
Project Gutenberg Australia

A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook

Title: The Big Fisherman (1949)
Author: Lloyd C. Douglas
eBook No.: 0400641.txt
Edition: 1
Language: English
Character set encoding: Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted: August 2004
Date most recently updated: October 2019

This eBook was produced by: Don Lainson dlainson@sympatico.ca

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed
online at http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


Title: The Big Fisherman (1949) Author: Lloyd C. Douglas



Chapter I


It was a calm, early summer noon in the southern mountains of Arabia.
Sheltering the King's well-guarded domain, a mile above and a dozen
miles east of the Dead Sea, motionless masses of neighbourly white
clouds hung suspended from a remote blue ceiling.

There had been an unusually heavy snowfall in the winter, not only
upon the King's land but throughout the country. It was going to be a
prosperous season for everybody. Intertribal jangling and discontent
would be reduced to a minimum. Arabia anticipated a relatively peaceful
summer.

Viewed from the main entrance to the King's encampment the undulating
plateau was a rich pasture on which a thousand newly shorn sheep,
indifferent to the rough nuzzling of their hungry lambs, grazed
greedily as if some instinct warned that there might be a famine next
season.

Nor was a famine improbable, for the distribution of snow was
unpredictable. Almost never were two consecutive winters partial to the
same area. This accounted for the nomadic habits of the people. They
held no permanent property, built no permanent homes. They lived in
tents; and, with their flocks, followed the snow and the grass. All but
the King, whose encampment was a fixed establishment. When the King had
a dry season the tribes replenished his purse.

And few ever complained about this assessment, for the crown in Arabia
was more than an ornament worn on state occasions. The King was
indispensable in this country. He earned his wages and his honours.
It required a strong and courageous man to deal equitably with these
restless, reckless, competitive tribesmen who were distinguished
throughout the East for the brevity of their tempers and the dexterity
of their knives.

It had been a long time since Arabia had been governed by a ruler with
the moral and physical strength of King Aretas. Everyone respected his
relentless administration of justice to the rich and poor alike. There
was no favouritism. They all admired his firmness, feared his frown,
and--for the most part--obeyed his decrees.

Of course it would have been foolish to say that the Arabian
people were sentimentally devoted to Aretas. In his difficult
position he could not bid for their affection: he wanted only their
obedience--prompt obedience and plenty of it. But there were a few who
did sincerely love the taciturn, sober-faced, cold-blooded Aretas.

First of all there was his motherless daughter Arnon, upon whom he
bestowed a tenderness that would have amazed the predatory sheiks who
had often been stilled to sullen silence under his hot chastisements.
And there was battle-scarred old Kedar, who had taught him to ride
when he was a mere lad of ten, who had watched him draw a man's bow
to full tension when he was in his early teens, and had followed him
worshipfully into all his hazardous adventures as Prince and King. And
there were his twelve Councillors who, in varying degrees, shared his
confidence. Especially there was Ilderan, Chief of the King's Council.
And young Zendi, Ilderan's eldest son who, everyone surmised, would
presently marry the Princess Arnon, with whom he was reputed to be
much in love. Surely the wedding would be soon, they thought, for the
Princess had recently celebrated her sixteenth birthday.

The tribesmen, who rarely agreed about anything, were unanimous in
their approval of this alliance. Not only was Arnon popular for her
beauty and Zendi for his almost foolhardy courage, but--taking a long
view of their marriage--there might come a day when Zendi would be
their ruler; for if an Arabian king was without male issue the throne
passed to the house of the Chief Councillor. Ilderan was nearing sixty.
If anything were to happen to Aretas, which was not inconceivable,
considering how dangerously he lived, the gallant young Zendi might
succeed him. This would be generally acceptable. All Arabia looked
forward to the royal wedding. It would be a great occasion. It would
last for a week. There would be games, races and feasting.

 * * * * * *

In the shade of a clump of willows sheltering a walled spring, not far
from the royal encampment, Arnon was awaiting the return of her father,
who had ridden early to the camp of Ilderan, seven miles east. She had
joined him at breakfast, shortly after dawn, finding him moody and
silent.

'Is anything amiss, my father?' Arnon had ventured to ask.

The King's reply was long delayed. Slowly lifting his eyes he had
stared preoccupiedly at the tent-wall beyond her.

'Nothing you would know about,' he had said, as from a distance.

Arnon had not pressed her query. Her father had made short work of his
breakfast. At the tent-door he had turned to say, 'I am consulting with
Ilderan. I shall return by midday.'

For a long time Arnon had sat alone, wondering what had happened.
Perhaps it had something to do with the message her father had received
yesterday. Of course there was nothing strange about the arrival of
a courier with a message. It happened nearly every day. But this
courier--she had seen him riding away--was apparently from afar. He
was attended by half a dozen servants with a well-laden pack-train.
The donkeys had seemed cruelly overburdened. After the courier had
departed, the King had retired to his own quarters. It was quite
obvious that he did not want to be disturbed.

Arnon strolled restlessly about under the willows, her thoughts busily
at work on the riddle. Presently her wide-set black eyes lighted as she
saw her father coming up the well-worn trail, at full gallop, on his
white stallion. She knew what to do. Emerging from the shade, Arnon
stood beside the bridle-path with her shapely arms held high. Aretas
leaned far to the left--the stallion suddenly slackening speed--and
sweeping his arm about the girl's slim waist, swung her lightly over
the horse's shoulder and into the saddle. Arnon laughed softly and
pressed her cheek against her father's short, greying beard. No words
were exchanged for a little while.

'You have something very serious on your mind, haven't you, father?'
murmured Arnon.

He drew the stallion down to an easy canter.

'I have had a strange message from Herod, the King of the Jews,' said
Aretas, slowing the impatient horse to a walk. 'Herod wants me to meet
him for a private conference a fortnight hence, in the city of Petra.'

'How fine for you, father!' exclaimed Arnon. 'You've always said you
were going to visit that beautiful city!' Quickly noting her father's
lack of enthusiasm, she inquired, 'But--you're going, aren't you?'

'Yes; it sounds important.'

'Is it not a long journey from Jerusalem to Petra? I wonder why the
Jewish King wishes the conference held there?'

'Perhaps it is something that concerns Petra, too.'

There was an interval of silence before Arnon spoke again.

'Is this not the first message you have ever had from the King of the
Jews?'

'It is indeed! The first that has crossed our border for...' Aretas
paused to reflect.

'A hundred years?' guessed Arnon.

'A thousand years!' said Aretas. 'Many, many more than a thousand!'

'What do you make of it, father? What does the Jewish King want of us?'

Aretas shook his head. They were arriving at the encampment now. Guards
stepped out to meet them. Arnon was released from her father's arms and
slipped lightly to the ground. Dismounting, the King beckoned to old
Kedar, as his horse was led away.

'You will fit out an expedition to Petra. We are leaving on the third
day of the week. The Councillors will accompany us, and a guard of
twenty riders. We may be tented at Petra for one day--or ten: it is not
yet determined. The Councillors will have had their instructions from
Ilderan. You will attend to all the other arrangements.'

'The festival tents?' inquired Kedar, implying that his sharp old eyes
had observed the royal insignia on the accoutrements of yesterday's
courier.

'No,' replied Aretas. 'We will take only the equipment we commonly use
when we visit the tribesmen.'

Kedar bowed his grey head, his seamed face showing disappointment. He
wanted to say that if the event was of high importance the King should
make a better show of his royalty. He was turning away when Aretas
spoke again, quite brusquely:

'And, Kedar, though you may have conjectured about the nature of our
errand in Petra, if anyone should ask you what is afoot you will reply
that you do not know. And that will be the truth.'

 * * * * * *

Retiring to his private quarters, the King resumed his contemplation of
the conundrum. What manner of emergency could have induced the proud
and pompous Herod to ignore the age-old enmity between their nations?

For fifteen centuries, notwithstanding they were neighbours according
to the map--their frontiers facing across an erratic little river
that a boy could wade in mid-summer--the Arabs and the Jews had been
implacable foes. This ancient feud had not been rooted in racial
incompatibility, though there was plenty of that too. The antipathy
had derived from a definite incident that had occurred long ago: so
very long ago that nobody knew how much of the story might be mythical.
But--let the tale be half fact, half fiction--it accounted for the
bitter hatred of these people.

According to the saga chanted about the Arabian camp-fires by wandering
minstrels, a wise and wealthy migrant had ventured from Chaldea to the
Plains of Mamre. It was a long story, but the minstrels never omitted
their elaborate tribute to Chaldea as a land of seers and sages,
oracles and astrologers. In Chaldea men dreamed prophetically and were
entrusted with celestial secrets. Abraham, distinguished above them
all for his learning, had received divine instructions to make a far
journey southward and found a new nation.

But the prophecy was in danger of lacking fulfilment, for the years
were passing and the founder of the new nation was childless. Sarah,
his ageing wife, was barren.

To solve this problem, the perplexed idealist had won the consent
of his wife to permit his alliance with a beautiful young native in
their employ. A son was born to them. They named him Ishmael. He was a
handsome, headstrong, adventurous child, passionately devoted to his
desert-born mother, whom he closely resembled. Sarah, naturally enough,
did not like him. Abraham admired the boy's vitality and courage, but
Ishmael was quite a handful for the old man, whose hours of pious
meditation were becoming increasingly brief and confused.

To further complicate this domestic dilemma, Sarah surprised everybody
by producing a son of her own. They named him Isaac. He was not a
rugged child. His eyesight was defective; so defective that in his
later life he had gone stone-blind. He was no match for his athletic
half-brother. For a little while they all tried to be polite and
conciliatory, but the inevitable conflict presently flared to alarming
dimensions. Sarah no longer made any effort to control her bitter
hatred for young Hagar and her tempestuous son. 'These impostors,' she
shouted, shrilly, 'must go! Today! Now!'

With appropriate misgivings Abraham conducted Hagar and their indignant
boy to the rim of his claim, gave the bewildered girl a loaf of bread
and a jug of water, and pointed south toward the mountains. Not a word
was spoken. Abraham turned and plodded slowly toward his little colony
of tents. Hagar did not look back.

When the vagabond minstrels sang the old story, which, as the ages
passed, lost nothing of the magical in the telling, they declared that
Ishmael grew to full manhood that day. This may have been a slight
exaggeration, though enough had happened to hasten his maturity. He
swore to his mother that from now and henceforth for ever he and his
seed would be at enmity with everyone else descended from his father's
house.

Seeking refuge among the savage tribes of itinerant shepherds and
camel-breeders in the southern mountains, Ishmael quickly became their
acknowledged leader, fighting his way to power with an audacity and
ruthlessness that commanded their admiration and obedience. It was
no small matter to bind so many discordant elements into something
resembling a nation, but before Hagar's forceful and fearless son was
thirty the hard-riding, fierce-fighting savages of the desert were
boasting that they were 'Ishmaelites.' The name was respected and
feared, by rulers and robbers alike, all the way from the Jordan to the
Mediterranean, all the way from Damascus to Gaza. As time went on, the
wild new nation became known as 'Arabia,' meaning 'Men in Ambush.'

The descendants of Isaac, and his more resourceful but less scrupulous
son Jacob, after many misfortunes and migrations--including a long,
humiliating period of enslavement in Egypt--fought their way back into
their 'Promised Land,' their western boundary on the world's busiest
sea, their eastern rim within a sling-shot of the domain controlled by
the Men in Ambush. If some stupid stranger inquired, 'Why do the Jews
and Arabs hate each other so bitterly?' he was told, 'It is written in
the sacred prophecies of both nations that they are destined to be at
enmity for ever.'

It was commonly understood, therefore, that when the posterity of
Father Abraham's two families met they neither smiled nor saluted. They
never broke bread together; never gave aid, no matter how serious the
emergency. They conducted their necessary business briefly and gruffly;
and, having brought it to a conclusion, turned away and spat noisily on
the ground. It was not often that they fought, but it was said that on
such rare occasions the catamounts crept out into the open to learn new
techniques of tooth and claw. Often the contentious children of Abraham
quarrelled; screaming, gesticulating, and reviling; for both of their
languages, stemming from a common origin, were rich with invective and
ingenious in the contrivance of exquisite insults. Neither nation had
ever sent an ambassador to the other's court. Officially, neither had
ever acknowledged the other's existence.

Not meaning, however, that there was no commerce at all between these
mutually contemptuous men. Racial antipathies had not deterred the
ardent traders of both nations from venturing across the Jordan to
engage in an undercover barter that would have amazed and enraged the
ordinary rank-and-file of their respective kinsmen. Jewish merchants,
far travellers by nature, quietly forded the river with pack-trains
bearing imports from many distant lands, and did not lack for wealthy
Arabian customers when they appeared with foreign fabrics of silk and
velvet, fine linens, gold ornaments, precious stones, medicinal herbs,
spices, and other exotics. It was customary, on these occasions, for
the negotiations to be conducted with all the sullen impoliteness that
the everlasting feud demanded; but the expensive goods did change
ownership, and the pack-asses skipped home, under a young moon, freed
of their burdens. Had either the Jews or the Arabians been gifted with
a sense of humour, all this might have seemed funny.

During the last score of years something resembling a commercial
truce had permitted a group of Arabian camel-breeders to bring their
incomparably beautiful and expensive animals to the celebrated
stock-show and auction held annually on the disused drill-ground near
Jerusalem during the Jewish Feast of Pentecost.

Indeed, it was the lure of the Arabians' superb camels that had lately
made this Pentecostal stock-show notable throughout the East. Rich
Romans, ever competing with one another in the lavishness of their
gaudy turn-outs in the proud processions of the Imperial City, would
send their stewards to purchase the finest of these majestic creatures,
regardless of cost. The Jews, well aware that this uniquely attractive
camel-market was responsible for bringing desirable patrons from afar,
tried to forget--for this one day of the year--that the coveted camels
were Arabian. And the Arabs who owned the camels pretended they didn't
realize--on this one day of the year--that they were doing business in
the land of Israel. They growled and scowled and spat--but they bought
the camels.

This camel business, profitable alike to the merchants of Jerusalem and
the stock-breeders of Arabia, had come to a dramatic end a year ago. A
most unfortunate incident had occurred. The auction, last summer, had
attracted an unusually large assembly of well-to-do foreigners. They
had come from everywhere: Romans, Egyptians, Damascenes, Cyprians,
Greeks from Petra and Askelon. The bidding was reckless and the
Arabian camels were bringing unprecedented figures. By custom, the
least valuable of the herd were offered first; and so it was that as
the afternoon wore on, the excitement increased. In many of the later
contests, the spellbound crowd--whose majority had long since been
priced out of the market--held its breath in amazement.

The finest beast of the lot was not offered until all the others had
been bought. This tall, tawny, pompous three-year-old was clearly the
pick of the herd. When, at last, the haughty creature was led forward,
two well-groomed men, who had taken no part in the previous sales,
shouldered their way through the pack from different directions, and
showed a serious interest. Not many men in the crowd recognized either
of them; but Demos, the suave Greek auctioneer, knew who they were,
and was suddenly weak in the knees. The clean-shaven, middle-aged
Roman, with the cloth-of-gold bandeau on his brow and the black
eagle on the breast of his tunic, was a purchasing agent for Legate
Varus, Commander-in-Chief of the Empire's Armies in the West. The
lean, austere, grey-bearded Jew, in the long black robe, was Joel,
the representative of the immensely wealthy Simeon Maccabee, whose
political power in Jewry was responsible for Herod's strong position
on the Judaean throne; for the Maccabee family paid the bulk of the
tribute which Rome exacted of the province--and Herod was their man.

Commander Varus, who was distinguished chiefly for his high opinion of
himself, had become accustomed to getting what he wanted. Simeon the
Maccabee entertained a similar feeling about his own desires. It would
be a very awkward situation if the representatives of these eminent men
staged a battle in which one of them would be defeated. Wars had risen
out of incidents more trivial.

Demos hastily consulted the Arabians, explaining the gravity of the
impasse, and suggested that they withdraw the camel from the sale.
Disappointed but comprehending, they consented. The prize camel was
led away, and Demos announced that the Arabs had decided, at the last
moment, to keep the handsome king of their herd for the continued
improvement of their own stock. This left the sons of Ishmael in a
very bad spot indeed. The crowd jeered. There was some stone-throwing.
The little party of unpopular Arabians were in no position to defend
themselves, and they beat an inglorious retreat.

Upon their return home, the whole matter was laid before King Aretas,
who decided, promptly and firmly, that the Arabs were not again to
participate in any of the Jews' affairs. That had been a year ago. This
summer the camel-breeders had let it be known that they were marketing
their valuable herd in Damascus. The announcement carried fast and far;
and as a result the stock-show at Jerusalem, on the Day of Pentecost,
was poorly attended by the people previously counted on to ensure its
prestige.

As King Aretas sat in counsel with wise old Ilderan, advising him of
Herod's incredible request for a parley at Petra, the latter had said,
after a considerable silence between them, 'Perhaps he wishes to have
our camels brought again to his Pentecostal fair.'

Aretas shook his head slowly.

'No, my good Ilderan. It's something more important than camels.'

 * * * * * *

There was no city anywhere quite like Petra. Nobody knew its origin
or its age; a thousand years, perhaps. It was known to have sheltered
at least four successive civilizations, and had borne as many names.
For the past three centuries it had belonged to a wealthy colony of
fugitive Greeks, who had expensively bestowed upon it an incomparable
beauty. It was Athens minus the slums and the smells.

Petra was more than a city; for it embraced not only an exquisitely
contrived municipality, distinguished for the architecture of its
baths, theatres, forums, temples, and stately residences, but a broad,
enveloping valley whose green meadows and fertile fields were nourished
by innumerable gushing springs.

Nature had also made provision for the defence of this self-contained
little city-state by encircling it with a ring of precipitous stone
mountains, converting it into a natural fortress. Petra could be
entered only through two gateways: on the west, where a deep-worn
camel-trail began its ambling toward distant Gaza and the coast-road
north to Damascus, and on the south, leading to the Red Sea. These
approaches were made through narrow, high-walled defiles which a
handful of guards could--and often did--defend against bands of
reckless marauders. It had been a long time since the city had had to
repulse a serious invasion: never, indeed, since its occupation by the
Greeks.

Naturally, it had been, through the ages, a much coveted stronghold,
populated and repopulated with rich traders of various tints and
tongues, whose dynasties successively fattened and fell, each of them
leaving monuments and tombs which their victors wrecked to make room
for the more extravagant memorials of their own.

According to what passed for history in Arabia, which had never gone
to much bother about keeping records, the most recent invasion of this
territory had been made by their own tribesmen, some five hundred years
ago, who had thought it their turn to enter and sack the rich old city,
then in the hands of a decadent generation of Nabataeans. At small
cost to themselves, the Arabs had driven out all the inhabitants who
were left from a ruthless slaughter, had carried off everything of any
value, and then had wondered what to do with their new acquisition; for
they were nomads and had no use for cities.

After an interval of a couple of centuries, during which only the
bats and hyenas were in residence, one Andrakos, fleeing for refuge
from a Roman invasion with a large company of well-to-do Athenians,
offered King Retar of Arabia a great price for the deserted city. Much
gratified to have, as neighbours, a new kind of people, who had seen
much too much of warfare and might be expected to behave themselves,
Retar promised the Greeks that they would never be molested by the
Arabians, and published a decree warning his own people that Petra
was not to be violated. This injunction they had scrupulously obeyed,
not only because King Retar was held in high regard but because the
penalty for annoying Petra was a public stoning. Arabia had kept the
peace-pact; and, with this comforting guarantee of security, Petra had
built the most beautiful city in the world.

As for the current relations of Petra and Arabia, it could hardly be
said that they had any at all. In the opinion of the Arabs, the Greeks
were a queer lot of people who spent their time carving figures out of
stone, painting pictures, and reading old scrolls written long ago by
men as idle as themselves. Such preoccupations, however unprofitable,
were harmless enough, and if the citizens of Petra wanted to fritter
away their lives in this manner, it was agreeable with realistic and
illiterate Arabia. All that Petra knew about the Arabs was that they
raised and rode the most beautiful and high-spirited horses to be
found anywhere on earth, that their magnificent camels--too expensive
for draught duty--were bred for showy parades in which they marched
accoutred with silver ornaments, that the long-fibred wool of the high
mountains was eagerly sought by the most famous weavers of Caesarea,
Corinth, and Rome, and that their interest in anything artistic
was completely non-existent. Aside from the fact that the bodily
temperature of the Greeks and Arabs was maintained at approximately the
same level, they had nothing in common and regarded each other with a
condescension not unmixed with pity.

Upon the accession of Aretas to the Arabian throne (a venerable cedar
chest covered with the spliced white pelts of two long-haired goats),
a richly caparisoned deputation from Petra had come to pay neighbourly
respects. For all parties concerned it was a pleasant visit. The
pundits from Petra were shown every available hospitality. Their
gift to the young King was a richly illuminated scroll containing
Thucydides' History of the Peloponnesian War; and, to show his
appreciation, Aretas sent the aged Governor of Petra home on a tall,
sleek, snobbish camel named Retar, in honour of the Arabian king who
had had such amicable dealings with the Greeks in an earlier day. When,
some weeks after the coronation, it was amusingly reported to Aretas
that Retar had proved unmanageable, he replied, 'That makes us even.'

Chief Councillor Ilderan, who had something of an instinct for
statesmanship and was canny enough to take a long view of international
relations, had sometimes urged Aretas to pay a visit to Petra.

'The time may come, sire,' Ilderan had said, 'when it might be to our
advantage to have had a closer acquaintance with these people.'

'Very well, Ilderan,' Aretas had replied. 'Sometime we will do that.'
But the young king had plenty of pressing problems on his hands. He
had never found time to visit Petra, nor had he any inclination to
place himself at a disadvantage in the company of men whose manner of
life and thought was so foreign to his own. One day Ilderan, still
nourishing the hope for a closer friendship with the Greeks, remarked
that Herod and his sons were said to be frequent visitors in Petra.

'That makes me even less eager to go there,' Aretas had replied almost
gruffly. 'If the King of the Jews has found favour with the Governor of
Petra--all the more reason why we should keep our distance.'

 * * * * * *

It was high noon when the Arabian cavalcade by a circuitous route
reached the southern gateway into Petra. A brightly uniformed
detachment met the expected guests at the pass and conducted them
through the fortified defile.

After a three-mile ride on a well-kept road, flanked by green pastures,
orchards, and widely spaced villas of exquisite architecture, the
visitors climbed a long hill, reining in at the summit to face a
breath-taking view of the white marble city. There they dismounted to
rest their horses. Aretas and Ilderan sauntered a little way apart and
for some moments silently surveyed the beautiful panorama below them.

King Herod's encampment, easily identifiable, had already been set up
in a spacious park at the centre of the city. It monopolized at least
three-quarters of the park. The colourful tents and gay banners moved
Aretas to mutter that it was a more gaudy show than he had expected of
the ever dolorous Jews.

'That is the Roman touch, sire,' observed Ilderan. 'Herod does not
forget how he came by his kingship.'

'Aye,' rumbled Aretas. 'It was a lucky day for that Idumean upstart
when his foolhardy father stopped the Egyptian arrow intended for
Cassius.'

'I have often wondered, sire,' drawled old Ilderan, 'whether Cassius
might have been so generous with his gratitude had he known how much
wealth these Idumeans would acquire in Judaea.'

'It's never too late for the Empire to rectify a mistake of
generosity,' said Aretas.

'True--but there's no hurry. Herod took over a Jerusalem built of
sun-baked brick and is refashioning it in granite and marble. Old
Augustus should be willing to let him do that, at the Jews' expense.
Besides,' continued Ilderan, 'Judea pays an exorbitant tribute. Why
should the Emperor send an army in to kill the goose that lays gold
eggs?'

'Even so; Herod's nights must be troubled by bad dreams...Shall we
proceed into the city, Ilderan?'

The old Councillor did not assent promptly. His brow was furrowed.
Pointing toward the Jews' encampment with his riding-whip, he remarked,
'Herod has occupied all but a corner of the park, sire. Doubtless he
expects us to content ourselves with what remains of it. Such an idea
would become him, I dare say.'

'Let us not give him that satisfaction,' growled Aretas. 'We will pitch
our tents where we are--on this hill-top. Agreed?'

Ilderan nodded approval. Beckoning to Zendi, the popular young
Captain of the Royal Guard, Aretas gave the order. Noting the sudden
disappointment in Zendi's face, he added, 'After our camp is in order,
you and your men are at liberty to ride down into the city.'

There was a spontaneous murmur of pleasure from the tough young
cavalrymen, which prompted the King to announce sternly, 'You will
remember that we are guests here. Zendi, you are to hold your men
strictly to account for their behaviour!...And--one thing more: there
is to be no quarrelling with the Jews!'

Zendi raised his hand for permission to speak.

'Should the Jews attack us, Your Majesty, what shall I tell my men to
do?'

King Aretas swung into his saddle before replying.

'In that case, Zendi,' he said, with a shrug of his shoulder, 'your men
will know what to do--without being told.' There was a concerted shout
of laughter. Even Aretas, who rarely smiled, pulled a reluctant grin
as he rode away in the lead of his amused Councillors. Ilderan, riding
beside him now, resumed their conversation about Herod.

'Of course, sire, he cannot help realizing the instability of his
provincial throne. He proves his apprehension by the frequency of his
journeys to visit the Emperor--and the fact that his sons spend most of
their time in Rome.'

'The Jews probably object to that,' surmised Aretas.

'Naturally, sire; but Herod is in greater need of the Emperor's favour
than the good opinion of the Jews, who would despise him, no matter
what he did--or left undone...All that flamboyant display of Roman
trinkets represents Herod's fear--rather than his admiration--of
Augustus.'

On the level now and four abreast, the Arabians quickened their speed
and swept through the suburbs of Petra, presently drawing up before the
stately palace of Sosthenes, the Governor, where Aretas and his council
were ceremoniously received. Sosthenes seemed flustered.

'I trust Your Majesty may find ample room in the park for your
encampment,' he said, with an apologetic smile which Aretas made no
sign of interpreting. It was evident that the taciturn King of Arabia,
whatever he might think of the King of the Jews, was not disposed to
exhibit his feelings for the entertainment of this smooth-tongued
Greek. 'And if there is not sufficient camping-space in the park,'
continued Sosthenes uneasily, 'we will see to it that your retinue does
not lack for hospitality.'

'We have already encamped, my lord,' said Aretas; 'on the high plateau
south of the city. Our people prefer the open spaces. Will you advise
King Herod that Arabia is at his service?'

'He awaits you, Your Majesty.' Sosthenes' tone indicated his relief
that an awkward situation had been nicely disposed of. 'If it is
agreeable, your conference will be held here in our council-chamber.'
With a deep bow, he led the way to a high-domed, marble-walled room,
luxuriously furnished with huge upholstered divans arranged in two
semi-circles fronting a massive teakwood table, at either end of which
stood a tall-backed, gold-covered, throne-like chair. The Arabians
had not long to wait. Attended by a dozen venerable members of the
Jewish Sanhedrin, Herod strutted in. Stiff bows and crisp amenities
were exchanged. The Kings took their places in the tall chairs. The
Councillors and the Sanhedrin sat. Facing each other, with calm,
steady-eyed curiosity, the rulers of Judaea and Arabia presented a
striking contrast in costume, bearing, and physique.

Herod was urbane, suave, quite the man of large affairs. He was sixty
and paunchy, and there were pendulous pouches under his experienced
eyes. It was apparent that the paunch and the pouches were decorations
won in courageous combat with nourishing food and rich beverages.
His abundant thatch of greying hair--close-cropped after the Roman
manner--glistened with scented unguents. His beard was short and
well-groomed, a compromise between the patriarchal whiskers of
Jerusalem and the cleanly shaved jowls of Rome. His robe was of
fine-spun white linen, trimmed with purple at the throat, cuffs, and
skirt-hem. Herod had the self-assured posture of a man who had been
everywhere, and always with the right people; who had seen everything,
and always from a reserved seat.

Aretas was carelessly dressed in a brown, travel-worn cashmere
burnous, the skirt of which was parted revealing his brown goat-skin
riding-breeches and thong-laced boots. The only touch of colour on
his clothing was the ancient crest of the Ishmaelites, an oval patch
of blue silk appliquéd to the left breast of his burnous. In this
field of blue were the well-known devices seen on Arabia's banners--a
slim, gold-embroidered moon-crescent, half-circling a silver star--and
pierced, in the form of an X, by a white sword and a shepherd's crook,
the distinctive symbol of Arabian royalty. Aretas did not relax in his
chair but sat rigidly erect with the air of a man accustomed to brief
parleys, laconic statements, swift agreements, and an unceremonious
adjournment.

In his early fifties, Arabia's King was lean as a leopard, tough as a
bowstring, and as tanned as an old saddle. The hood of his burnous had
been pushed back from his deep-seamed forehead, showing a tousled mop
of grizzled hair. He too wore a short beard, but nobody had trimmed
it that morning, much less anointed it with fragrant oils. There was
nothing of smooth statesmanship in the face or bearing of this Arabian.
Except for the royal crest, he was not accoutred like a king, nor did
he have the manner of one accustomed to the adroit thrust and parry of
diplomacy. Yet there were the deep-set black eyes to be reckoned with,
eyes inured to long vistas and well-versed in the lore of the sky.

Having spent most of his life indoors, Herod--cannily competent in
studying the minds and moods of similarly sheltered men--peered into
the fathomless eyes of Aretas, and the carefully rehearsed speech he
had obviously meant to make seemed to need revision.

'Your Excellency,' began Herod, measuring his words, 'we invited you
here to discuss a matter of grave concern to both our nations.' He
paused for some response; at least a slight lifting of the Arabian's
brows. But the face of Aretas was impassive, giving no sign of surprise
or curiosity.

'We have recently returned from Rome with disturbing news,' continued
Herod. 'Plans are rapidly taking shape for a Roman invasion into the
north-east that will sweep this coast so bare of everything valuable
that when it is ended the very vultures will die of starvation. Neither
of us--and you may be sure that we will both be involved in this
tragedy--can hope to withstand such an attack, but, firmly resolved to
unite in a defence of our countries, we might exhibit enough force to
dissuade Tiberius--'

'Tiberius!' broke in Aretas. 'Is Tiberius not leading the Army in the
West?'

'Not at present,' replied Herod, pleased to be able to instruct his
conferee from the hinterland. Tiberius had been recalled to Rome some
months ago, to be co-regent with Augustus. The Western Army, in charge
of the subjugation of the German tribes and the occupation of all Gaul,
was given to Varus, who had now been completely overwhelmed--put to
utter rout, destroyed! 'It is the worst defeat that the Empire has ever
experienced. Never again will the Romans cross the Rhine. If they are
to recover their lost prestige, at home and abroad, they must extend
their power in the east--and the north. And our countries are on the
highway to Damascus.'

Aretas frowned studiously, but made no reply, though the Jew gave
him plenty of time for a rejoinder. Perhaps, mused Herod, the remote
Arabian does not fully realize the predicament of the Romans and their
necessity to strike a blow--or invite disaster. He decided to post
Aretas on some recent history that might have escaped him. The speech
lasted for a full half hour, Aretas listening without commenting.

Augustus--Herod went on--had made a great Emperor; no doubt of that.
In spite of the fact that he never had had any health, at all, he had
done much for Rome. But now he was old, and so ill that everybody knew
about it. The reins of government had been slipping rapidly through
his rheumatic fingers. He had lost his grip on the Senate. The rabble
was restless. Of course the trouble was largely fiscal. Gone were the
days when--in need of money to finance a fortnight's free feasting
for Rome's improvident thousands--an expedition could be sent to raid
Sicily or Crete or Cyprus or Macedonia, returning with valuable slaves,
grain, lumber, leather, and gold. True, the provinces could still be
sacked and pillaged, again and again; but the Romans had less and less
to show for it.

'You remember, don't you, Your Excellency, how Augustus was so hard
up--a few years ago--that he required every man, in all the provinces
tributary to Rome, to pay a poll-tax?' Herod snorted with disgust.
'It was a paltry thing to do, the act of a miser or a bankrupt. The
provinces were already taxed to the limit of their endurance. And then
this bewildered old Emperor childishly decides to screw a poll-tax out
of the hungry provincials! He sought to clothe the ridiculous affair
with dignity by pretending the main idea was to take a census; every
man was commanded to report on a certain day, in the place of his
birth--wherever that was--and have himself enumerated. But that never
fooled anybody. Augustus didn't care how many people were controlled
from Rome. All he was interested in was their wretched little five
farthings. Some of our poor people had to travel so much as a week's
journey to obey the edict.'

'I had forgotten,' said Aretas. 'It did not affect my people. The
Emperor would hardly chase an Arabian through the mountains for five
farthings.'

'I'm not so sure that he wouldn't,' remarked Herod, with a shrug.
'He will--this time! Tiberius will want your sheep and cattle and
camels; and your daughters too. There is only one way out for us, Your
Excellency. Let us make a treaty--and stand together. Tiberius will
think twice before he risks another defeat.'

'Do you imagine, sire,' asked Aretas, 'that Tiberius could be made to
believe that the Jews and Arabs had concluded an alliance after many
centuries of hatred?'

'I had thought of that.' Herod hitched at his big chair, which did not
move an inch, and leaned forward, lowering his voice to a confidential
tone. 'I too had thought of that. Tiberius will need sound proof that
out alliance is genuine.'

'Have you something to suggest?' inquired Aretas.

'A tangible unity. I am told that you have a marriageable daughter. I
have an unmarried son.'

Aretas winced, and shook his head.

'My daughter,' he muttered, 'would not like that.'

'Nor would my son,' said Herod, with equal candour. 'But for what
reason are princes and princesses fêted and sheltered; for what reason
are they given ices cooled with snow brought from the mountains
by swift runners with lungs on fire; and to what end do courtiers
bow before them--if not that when the day comes on which they must
subordinate their own desires for the good of their country, they shall
pay their debt cheerfully and in full?'

'Perhaps this may apply to your son, my lord, but not to my daughter.
She has lived simply, even frugally, as becomes an Arabian of whatever
position. Arnon has had no ices in summer.'

'Be that as it may,' said Herod crisply. 'Ices or no ices, your
daughter loves her country, I think. She would sacrifice much rather
than see Arabia laid waste. Nor would she suffer hardship at the
hands of my son, Antipas. He is a noble young fellow, gracious, kind,
wealthy. They might even come to love each other, though that, of
course, is unimportant.'

'It would not be unimportant to my daughter,' said Aretas.
'Besides--she is already in love with a young man of our own people.'

Herod stroked his chin with the backs of his plump fingers, and
meditated.

'Has her betrothal been announced?'

'No,' admitted Aretas.

'That is good,' nodded Herod. He clapped his hands and an aide
appeared. 'We will dine,' he said.

Aretas was not hungry, but it would have been impolitic to say so.

 * * * * * *

The Councillors were in session all night. Aretas set forth their
dilemma, expressing it as his opinion that Herod knew what he was
talking about and had not exaggerated the threatened disaster.

Dumah made bold to say, 'I had rather be enslaved by the Romans than
allied to the Jews.'

'As for you, yourself, yes,' said Tema, 'but how about your wife and
daughters? The Romans are shameless butchers!'

'But how can we be certain that there is to be an invasion?' scoffed
Dumah. 'This fellow Sosthenes would be directly in the path of it--and
he doesn't appear to be much upset.'

'Well, he will be,' muttered Tema, 'when Herod tells him how much is
expected of him--in gold!'

'Ah--so that's why we're meeting in Petra, is it?' queried Adbeel.

'It's a good enough reason,' said Tema wearily. 'No--it's quite useless
to debate this matter. We've been over all the ground--and there's no
way out. An alliance of the Jews and Arabians is quite as distasteful
to Herod as it is to us. He knows the danger or he would never have
made this proposal. We may be sure of that!'

'It is asking too much of our Princess,' said Adbeel. 'She will have a
wretched life with this young Jewish scamp.'

'Doubtless,' agreed Naphish, 'but at least she will live.'

'I think she would prefer to die,' muttered Adbeel.

'But that is not the point,' said Mishma. 'If the Princess marries
Antipas she will be saving her country. When this is explained to her,
she will consent.'

There was a long interval of moody silence, broken by Jetur, who
ventured to raise the question that was on everyone's mind: What would
young Zendi think of all this?

Ilderan was prompt with a reply.

'My son will be deeply grieved,' he said slowly, 'but he too loves
Arabia.'

Aretas nodded his head, without looking up.

'Is there anything further to be said?' he asked; and when no one
spoke, he rose, walked toward the door, and dispatched the fateful
message to Herod. The Council adjourned, but not to sleep. Breakfast
was disposed of shortly before dawn. The tents were quickly packed. By
the time the Jews in the park were astir, the Arabian camp-site on the
hill was deserted.

The journey home was swift, and for the most part silent. At dusk on
the evening of the fourth day of hard travel they separated gloomily.

Arnon was anxiously waiting at the entrance to the encampment. Aretas
dismounted slowly, heavily; a haggard old man.

'Father!' exclaimed Arnon. 'What has happened to distress you so? Are
you hurt?'

Aretas took her by the hand, as if she were a little child, and
silently led her into the tent. When they were seated together on a
divan, Arnon summoned a servant and ordered supper to be brought for
her father, but Aretas shook his head. Drawing her close, he gazed
sadly into her wide, frightened eyes and blurted out the story. Arabia
had made an alliance with the Jews. It was the only way of escaping a
Roman invasion that would utterly destroy both countries.

'But--if you have made the alliance and have saved our country,' said
Arnon hopefully, 'why are you so downhearted?'

'Because--the alliance provides for a royal marriage of Arabia and
Judaea.'

Arnon gave a little gasp and her face paled.

'Does that mean--me?' she asked weakly.

'Can you do this, my child, for Arabia?'

Closing her eyes, Arnon drew a long, shuddering breath, and slowly
relaxed into her father's arms. After an agonizing moment, she
straightened and looked up bravely into his deep-lined face.

'For Arabia--yes--my father,' she said, barely above a whisper.

They sat in silence for a little while. Arnon patted him tenderly on
the cheek. Swallowing convulsively in a dry throat, she murmured, 'May
I go now, father?'

Aretas released her and she walked toward the door of her room with the
short groping steps of the blind. He watched her with brooding sorrow.
He would gladly have given his life to save her this painful martyrdom.

 * * * * * *

If it was necessary for the Arabs and the Jews to guarantee the
genuineness of their alliance by arranging an international marriage
it was equally important that the wedding occur without delay, for
Tiberius could not afford to wait very long after the catastrophe to
Roman arms in the West before attempting elsewhere a recovery of the
Empire's ailing prestige.

Nor was this royal wedding an event that might be conducted quietly.
It must be distinguished for its pomp and flamboyant extravagance. The
full military power of Judaea and Arabia was to be put on exhibition
so that Tiberius, when appraised of it, would realize that these
passionate little nations had resolved not only to stand together but
had the strength to make their unity formidable.

Of course the responsibility for this impressive spectacle would
fall more heavily upon Herod than Aretas, for the Arabians were
inexperienced in showmanship. At this game Herod was skilled. He had a
natural talent for it and his long acquaintance with Roman pageantry
had made him fully conversant with its tactics.

The big show would be held in Jerusalem immediately after the wedding
in Arabia. With amazing speed Herod assembled his widely scattered
troops, secured the financial backing of the wealthy guilds, and even
won the timid support of Annas, the High Priest, who never liked to
take sides in a political issue until sure which way the cat was going
to jump.

The skeletonized 'Legion' of Roman soldiers stationed in Jerusalem,
ostensibly for police duty but really to keep the restless Jews in
remembrance of their provincial status, merely joked about Herod's
bombastic show, until the habitually sequestered Jewish troops
began mobilizing in surprising numbers on the unkempt and disused
drill-grounds in the Kedron Valley. Fully accoutred, they were marching
boldly through the city, en route from Joppa, Caesarea, Hebron,
Jericho, and remote Capernaum in Galilee.

That, complained young Legate Julian to his Centurions, was what ailed
the Jews: they never knew when they were whipped. The Sanhedrin made
deep bows to the Empire's representatives, and retired to plot. Every
evening at sunset the faithful appeared at the Wailing Wall to howl
hopelessly over their subjugation, and strolled back to their cellars
to sharpen their knives and spin tougher bow-strings.

Apprehensive of a dangerous incident, and anxious to head it off by
polite appeasement--for he had been sent to Jerusalem to keep the peace
at all costs--Julian went to Herod. Why all these military manoeuvres?
Herod smiled innocently. There was to be a wedding, he said. His son
Antipas was marrying the young Princess of Arabia. Yes, yes, Julian
knew all about that, and said it would be quite agreeable to the
Empire, he thought, if a detachment of Jewish patrolmen marched in the
wedding procession, but--

'A detachment!' broke in Herod disappointedly.

'Well--a legion, then,' conceded Julian, 'if that would better please
Your Excellency; but we see no occasion for a parade of catapults
weighing two thousand pounds. Is that customary--at a wedding?'

'It would be an interesting novelty,' reflected Herod, in a tone of
childish wistfulness. 'Many of our people will be surprised to know
that we have catapults.'

'Our people will be surprised too!' exclaimed Julian. 'And if a large
display is made of such heavy weapons, Your Excellency may soon have a
more serious use for them.'

Herod smiled enigmatically, patted a yawn, and drummed absently on the
table with his knuckles. Julian dourly accepted his dismissal and rose
to go.

'In any case,' pursued Herod, 'they are good catapults, and they are
ours, and they are here! It would be no easy matter to bring as large
ones, or as many, from Rome.'

Slightly stunned by this unexpected impudence, Julian stammered, 'I am
aware of that, sire.'

'And so is Tiberius,' added Herod recklessly.

'Meaning that Your Excellency would like me to inform the Emperor?'

'As you please, Julian. You will anyway, you know.'

This raw arrogance was something new to the Legate, whom Herod had
always treated with a suave, if insincere deference. It was evident
that the crafty Jew intended to gamble this time for very high stakes.

'The Emperor may suspect that this wedding is primarily a display of
defensive armour!'

'How quick you are, Julian,' drawled Herod, now candidly contemptuous.
'You are wasted as a mere peace officer. You should be a Consul, at the
very least.' He rose and bowed ceremoniously. 'Forgive us if we have to
let you go now. We have another appointment; and you, doubtless, have
business of your own.'

As the troubled young Legate made his inglorious exit from the spacious
gold and blue audience chamber, Prince Antipas lounged in through
the King's private entrance. Herod glanced up, nodded amiably, and
resumed his writing. His face expressed satisfaction with his favourite
son, something of pride too; for Antipas--not always so docile--was
showing himself surprisingly co-operative in this affair of the Arabian
nuptials. Not meaning that he was enthusiastic--which would have been
too much to expect--but quietly acquiescent.

Of Herod's three sons by his much loved Mariamne, Antipas was his
pet. Antipas was respectful, courteous, good to look upon, of better
than average height, with a handsome face, an athletic figure, and
the confident carriage of a soldier. The firm discipline of the
Roman Military Academy was stamped on him. At twenty-five, his slow,
agnostic smile gave more than a hint of the fashionable cynicism which
characterized the indolent crew of rich men's sons who gambled all
day at the baths and banqueted all night in the best possible places.
Antipas was already an experienced man of the world.

As for his other sons by Mariamne, Herod had had but little occasion
for pride in them. Archelaus, the eldest, was a contentious fellow, for
ever getting himself into embarrassing brawls. Philip, the youngest,
whom the family invariably referred to as 'Poor Philip,' was so
listless and impractical that he even had much difficulty in holding
the government job his eminent father had found for him in Rome at the
cost of much coaxing--and a bit of bribery. And, as if poor Philip were
not sufficiently weighted with handicaps, he had allowed himself to be
led into an unhappy marriage by Herodias--a cousin twice removed--who
was his senior by ten years and a century older in experience. A
widow, Herodias had brought along a pert young daughter, Salome, whose
adventures were common talk. Herod could not be proud of poor Philip.
But Antipas--here was a son worthy of all the costly investments that
had been made in him!

Noting that his father was occupied or pretended to be, the
well-favoured Prince strolled across to the high bank of cases which
lined the eastern wall, drew out a new, heavily gilded scroll, read the
title, and chuckled audibly. Herod regarded him with interest.

'Did the old man give you this?' inquired Antipas, amused.

'If you are referring to the aged Emperor Augustus,' reproved Herod,
'he did.'

'Gave it to you--personally?' nagged Antipas.

Herod hitched uneasily in his chair, as if to admit that the
ostentatious scroll was one of a large number presented to Consuls,
Prefects, Governors, Provincial Kings--and Senators too, perhaps.

'I'll wager a hundred shekels that Your Majesty hasn't read a line of
it!' taunted Antipas; and, when his father had shrugged, added, 'You'd
better, sire. This is Virgil's new eulogy to Augustus, extolling his
brave deeds. He calls it The Aeneid.'

'We shall have to peruse it,' consented Herod absently.

'Indeed you will, sire!' Antipas made pretence of seriousness. 'You
may have to take an examination on it some time.' He flipped the
gaudy scroll back into the case, sauntered to the King's dais, flung
himself into a chair--and yawned. Herod put down his stylus and smiled
benevolently.

'And how are you amusing yourself, my son? We hope the time does not
hang too heavily on your hands while you wait for your marriage.'

'Not heavily at all, sire. Your Majesty will recall that Salome, who is
very good company, returned with us on our ship, for a visit.'

'Specifically--she came to represent poor Philip's family at
the wedding,' amended Herod. 'Otherwise she would not have been
tolerated--much less invited: you may be sure of that!' He lowered his
voice, discarded his kingship, and impulsively became a father. 'If I
were in your place, Antipas, I should arrange not to be seen in public
with the little trollop.'

'My niece, sire!' Antipas feigned indignation, but his ironical smirk
showed through.

'Niece? Nonsense!' growled Herod. 'Since when did poor Philip's
notorious step-daughter become your niece?'

'Technically she is my niece, sire; and Your Majesty's grand-daughter.
Does that not entitle her to some courteous consideration?'

'Not from you! The women of the court can attend to Salome's wants. The
Queen will arrange for her entertainment.'

'But mother does not care for her,' said Antipas sadly.

'Not much wonder!' muttered Herod. 'But--however that may be--you are
to have nothing further to do with her. The fact that your half-witted
brother married her mother does not obligate you in the least. Your
association with this Salome will do you no good, especially now that
your heart is in Arabia.'

'Is it?' Instantly Antipas realized that he had overtaxed his royal
parent's patience. He had been sweetly wheedled into returning to wed
the Arabian princess. It had required a deal of coaxing. At first he
had loudly protested, and his father had promised him an immediate cash
payment of his patrimony. He had shaken his head sorrowfully, and his
father had conferred on him the Tetrarchy of Galilee. Finally he had
yielded to the King's importunate pressure. It had placed him in an
advantageous position, and he had been trading on it sharply, with all
the inconsiderate tyranny of a spoiled invalid. His father's dark frown
warned him now that his impudence had reached a limit.

'It had better be!' rasped Herod hotly. 'This is a serious business!
And you are a fool not to realize it!' He rose and paced to and fro,
with mounting rage. 'You should be in Arabia at this moment--as I
counselled you--making friends with these aliens. I tell you they are
no more eager for this wedding than you are! And if you treat it too
lightly you may get a dagger between your ribs--blood-letting is a mere
pastime with these Arabians! They never forget an injury or an insult.'
The King was breathing heavily as he strode toward the door. 'Don't say
I did not warn you!' he shouted.

 * * * * * *

Arnon was given but little time to brood over coming events.
Preparations for the marriage proceeded with breath-taking speed. Every
day couriers arrived from Jerusalem to inquire of the Princess--or,
more correctly, to report to the Princess--what were her wishes in
respect to details which, in the opinion of an Arabian, were childishly
trivial, but apparently important enough to warrant a laborious journey
from the Jewish capital.

The vanguard of servants and equipment began to appear in increasing
numbers. Long caravans toiled up the tortuous trail from the valley
floor, widening the bridle-path to a hard-beaten road. Skilled Arabian
seamstresses and weavers worked in feverish haste on the wedding
garments for the Princess and her attendants.

Tactfully, mercifully, Aretas had dispatched Zendi to faraway Corinth
on an errand no less important than the conclusion of a pending deal to
lease another large parcel of land in the north to war-weary Greeks.
It was a relief to Arnon when Zendi, pressed for time, called to say
farewell; both of them glad that the leave-taking was done in the
presence of their fathers. Arnon couldn't have borne it, she knew,
if they had had their final moment in seclusion. Poor Zendi! He had
been so determined to deal manfully with his sorrow that he had hardly
raised his eyes to hers when they parted.

The thousand sheep were led to another pasture, and on their grazing
ground an awe-inspiring tented city rose. Soldiers in colourful
uniforms made camp with such dexterity and precision that Arnon was
forced to admire their skill. They did not squat in small huddles, an
Arabian custom, to discuss what procedures were best. They knew exactly
what to do. This, thought Arnon, was probably the way everything went
in the outside world beyond her untamed but beloved mountains. Though
firmly loyal to Arabia and its haphazard way of doing things, she felt
a tug of excitement over being made a part of that competent society
whose urbane representatives were now demonstrating their disciplined
self-assurance.

Now delegations of wealthy Arabian sheiks swept by on their sleek
horses and entered the tents their servants had prepared on the broad
plateau, each contingent accompanied by entertainers: minstrels,
magicians, field athletes, acrobats, and comedians.

Then came the awaited day of King Herod's arrival with Prince Antipas,
their tall camels resplendent with costly housings and trappings of
gold and silver. Proudly, haughtily, the impressive caravan swung
past the encampment of King Aretas and came to rest a few hundred
yards away. With fluttering heart, Arnon watched her father and
the Councillors greet the party from Jerusalem. It was a dizzying
spectacle. King Herod was undeniably a distinguished personage and the
Prince was tall and handsome. And there was the High Priest, guessed
Nephti, Arnon's lifetime nurse, who was holding the tent-panel open to
see. Doubtless he had come, added Nephti, to conduct the wedding.

'I had not realized it was to be a Jewish wedding,' said Arnon.

'The Jews like ceremonies,' declared Nephti.

'And we don't?' asked Arnon childishly.

'Ours is more simple. If you were marrying Zendi--'

'Don't, Nephti!' murmured Arnon. 'You promised me.'

'I am sorry, Princess. I only meant to explain that you would have
taken his hand, in the presence of the Councillors, and promised to
obey and serve him all the days of your life.'

'And will I not be asked to obey and serve Prince Antipas?'

'Of course--but it will take longer, I suppose. The Jews are like that.'

Nephti closed the leather panel as the girl turned aside soberly. Her
intuition read Arnon's thoughts. These strange people from afar were of
immense interest, but they were of another world.

'I had hoped that Queen Mariamne might come,' said Arnon. 'You saw no
women in the party, Nephti?'

No--the whole event was to be a man's affair: a political transaction,
in which one woman would be included because she was necessary. Gladly
would they have done without her, reflected Arnon, if that were
possible. The wedding was a confirmation of an international alliance.
The treaty had been formally written on a sheet of papyrus, duly
signed, and now it must be ratified. Arnon was but so much sealing-wax
stamped on an official document. Suddenly she was overwhelmed with a
sense of heart-sickening loneliness.

That evening there was a banquet attended by the Kings, the Prince, the
High Priest, several ranking members of the Sanhedrin, and the Arabian
Councillors. After an hour's feasting on the part of the men, Arnon
was brought in to be introduced. She felt and looked very small and
helpless.

Antipas stepped forward to greet her. He took both her hands in his
and smiled down into her timidly upraised eyes. It was an experienced
smile that skilfully appraised and evidently approved. For a moment
the silence in the tent grew oppressive as they waited for an opinion
from the beautiful young Princess. Presently she gave a shy, tremulous
smile--and the suspense lifted. They all breathed freely again;
and, with the exception of Aretas, exchanged glances of relief and
satisfaction. Herod drained his goblet and smacked his lips. It was
good wine. And--what was still better--by this time tomorrow the
alliance would be an attested fact and he would be ready--if need
be--to confront Tiberius.



Chapter II


Now that the month of Tishri had come and the trees were taking on rich
colours, Arnon's homesickness became almost insupportable. Jerusalem
was slowly strangling her. But for the understanding sympathy and
tenderness of Queen Mariamne, she would have died or gone mad.

Nature had not intended that Arnon should be surrounded by walls.
Because her own people were of necessity nomadic they had built no
cities. Indeed, the Arabians were contemptuous of cities, considering
them pestilent prisons, stultifying to both body and spirit.

Every morning, in the far away and long ago, Arnon had risen at dawn to
breathe deeply of the invigorating mountain breeze and rejoice in the
peace of a silence broken only by the distant tinkle of camel bells.
But here in Jerusalem she felt stifled, caged. Late in the morning she
would struggle back to consciousness, finding herself hungry for clean,
bracing air. The beautifully wrought antique tapestries which curtained
her luxurious bed gave off a sickening odour of mould and the exquisite
mosaics leaked the sour stench of disintegrating plaster.

Added to the tomblike atmosphere of her spacious bed-chamber was a
conglomeration of city smells seeping in from the outside, smells
of old and decaying things: old walls, old towers, old markets, old
stables, old cobbled streets. There were plenty of distasteful sights,
sounds, and scents in this ancient city, but the worst thing of all was
the stagnant, fetid air.

Every day now, Arnon woke nauseated; though the servants--who found
nothing wrong with the air--graciously assured the foreign Princess
that her morning sickness was due to her condition, always adding,
piously, 'For which the Lord God of Israel be praised!'

On this tenth day of Tishri, Arnon tugged herself loose from a
nostalgic dream of riding swiftly beside her father in a noisy mountain
storm, galloping, galloping hard, quite out of breath, with big
splashes of warm rain pelting them. Half-suffocated and drenched with
perspiration, she gazed up dully into the smiling eyes of the Queen.

Mariamne was the most beautiful woman Arnon had ever seen. She was in
her early fifties, but seemed much younger, for by her abstemiousness
she had retained a youthful figure. She had all the traditional dignity
of a queen, but none of the arrogance. Arnon had known from the first
moment of their meeting that she was going to like Mariamne. The Queen
had no daughter and Arnon had never known a mother. Their friendship
was instant and mutual.

But in spite of the affection she felt for her charming mother-in-law,
Arnon had extended no confidences. Her father had warned her to guard
her tongue in the presence of these people. 'Spies are always friendly,
and free to share their secrets with you.' Sometimes it had been
difficult to observe this reticence, her intuition assuring her that
Mariamne's devotion to her was sincere.

'How are you, my child?' asked the Queen gently.

'Very warm,' mumbled Arnon; 'and a bit sick, as usual. I shall feel
better when I've had something cold to drink. You are up early, Your
Majesty. Have you had your breakfast?'

Summoning a servant to bring the Princess a goblet of cold pomegranate
juice, Mariamne sat down on the edge of the bed.

'I am not to have breakfast this morning, my dear. This is a fast day.'

'All day?' Arnon's eyes widened incredulously.

'Until evening. Then there will be a bountiful feast. You are not
expected to do any fasting, but we will want you to attend the banquet.'

Arnon sat up in bed, pushed her tousled black hair out of her eyes, and
inquired what this fast was about.

'It is the Day of Atonement,' explained Mariamne. 'Of all our special
occasions this one means the most. It really begins the day before,
with all the faithful Jews going about making things right with one
another--doing neglected duties, paying their debts, returning things
borrowed, and asking forgiveness for wrongs done and hot words spoken.
Damaged friendships are mended, estrangements are cleared up. And then
today--with clean hands and a right spirit--everyone brings a gift to
the Temple and receives a blessing.'

Arnon's eyes shone.

'It is very beautiful!' she whispered. 'May I do it, too? It would
be a relief--to go to the Temple and be blessed.' She bowed her
head dejectedly. 'My heart has been so bitter.' Slowly she raised
tear-filled eyes. 'Your Majesty, I have been very unhappy.'

Mariamne slipped an arm around her compassionately.

'Arnon, dear, would you like to call me "mother" instead of "Your
Majesty"? Don't do it if--if it takes an effort,' she added, 'but it
would please me.'

With that, Arnon's tears overflowed and she sobbed like a little child.

'I should like to,' she murmured brokenly. 'You have been so good to
me. I want you to be my mother. That's the way I think of you.'

Mariamne drew her closer.

'Tell me, Arnon,' she said softly, 'has the Prince been unkind to you?'

Arnon indecisively shook her head, but the pent-up tears ran unchecked.
When she could speak she said, 'No; he has not mistreated me--mother.
I see very little of him, you know. But the Prince is a busy man. He
can't be spending all his time entertaining me.'

'Men are always busy, my dear.' The Queen's usually placid voice showed
a trace of asperity. 'There are the games at Gath and a new Greek play
at Askelon--and other important engagements.' She paused for a moment.
Dropping her tone of raillery, she went on, 'Our Antipas is really a
sweet boy. He wouldn't intentionally hurt a fly. But he is selfish and
spoiled. How could it be otherwise? Too much money; too much leisure.'

'And too many people wanting to win his favour,' added Arnon.

'Sometimes I have thought,' said Mariamne soberly, 'that a baby Prince
should be left on the doorstep of an honest, frugal, hard-working
family and brought up as their son until he is about--'

'Twenty?' suggested Arnon, when the Queen had seemed at a loss for the
right figure.

'Forty!' amended Mariamne. 'Then he should be brought to the throne,
knowing what his people need. As it stands, there is nobody in the
kingdom quite so ignorant of his duties as the ruler himself. He
lives in a different world.' After an interval of silence she asked,
abruptly, 'Is anything else wrong, dear?'

'Almost everything,' confessed Arnon. 'Everything but you! It may be my
own fault. I cannot be myself here. In my own country I am happy and
free. I love to ride. The shepherds wave a hand and smile as I pass
by and I wave my hand and smile too. We are friends. Their wives and
daughters weave gay scarves for me and I visit them when they are sick.
Often I stop at their tents and play with the little children.'

'That is as it should be,' approved Mariamne. 'And they are not in awe
of you, as the King's daughter?'

'They call me "Princess," but when we play they do not throw the
game away to humour me. Maybe that is what ails a royal family:
they are allowed to win all the games...Here in Jerusalem I am a
Princess; always, every hour, a Princess. I am unused to these stiff
ceremonies--people bowing worshipfully--and backing out of the room. I
have to change my costumes half a dozen times a day, and none of them
is comfortable. Everything is strange--and I am becoming a stranger
even to myself.' Her voice broke completely. 'Please--may I not go
home--just for a little while?'

There was a long delay before Mariamne replied.

'I wish you might, Arnon. Doubtless the King would consent if it were
not for this military alliance. If it should come to the ears of the
Emperor--'

'I understand,' said Arnon weakly. 'Let us think no more about
it...And--I should like to go with you to the Temple. Is the Prince
going with us?'

Mariamne frowned and shook her head.

'Antipas set off early this morning for the north. You know he has been
made the ruler of Galilee?'

'Yes, mother. He did not tell me, but I heard a friend congratulate him
on it, at our wedding. Are we to live in Galilee?'

'Part of the time, perhaps,' said Mariamne uncertainly. 'Antipas is a
restless fellow. He does not like to stay long in one place. The King
is building a Galilean embassy here in the city. Antipas will spend
a couple of months every year in Jerusalem, attending to provincial
business. He loves Rome, and I dare say he will want to be there
occasionally. At the moment he is infatuated with the idea of building
a beautiful villa on the western shore of the Lake Gennesaret in
Galilee.'

Arnon brightened.

'That would be lovely!' she exclaimed. 'I have heard so much of that
beautiful Sea of Galilee. Perhaps there would be sailing!'

Mariamne did not share Arnon's sudden enthusiasm.

'I doubt whether the Prince would be interested in sailing. There are
some warm springs on the western shore. Antipas, who loves bathing,
will build commodious bath-houses in connection with his villa. I think
he hopes to induce a few of his wealthy Roman friends to build villas
there.'

Arnon's interest gradually faded. Instinctively she gathered that the
Queen had thought it time for her to know what manner of life she
should anticipate. But perhaps Antipas had not included her in all--or
any--of his plans. If he had expected her to live with him in Galilee,
he might have inquired what sort of home she would like.

'Has the Prince planned the villa?' she asked.

Mariamne stirred uneasily, reluctant to discuss the matter.

'Perhaps,' she said. 'He spent all last week in Petra inspecting a few
of the beautiful marble villas built by wealthy Athenians. He may have
told you.'

'He tells me nothing,' said Arnon.

Mariamne sighed deeply and rose to her feet.

'If you wish to go with us to the Temple, dear, you should be ready at
noon. Your maid will tell you what you are to wear. His Majesty expects
to leave the palace promptly at mid-day. It has been announced.'

'I hope I shall be prepared for the blessing,' said Arnon wistfully.
'I am much in need of it. Is there anything I should do? I'm afraid I
do not owe anything that should be paid back; and I have spoken no hot
words, though I have had them in my mind, which is probably just as
bad. Perhaps if my husband were here I might ask him to forgive me for
all the unkind things I have thought about him.'

The Queen drew a slow, sober smile and shook her head.

'In that case,' she said quietly, 'it is just as well that he isn't
here.'

 * * * * * *

It was traditionally considered a misfortune in royal households if a
titled infant was a girl. The father of the hapless child was expected
to be grumpy and the mother was ashamed of herself. But nobody seemed
much upset over the sex of Princess Arnon's baby; certainly not Arnon
herself, whose experience with one Prince had not made her eager to
produce another.

Antipas was up in Galilee when it happened. But for a handful of
servants, he had been spending his time alone. The new villa, on which
more than two hundred skilled stone-masons had been engaged for five
months, had risen a few feet above the massive foundation. One could
easily imagine its oncoming beauty, even in the bewildering clutter
of construction. The great oval pool, to be related to the house by
a series of graceful arcades, had been completed--all but the mosaic
lining, a tedious business, to be postponed until the Prince should be
absent for a season. The marble flagging that bounded the pool, the
exquisitely sculptured balustrades, and the commodious dressing-rooms
were quite finished. Antipas had given much attention to the
architecture and appointments of these sumptuous rooms, furnishing them
so lavishly that he was using them for his living quarters. The pool
had in every way surpassed his expectations. The warm water, reputed to
be of invigorating quality, poured generously from stone lions' mouths
in a steady flow that promised to be endless.

It was a great privilege, reflected Antipas, to be the ruler of the
Province of Galilee. True, he had not yet become acquainted with
any of his subjects, nor had he given a moment's thought to his
executive duties, whatever they might be. He knew very little about
the Galileans, except what everybody knew--that they were a stolid,
inoffensive, pious people, who minded their own small business and had
no ambitions to make their country known abroad. They grew their own
grain, wine, flax, and wool. They fished in the Lake Gennesaret. Their
men were adept at fashioning articles of household furniture, sometimes
showing themselves to be excellent craftsmen. Their women wove
serviceable fabrics for domestic uses. Their lives were self-contained
and, in consequence, narrowly circumscribed. They almost never
travelled beyond their own communities, except on the occasion of the
annual 'Passover,' when considerable numbers of them made a pilgrimage
to Jerusalem, where a week was spent in the performance of religious
rites. Customarily they took along some of the products of their lathes
and looms, which they offered for sale at the bazaars. They wore no
distinctive costume, but were readily identified in the city by their
accent and colloquialisms. They were a bit self-conscious and shy in
the presence of urbane strangers, aware that they were considered
outlanders.

Antipas felt that the task of governing these simple-hearted country
folk would not be arduous. Doubtless their trivial disagreements would
be quietly settled among themselves; and, as for possible entanglements
with the other provinces, the Galileans, exporting and importing
nothing of any value, would not be likely to invoke judicial aid. He
had little or nothing to do; his wealth would enable him to live in
luxury. Whenever he wearied of his lethargy, he could easily trek to
Caesarea and sail for Rome.

Life in Galilee was still a novelty. Antipas had fallen in love with
the entrancing view to be had from the eastern portico of the pool.
At his command the servants habitually roused him early to see the
dawn come in. It was a glorious pageant, with the steep banks of
cumulus clouds transformed into symmetrical garlands of gold as the
sun illumined them from behind the distant mountain range, while the
beautiful Lake Gennesaret--which everybody, except the natives, called
'The Sea of Galilee'--reflected the deep blue of a further sky.

Then would come the dramatic moment when the sun itself would mount
regally into the open, stripping the clouds of their gold and arraying
them with silver. The slanting sails of the little fishing boats would
flash brightly. The tall tower of the Roman fort, a mile to the north,
and the squat dome of the Jewish synagogue, a mile further in the heart
of Capernaum, would be flatteringly high-lighted. The untidy clutter of
fishermen's shacks and wharves on the lake-shore would seem less ugly
than picturesque. And the ruler of Galilee, suffused with a sense of
well-being, would send for his breakfast.

Only one thing was lacking, congenial company. And on this eighteenth
day of Adar that want was supplied. The arrival of Mark Varus was not a
surprise, though Antipas had not expected him so soon. He had promised
to come in mid-summer. Attended by half a dozen servants from home and
a pack-train of baggage which had been disembarked at Caesarea, Mark
had turned up in the late afternoon, warm, dusty, and noisy with his
approval of all these impressive building operations. Antipas hugged
him with fervour, then picked him up and threw him headlong into the
pool, where he wriggled himself out of most of his clothing, his host
following along the ledge with a pike-staff, fishing out the discarded
garments as they accumulated in the water.

Presently, refreshed and clad, Mark joined his friend, who, sprawled
at full length on an ornamented lectus, was in conversation with the
butler concerning the arrival of a courier from Jerusalem.

'Make him comfortable,' the Prince was saying, 'and tell him we will
see him in an hour or two.'

'He says it is urgent, sire.'

'Nothing is urgent--in Tiberias,' drawled Antipas.

'"Tiberias"?' queried Mark lazily, from the adjacent loggia. 'Name of
your new villa?'

'Name of my new city!' declared Antipas. 'One of the most beautiful
cities in all the world. All of it--every building in it--great and
small--to be of white marble. You're planning to build your villa of
white marble, aren't you?'

'Apparently,' chuckled Mark; 'though I hadn't thought much about it.'

'Are you ready now for a tankard of wine?'

'I've been ready this half-hour.'

Antipas clapped his hands and the wine arrived. They drank earnestly
and their tongues were loosened. Mark was besought for the latest news
of Rome. He shook his head dourly. Rome had quite lost her charm:
many changes--and all of them for the worse. He did not bother to
explain that his eminent father's disastrous defeat at the hands of the
barbarous Germanic tribes had done the Varus family no good socially;
Antipas could--and did--form his own conclusions about that. Mark would
be glad enough, he went on, to change his residence. Rome was filling
up with vulgar upstarts, rich nobodies busy with business; a strange
crowd now at all court festivities. Old Augustus had his faults, to
be sure, but he had some dignity. Tiberius had brought in an entirely
new breed of favourites. He had made Rome the dullest place on earth.
He hated games; considered them a waste of public funds. He was going
in for all manner of economies, as if the Empire was on the verge of
bankruptcy.

'Well--it is, isn't it?' mumbled Antipas.

Mark agreed that it was, and always had been, but it still contrived to
carry on.

'This new Tiberian dynasty,' he continued, 'is going to strip the city
of everything that made her name famous. All that we hear about now is
the importance of making the land more productive and the common people
more contented.'

'Sounds sensible,' said Antipas.

'That's what ails it,' muttered Mark. 'How can there be any pleasure in
a country that has resolved to be--sensible?'

'Is Tiberius still thinking of a northern invasion?'

'He probably never entertained such a thought,' scoffed Mark. 'I'm
surprised your father was ever taken in by that rumour. The Emperor is
working night and day to rebuild his Western Army.'

'Indeed! I had supposed there was nothing left of it,' remarked Antipas
ineptly. To cover his unintentional rudeness he added quickly, 'So--we
no longer have anything to fear? That is good--if you're sure you know.'

'I've had it on the best of authority. You might have been spared that
matrimonial alliance with Arabia. By the way'--Mark's eyes twinkled
mischievously--'how has that little treaty worked out? Is she pretty?'

Antipas frowned slightly, shrugged the impertinence away, up-ended his
goblet, sat up, blinked thoughtfully, and began slowly counting his
fingers.

Beckoning to the butler he said, 'Tell the courier we will see him
now.' Presently he was thrusting his jewelled dagger through the wax
sheath of a heavily gilded scroll. In silence and without betraying any
sign of interest--for he was aware of Mark's lively curiosity--he read
the formal message from his mother. Signalling the courier, waiting at
a little distance, he said casually, 'After you have rested, you may
return to Jerusalem. Convey our regards to Their Majesties and our good
wishes to the Princess Arnon, for her health and happiness. And you may
say,' he added, as an afterthought, 'that the child's name is Esther.'

'Why do you want her called Esther?' asked Mark, with childish
impudence, when the courier had bowed himself away.

'Because she was born on the fifteenth of Adar, a feast-day in honour
of Queen Esther.'

'Never heard of her. What's she queen of?'

'Persia--a century and a half ago.'

'Jewess?'

'Of course.'

'Why "of course"? Persia is not a Jewish country.'

Antipas dismissed this query with a negligent gesture, adding that he
was not an authority on Persian history; but Esther, a very beautiful
Jewess, had once been Queen of Persia, and did Mark want to bet
anything on it?

'Is your baby a Jewess?' hectored Mark. 'Half Arabian, isn't she?'

'That will not matter much,' yawned Antipas. 'She will be brought up as
a Jewess.'

'In my poor judgment,' declared Mark, suddenly serious, 'it's going
to be an awkward situation for her, all her life. A very unfortunate
combination--half Arab, half Jew.'

'Not so bad as you think,' said Antipas reassuringly. 'Both nations
will want to claim her.'

'You know better than that!' said Mark. 'Neither nation will accept
her, much less claim her! My guess is that your Esther is going to be a
very unhappy little girl.'

'Well,' muttered Antipas, 'it's too late to fret about that now.'
He held up his goblet for refilling. 'Of course, you've no idea how
beautiful this pool will be when the lining is in. I'll show you the
designs after dinner. They are absolutely incomparable!'

 * * * * * *

Again it was Tishri. The summer was over and the grass was tipped with
white in the mornings. Varus had left for Rome, gratified with the
Prince's assurance that he would be joining him in a couple of months,
after he had paid his respects to his family.

Arriving home, Antipas had spent a leisurely hour refreshing himself
after the tedious journey. Strolling into the Queen's apartment as
casually as if he had taken leave of his mother an hour ago, he eased
himself into a deeply cushioned chair and waited for her appearance.

'Antipas!' Mariamne threw her arms about him, hugging him hungrily.
'You have stayed away so long! We wondered if we were ever to see you
again!' She held him at arms' length. 'You're brown as a peasant.'

He patted her on the cheek.

'Beautiful as ever!' he declared. 'How do you do it?'

They sat down together on the divan, Mariamne gently caressing his
tanned forearm.

'You've seen Arnon?' she inquired anxiously.

'Not yet.' Noting his mother's frown, he added, 'Naturally, I wanted to
see you first.'

Mariamne accepted the tribute with a wisp of a smile, but grew serious
again, shaking her head slowly.

'I think I should tell you, my dear, that your neglect of Arnon has all
but broken her heart. You might at least have written her a friendly
letter--about the baby.'

'Sorry,' muttered Antipas. 'I've been very busy. The villa, you know. I
must tell you all about it. You see, when I first thought of it--'

'The villa can wait,' said Mariamne crisply. 'In the name of common
decency, you should go at once to see your Princess--and this beautiful
child, Fara. Come--I shall go with you if that will make it any
easier.' She rose and tugged him to his feet.

'Why do you call the child Fara?' inquired Antipas testily. 'I named
her Esther.'

'You may call her Esther if you like.' Mariamne's tone was frankly
indignant. 'But Arnon has named her Fara!'

'Against my wishes?'

'Of course! Why should Arnon pay any heed to your wishes after the way
you have treated her?'

'She is my wife!'

'Oh--is she? I thought you had forgotten.' Mariamne was angry now,
and her words came hot and fast. 'I don't want to upset you, my son,
the first hour you are home, but not everyone has forgotten that you
married the Princess of Arabia. King Aretas remembers! Your father has
had a message from him. He will tell you.'

Antipas searched his mother's eyes and swallowed noisily.

'You mean--the Arabian is hostile?'

'Your father will tell you,' said Mariamne. 'Come! Better do what you
can to make amends to Arnon.'

'No!' growled Antipas. 'I shall not be applying for any Arabian's
pardon--not even Arnon's! And if this sullen shepherd, who calls
himself a king, has the effrontery to dictate to a Prince of Israel--'

Mariamne held up a hand warningly.

'It is quite apparent,' she decided, 'that you are in no mood to visit
Arnon. Go at once to your father and learn where you stand--in this
unfortunate business. I shall tell the Princess that you are here and
eager to see her, but that the King has summoned you to an urgent
conference. And--let me say one thing more,' she added, as Antipas
moved toward the door, 'it will be much to your advantage if you
conduct yourself respectfully in your audience with your father. No
strutting, no levity, no assumption that you are a petted favourite of
the King!'

'Angry, is he?'

'"Angry" is a very mild word for it! And--don't bother to tell him
what you have been building in Galilee. The King has other plans for
Galilee!'

 * * * * * *

It was not a happy interview. To begin with, Antipas was
halted--politely enough, but definitely halted--at the door of his
father's audience room, the Chamberlain announcing firmly that the King
was engaged.

'But he will see me,' rasped Antipas. 'Go and tell him.'

'His Majesty has been notified that you are here, Your Highness. He
bids you wait until you are summoned.'

Antipas turned to go.

'Say to His Majesty that I shall return when he is less busy,' he said
indifferently.

'If I may venture a suggestion,' murmured the obsequious Chamberlain,
'the Prince would be well advised to remain here until he is called.'

Something of warning in the old man's tone checked Antipas' impulsive
decision to leave. Indignantly he glanced about for a chair to fling
himself into, but to his surprise and annoyance there were no chairs
in the corridor. He was about to order one brought to him, but the
Chamberlain had already slipped back into the room, closing the door
behind him. Antipas paced up and down, fuming. He had never been
treated like this before. Once he made up his mind to go, stalked
as far as the great door that gave on to the terrace, but thought
better of it--and returned. It was a whole hour before the Chamberlain
reappeared to say that His Majesty would see His Highness now.

Forcing a filial smile, Antipas entered, bowed, and said: 'My
greetings, sire! I hope I find you well.'

'Sit down!' barked the King.

Antipas' expression sobered and he sat rigidly at attention.

It was immediately evident that the King had carefully composed the
speech upon which he launched with icy restraint. He had tried, he said
quietly, to be an indulgent father. It was not easy for a King--hard
pressed with cares of state--to give his children the firm discipline
necessary to the production of a strong character. He had paid his sons
the compliment of believing that--with their superb advantages--they
would develop strength, dignity, integrity.

But he had been bitterly disappointed, he went on dejectedly. Where was
there a father in all this realm who had less cause for satisfaction in
his sons? There was Philip, the weakling, the cuckold! Herod's voice
shook with contempt. And there was this insufferable braggart and
brawler, Archelaus! What had he ever done, the King asked himself, to
have deserved an affliction like Archelaus?

'Only last week,' he went on, with rising heat, 'your impudent brother
came to advise us that we were too old to continue our rule: that we
had toiled too long, too diligently; that we should retire, and confer
on him the regency! Think of that! The regency--of all Judaea! To be
conferred upon a loud-mouthed, contentious fellow who can't even get
along harmoniously with his own lazy drinking-companions!'

Antipas smiled a little reminiscently. Feeling himself to be presently
in need of mercy, he thought it opportune to put in a defensive word
for his elder brother. Herod, noting that the Prince wanted to speak,
paused to listen.

'Archelaus was indeed over-reaching himself, sire; but is it so
unthinkable that he should be made regent of Judaea? He is the heir to
this throne, is he not?'

'That,' snapped Herod, 'is none of your business! We are just now about
to come to your business!'

And so--after this considerable delay--they had come to the Prince's
business, and a bad business it was, too. Antipas, had he the normal
instinct of a six-year-old waif, would have known, declared the King,
what a dangerous position he had accepted when he consented to be the
son-in-law of an Arabian King.

Antipas feebly protested that the honour had been forced upon him, but
Herod wasn't entertaining any mitigating circumstances.

'You have treated this Arabian girl shamefully! What a fool you are--to
think that these savages in Arabia who, for all their uncouth manners,
have their pride, would let you heap indignities upon the only child
of their King! Now you have it to settle for--and in full, mind you. I
have had word from Aretas. His message is brief but clear. His daughter
is to be brought home to Arabia!'

Antipas raised his head and brightened perceptibly. He drew a long,
comforting sigh. His father, observing his relief, rose from his chair
and stabbed a finger in the air.

'Mind you'--he shouted--'the Princess is to be taken home to Arabia;
not sent home. And you, Your Brightness, will accompany her. Aretas
insists upon that. His much cherished daughter, he says, has suffered
enough at the hands of this court. She is not to be returned like some
article of rejected merchandise! Those were his words. Her husband is
to bring her home in a manner befitting their station, and show her the
honours she--and her countrymen--have a right to expect.'

'But'--spluttered Antipas--'why does he want me to play this farce? He
probably despises me.'

'Indeed he does!' yelled Herod. 'And not probably! And why shouldn't
he?'

'They will kill me if I appear over there,' muttered Antipas.

'They will kill you if you don't!'

'How long must I stay?'

'Until you have fully restored Arnon's damaged pride; until you have
satisfied Aretas and his Council that you respect their Princess as
your wife.'

There was a long silence.

'I had expected to leave for Rome,' protested Antipas. 'I have business
there.'

'That may be,' snorted Herod. 'But you have no business in Rome that
can compare in urgency with the business you have in Arabia.'

'How about my obligations in Galilee?'

'You are to forget all about Galilee!'

'Meaning that you have deposed me, sire?'

'For the present, yes. We will take care of all Galilean matters.
Whether you ever find yourself in Galilee again is a question you may
answer for yourself. You may go now. Make peace with your Princess. And
prepare to take her home without delay.'

Antipas noisily exhaled a self-piteous sigh, slapped his palms down
hard on the arms of his chair, and rose to his feet.

'This, sire,' he muttered, 'is the unhappiest day of my life.'

'So far as you have gone,' assisted the King. 'See to it now that you
do not encounter unhappier days. Make things right with your Princess.
Tell her how you have longed to return to her, but that a revolt among
the people of your Province--' He broke off, annoyed to find his son
attentively listening for further light on this extemporaneous alibi.
'Contrive your own lie,' he went on impatiently, 'but make it good!
Arnon will try to believe you, but she lacks a great deal of being such
a fool as her husband.'

'A revolt, eh?' reflected Antipas.

'A dangerous uprising; and you had to stay there--and deal with it.'
Herod grew thoughtful and continued, to himself, 'I shall say that to
Aretas. He may doubt the truth of it, but a poor excuse in a case so
desperate is better than none. When a man's pride is injured, almost
any medicine is welcome.'

'May I take my leave now, Your Majesty?' asked Antipas, with elaborate
humility, hopeful that his father might relent and smile a little.

'Indeed you may, Your Highness,' mocked Herod, with a profound bow.
'What an ass you are!'

 * * * * * *

The return to Arabia was not as difficult as Antipas had feared. He
was regarded with deference. It was obvious that his shameful neglect
of the Princess had been a well-kept secret. On the surface Arnon had
been treated kindly in Jerusalem. King Aretas received his son-in-law
graciously enough, though without any ostentatious amiability, an
attitude readily explained by his habitual reticence.

The Councillors, promptly assembling to pay their respects, were forced
to concede to one another (for none of them knew how badly their
Princess had fared but Ilderan and Tema) that if Antipas were not a Jew
he would be almost likeable.

'It isn't his fault that he's a Jew,' remarked Adbeel.

'No,' agreed Mishma; 'but it is a great misfortune.'

Arnon had wondered whether there might be some constraint in her
meeting with Zendi, but when he called with his pretty wife Rennah,
Dumah's daughter, the air was instantly cleared for them all by little
Fata. Rennah, presently to bear a child, had taken Arnon's uncommonly
beautiful baby into her arms, while the others, for various reasons,
beamed happily over her unselfconscious display of maternal tenderness.
They all laughed merrily when Fara laid a small pink palm against
Rennah's cheek--and smiled. Antipas, who had a talent for making
friends easily, was delighted with his daughter's charming response to
Rennah's caresses.

'What an adorable child!' declared Zendi.

'I never saw her take to any one so quickly,' said Arnon. 'I'm quite
jealous of you, Rennah.'

'Beautiful women,' commented Antipas, 'do not have to be jealous of one
another.'

Arnon's eyes had brightened at that. There was no doubt now that the
Prince was proving to be a good husband. Even Aretas, standing by,
seemed gratified.

'They are beautiful,' he put in unexpectedly, for he was not given to
compliments--'all three of them!'

And so--the return of Antipas to Arabia was made much easier for him
than he had expected or deserved. The baby Fara had paved his way.
The Arabians came from near and far to see this endearing child whose
extraordinary beauty was on everybody's tongue. Grim old shepherds,
who had bitterly resented Arnon's marriage to a Jew, came to see if
her baby was really as lovely as the rumour, and found the Prince
so obviously devoted to his family that they went away to report
favourably.

'He may be a Jew,' they said, 'but he is doing well by the Princess.'

The ranking Arabians of his own age, suspicious and cold at first,
gradually thawed toward Antipas. He was no match for them as an
equestrian, but he was by no means inexperienced in the saddle. Respect
for him increased almost to friendliness when, invited to join a party
on a wolf hunt, he had appeared on a nervous, fidgety, unpredictable
filly whose wet flanks showed that she had stoutly disputed his
authority. Aretas had told him to select his own horse that morning.
Old Kedar had been instructed to assist him. The Prince had looked them
over carefully.

'I'll take this young bay mare, Kedar,' said Antipas.

Kedar had drawn a long face.

'She needs quite a bit of handling, sire,' he said.

'I dare say,' drawled Antipas. 'She probably wants exercise--and so do
I.'

Privileged by his age to speak his mind candidly, Kedar chuckled a
little, deep in his throat, and replied, 'Well--you'll both get it, I
think.'

When the young blades, waiting for him on a little knoll, saw him
coming at an easy canter, they exchanged knowing grins. Approaching,
Antipas dismounted.

'The girth is a bit tight,' he remarked, loosening it with a practised
hand. 'It annoys her, I think.'

Everybody laughed companionably.

'It doesn't take much to annoy that filly,' said Zendi. 'Have any
trouble with her, sir?'

'Nothing to speak of,' said Antipas. He patted the perspiring mare
on her neck and gently tousled her forelock. 'You'll be a good girl
now, won't you?' he murmured kindly. The filly tossed her head; but
apparently thinking better of it, rubbed her muzzle across his arm.
They all laughed again. Antipas was getting along very nicely with the
Arabians.

Winter closed in. It was rather hard to bear. The days were short and
cold and uneventful. Sometimes Antipas would talk to Arnon about Rome,
and she would listen with wide-eyed interest, thinking to please him.
When the first hardy little edelweiss peeped through the melting snow,
he suggested that they plan a trip to Rome--not to stay very long. He
knew she would enjoy the voyage, he said, and she would be interested
in seeing this greatest of all the cities in the world.

Arnon demurred at first. She would like to go--but there was little
Fara. We will take her along, said Antipas. That would be difficult,
said Arnon. Then leave her here, said Antipas; she has an excellent
nurse and we will soon be back. Do think it over, he implored, adding
wistfully, 'I am really a city-bred man, my dear--and it has been a
long time since I have been on a paved street.'

'He has done very well, Arnon,' said her father, when she consulted him
for advice. 'Much better than we had thought. Perhaps you should humour
him.'

'I'm not very happy in a big city,' said Arnon.

'And your husband is not very happy in the open country,' said Aretas.
'Better meet him halfway in this matter. Otherwise he may grow restless
here.'

She nodded her head. It was good counsel. Antipas would grow restless
here. She did not add that Antipas was already so restless that it was
making him moody and detached.

 * * * * * *

No one could have been more graciously attentive than was Antipas
on their long voyage from the port city of Gaza to Rome. The early
summer weather was perfect for sailing, the little ship had better
accommodations than most and the ports of call were of fascinating
interest.

Arnon could not be quite sure whether the Prince's good humour and
high spirits represented his desire to make her contented or could be
accounted for by a boyish anticipation of a return to his enchanted
city. She gave him the benefit of the doubt and enjoyed the comfortable
journey.

Antipas spent long hours, on lazy afternoons under the gay deck-canopy,
discoursing on the life he had lived in Rome and the friends to whom he
would introduce her. But the more he talked, the less confidence she
had in her capacity to find pleasure in the pursuits of such people as
he described. Did they ride? she asked. No--there really was no safe
and quiet place to ride unless one lived on an estate in the country.
But--couldn't they do that? inquired Arnon. Antipas had whimsically
wrinkled his nose: he had had quite enough of country life for the
present. But--wouldn't it be frightfully noisy in the city? Doubtless;
but Antipas didn't object to the sound of traffic; it made him feel
alive.

One day she asked about the language of Rome. Latin, wasn't it? Perhaps
Antipas would teach her. No, Antipas had replied, they did not speak
Latin; that is, it was spoken only by the lower classes.

'Everybody who is anybody,' he went on, 'has had private tutors, and
these men are invariably Greeks--Greek slaves.'

'The better people are taught by slaves?'

'My dear, our Greek slaves are the most intelligent men in the world.
We Romans do not pretend to match them in learning.'

'"We Romans"?' laughed Arnon. 'You are not a Roman, are you?'

Antipas had glanced about, before replying in a guarded tone, 'I am
Jewish by race, but Rome is my city.' Rearranging Arnon's pillows for
her better comfort, he reverted to the language question. 'You will
pick up the Greek quickly, I think. You may speak with an odd accent at
first. Most foreigners do. That is to be expected. But the Romans will
find it charming. It always amuses them.'

Arnon smiled uncertainly. Of course she knew that she would be
considered a foreigner, but the word made her lonely. And she would
speak queerly, and it would amuse them. Doubtless they would treat
her as a child learning to talk. She wouldn't like that. Some women
were at their very best--playing they were six, prattling baby-talk,
but Arnon had been taught to despise such silly affectations. Now she
would be forced to do the baby-role, for which she felt temperamentally
unfitted. She frowned thoughtfully. If she had been at a disadvantage
in Jerusalem, where at least she could talk like an adult, how would
she feel in Rome? It worried her so much that she asked the question
of Antipas who, summoned from his day-dreaming, replied absently, 'You
will not feel strange--after a day or two.'

But she did. The great, garish, clamorous city bewildered her. The
elaborate house to which Antipas brought her was conducted in a manner
utterly unfamiliar. She had such difficulty in making the servants
understand her wishes that she soon gave up trying to be the mistress
of her home and allowed the score or more of slaves to run the
establishment as they pleased. Often they were drunk, always they were
lazy; it was suspected that the butler was dishonest. The meals were
late and indifferently served. The rooms were untidy. Antipas coolly
remarked that he had never lived less comfortably. He did not say it
was Arnon's fault; but whose else could it be?

Their first social evening out was at the home of Mark Varus. Antipas
had reminded Claudia that his Arabian Princess would be having language
difficulties which might make her seem ill at ease, and would Claudia
limit the number of her guests to a very small company who could be
depended on to understand Arnon's predicament. So Claudia had invited
only twenty.

The first person to be introduced was Arnon's sister-in-law, Herodias,
who spread a wide, red mouth, nodded gaily to her new relative--as if
they had known each other since childhood--and threw her long, slim,
jingling arms around Antipas' neck, drawing him to her in a daring
embrace. Lagging behind Herodias was a sheepishly grinning, baldish man
whom Arnon readily guessed was Poor Philip. He advanced shyly and spoke
in Aramaic.

'Thrice welcome, Princess Arnon, to this overestimated city. I am
Philip, the pampered husband of that lady who is so firmly attached to
my brother. We are, as you see, a devoted family.'

Arnon smiled at this persiflage, but couldn't help feeling shocked over
Philip's indifference to his wife's sluttish behaviour.

'They must be very warm friends,' she said, trying to be casual.

Claudia had turned away to greet arriving guests. Herodias had eased
her grip on Antipas and was whispering earnestly into his ear. Mark
Varus, flushed and lusty, approached to say--in Greek, 'So--at last--we
have the lovely Princess of Arabia with us!'

Arnon smiled, only half understanding.

'Her Greek isn't very nimble yet, Mark,' said Philip. 'Know any
Aramaic?'

Mark said 'Very little,' and proceeded to prove it by discoursing, in
extravagant terms, of the new villa in Galilee. Arnon, who knew less
about the villa than Mark knew about Aramaic, could only say that
she hoped to see it, some day. Mark's intuition suggesting that this
topic might profitably be dropped now, he offered her his arm and
led her--with a proprietorial swagger--among the groups of guests,
introducing her to faces rather than names. Arnon had a feeling that
no one knew who she was or cared very much. They smirked, nodded, and
continued their loud-pitched conversations in which three or four women
seemed endeavouring to talk one another down. Arnon was stunned by the
confusion. She had never been in a place so astoundingly noisy or so
appallingly rude.

Mark Varus continued to drag her about in a manner that made it
difficult to maintain any dignity at all, as if he were exhibiting
a blooded colt, pinioning her arm tightly under his, while he gaily
shouted greetings to new arrivals. Arnon turned about to look for
Antipas, but he was lost in the crowd; probably had forgotten her.

Presently an elaborate dinner was served, the guests lounging languidly
on an elbow in the deep upholstery of divans drawn close together
about a long table. Mark, seated next to Arnon, was most attentive,
embarrassingly attentive, finding frequent occasion to bend over her
in an effort to serve her plate personally with some delicacy. She
instinctively drew away from these intimate contacts; and Mark's
ardour, after a few unmistakable rebuffs, suddenly cooled. Turning from
her, he attempted to attract the attention of Herodias on the other
side, but finding her wholly preoccupied with Antipas, he laboriously
resumed his attention to the Arabian Princess, scolding her gently for
her abstinence. Arnon tried to explain that it was not a custom among
her people to drink intoxicants. Sometimes, she said, their men had a
glass of wine, but it was not considered suitable for an Arabian woman
to drink at all.

Philip, who was seated next to her, overheard the conversation and
leaned forward to remark that one was expected to drink deeply at Roman
banquets.

'It annoys half-drunken people,' he went on drolly, 'to talk to anybody
who remains sober. It embarrasses them. That's why Varus presses you to
imbibe, Princess Arnon. He means it well enough. He is your host--and
he wants you to be a social success.'

Mark listened with a frown, but made no comment.

'And I won't be a success--unless I'm a little bit drunk?' inquired
Arnon.

'Well,' drawled Philip, with a chuckle, 'that's one way of saying
it--but I never heard it put so briefly and clearly before.'

He caught Mark's eye and was rewarded with a scowl and a shrug.

'I'm afraid I am not going to like it very well--in Rome,' murmured
Arnon. It was some time before Philip commented on that. Regarding her
soberly, he said, 'No--you couldn't. My brother should not have brought
you here. You are of a texture much too fine to be soiled with this
degradation.'

For an instant Arnon searched Philip's eyes, suspecting that he was
taunting her, but found him seriously sincere.

'Perhaps you too would be happier--somewhere else,' she said.

'Anywhere else,' he replied.

 * * * * * *

After a few weeks of earnest but unsuccessful endeavours to accommodate
herself to the mores of Rome, Arnon gave up trying and begged Antipas
to excuse her from further attendance at banquets.

'And am I to spend my evenings at home, then?' he demanded testily. 'Is
it your idea that I should live the life of a hermit in a cave?'

There was only one reasonable answer to that. Arnon assured him that he
was quite free to go alone, whenever and wherever he pleased; which he
did. It was not long before they were seeing very little of each other,
making no effort to repair their estrangement.

One evening in early autumn when Arnon was about to sit down to a
solitary dinner, Philip surprised her by calling. She insisted upon his
dining with her, and he seemed glad to accept. She found it easy to
talk with Philip, whose reticence everybody mistook for stupidity. It
was not long before the conversation was becoming quite personal--by
mutual consent, for they were both lonely. Arnon's life in Rome, Philip
was saying, must have turned out to be very tiresome. Tiresome, said
Arnon, wasn't the word she would have used, but it was at least that.

'Sometimes,' declared Philip dreamily, 'I can hardly endure it. I have
often thought of running away--to Sicily, perhaps, to live alone'--he
seemed talking to himself now, with eyes half closed--'in the country,
in a little house, on a green hillside, with fruits and flowers to
cultivate, trees, grass, sunsets, and a friendly dog or two.'

'But would you be happy--without your family?' asked Arnon, when he had
ended.

'I have no family,' he muttered. 'Herodias is never at home. I do not
ask where she spends her time.'

'Why don't you?' ventured Arnon. 'She is your wife.'

'For the same reason that you do not ask Antipas where he spends his
time,' said Philip. He chuckled unpleasantly. 'I dare say that if we
inquired of their present whereabouts we would find them in the same
place.'

'You mean--they are often together?'

'They are always together! And if I were you, Arnon, I should leave for
Arabia at once--before this scandal humiliates you--and your people.'

Arnon's heart beat hard and her throat hurt.

'I think that was why you came to see me tonight,' she said weakly.
'You thought it was high time for me to know.'

Philip nodded, without meeting her eyes.

'Everyone else knows,' he said. 'Why shouldn't you?'

Next morning the unavoidable interview between Antipas and Arnon
terminated their unhappy alliance. To his considerable relief, the
Prince's scandalous behaviour was not discussed. Arnon simply stated
that Rome was no place for an Arabian Princess to hope for happiness,
and Antipas cheerfully agreed that her return to her own people was the
only solution to their problem. He would arrange for it without delay.

A well-appointed pleasure barge was chartered, stocked with everything
that might make the long voyage comfortable. A score of trusted men,
experienced in handling caravans, were engaged to safeguard the
overland journey from the port at Gaza.

On the day before the sailing, Antipas tried to turn the conversation
toward the probable attitude of King Aretas. Reassuring Arnon on the
wisdom of her decision to return home, he added pleasantly, 'And how
pleased your father will be to have you come back to him! I am sure he
has been lonely without you.'

Arnon frowned, pursed her lips, and stared squarely into his uneasy
eyes. He shifted his position and made a pretence of casualness. Slowly
lowering her head, she continued to search his face from under her long
lashes. She gave him a slow, enigmatic smile.

'My father will welcome his daughter's return to his tent,' she said,
measuring her words. 'But Aretas, the King of Arabia, may not be
pleased when he learns that the Princess of Arabia has been put to
shame by an alien enemy.'

'Meaning that he will seek revenge?' Antipas was serious now and his
voice was unsteady.

'Prince Antipas is not well versed in Arabian history,' replied Arnon,
'if he thinks that this indignity might be easily overlooked.'

The implied warning disposed of the Prince's suavity and
self-assurance. He paced the floor, flushed and angry.

'Let the King of Arabia do what he will!' he shouted. 'Doubtless the
Princess will put the worst possible construction on her difficulties.
She will not tell the King that she made no effort to fulfil her
obligations to her husband.' He paused in his march and regarded her
sternly. 'I have not injured you! On the contrary, you are abandoning
me! And I may as well tell you now that when your ship has sailed
tomorrow I shall execute a bill of divorcement--on the grounds of
desertion!'

Arnon suddenly sat erect. Her eyes lighted.

'Do you really mean that?' she exclaimed. 'Accept my thanks, Antipas,
for this gracious favour!'

Stunned by this unexpected blow to his vanity, he studied her eyes
soberly. No--she was not ironical. She meant it sincerely. He had
hesitated to hand her this crushing news--and now it was evident that
she was delighted to receive it. He bowed stiffly and walked toward the
door, where he turned for a final word.

'You will find on the barge a young, well-born Greek slave, whom I
bought yesterday at considerable cost. She is your personal property.
I hope you will take her with you. She reads, writes, and speaks Greek
fluently. In addition to her other duties, perhaps she will teach my
little daughter a more graceful language than the crude imitation of
Aramaic that is spoken in Arabia.'

Arnon flushed a little.

'Whether our language is crude or not,' she retorted, 'depends on who
speaks it! And--I want no parting gift from you.'

'As you like,' said Antipas indifferently. 'The Greek slave will be on
the barge, and she is your property. If you do not want her--pitch her
overboard.'

The Prince did not appear when the ship sailed. Arnon had not expected
him, and was not disappointed. At the last minute before the hawsers
were hauled aboard, Philip arrived in a surprisingly happy mood. He led
her a little way apart on the afterdeck for a final word.

'This is a good day for you,' he said gaily--'and for me too! You are
going home to people who love you, freed from everything that has made
your life unpleasant.'

'And you?' queried Arnon.

'I too am free! Herodias has informed me that she and my brother want
to be married; and would I divorce her. Would I? I do not often move
with so much alacrity. And I am sailing in a week, for Sicily.'

'How fortunate you are, Philip,' said Arnon. 'I do hope you will be
contented there. I shall often think of you--in your garden.' She
lowered her voice. 'The Prince may have told you that he is divorcing
me.'

Philip nodded.

'I was gratified and a bit surprised that Antipas found the courage to
tell you himself. My brother has always disliked to admit that he is a
scoundrel.'

After farewells were said and the ship had cast off, Arnon was
conducted to her commodious cabin, where an uncommonly bright and
pretty young woman, of nearly her own age, was unpacking her boxes. She
had quite forgotten about the slave. The girl made a deep curtsey, with
eyes timidly averted, and continued with her task.

'I am told that you belong to me,' said Arnon kindly. 'What is your
name?'

'Ione, Your Highness,' said the girl, with another obsequious curtsey.

'You may address me as "Princess Arnon"--and you need not curtsey. Are
you a good sailor?'

'I do not know, Princess Arnon.'

'But this is not your first voyage?'

'No, Princess Arnon. I was brought to Rome from Piraeus in a slave-ship
when I was only ten, but we were crowded down deep in the hold, where
it was always dark and there was no air. I was very sick, all the time.
Perhaps I may do better if--'

'If you are allowed to breathe,' assisted Arnon. 'We will see to that.'
She smiled reassuringly, and the girl's eyes softened. 'It will be a
long voyage,' she added. 'I am taking you to Arabia.'

'I am glad, Princess Arnon,' murmured Ione.

'You are not sorry to leave Rome? You will not be homesick?'

'I have no home, Princess Arnon. I am glad to leave Rome. I shall be
happy in Arabia.'

'But you were never in Arabia,' said Arnon, amused.

'No, Princess Arnon,' said Ione, 'but I know I shall be happy--if you
are there.'

 * * * * * *

The caravan wearily drew up before the King's encampment at sunset.
Old Kedar was much moved as he helped Arnon out of the cramped
camel-housing, lifting her down as if she were still a little girl.
Word spread rapidly that the Princess had come home. Nephti met her
at the door and tenderly placed the baby Fara in her arms. Arnon's
eyes were misty as she looked down into the child's smiling face. The
servants gathered about, making soft little murmurs of fond delight.
The Princess inquired for her father.

'The King should be here soon,' said Kedar. 'They buried the good Chief
Ilderan this afternoon.'

As the twilight came on, Aretas arrived, sober and moody over the
loss of his great friend. Arnon's presence comforted him, but he was
impatient to learn why she had been brought back by strangers. She
tried to spare him, tried to take most of the blame, tried to temper
his rising anger; but he demanded the full truth, and she told him
everything. Aretas did not eat or sleep that night.

Next morning, well mounted couriers were dispatched in all directions
with messages to the Councillors tersely telling the story. The
Councillors, in turn, sent word to their tribal sheiks that an
expedition would move at once upon Jerusalem. A mobilization of cavalry
was ordered, the concentration to occur on the east bank of the Jordan
near the village of Jeshimoth. By the fifth day two thousand armed
horsemen were assembled.

The violent rage that had swept Aretas was not apparent now. That
fire, still dangerously hot, had been banked. When the King spoke to
his impatient troops he was composed. Arabia had suffered a great
humiliation at the hands of the Jews. A swift and savage blow was to be
struck at Herod, seeing that the despicable Prince Antipas was out of
reach.

The Arabians needed no urging. They were so eager to proceed that the
Councillors postponed the election of a successor to Ilderan. Indeed,
it was with much difficulty that Aretas detained the vanguard until
the contingents from far distances had arrived. Young Zendi would have
taken a score of his reckless neighbours on ahead of the others had not
Aretas spoken to him sharply.

'You may be the ruler of these brave men, some day,' he said, 'and it
is not too soon to let them know that you have not only a courageous
heart but a cool head.'

When the eagerly awaited order was shouted on that eventful morning
they bounded away to the west, forded the river, scrambled up the
bank into Judaea, galloped four abreast across the plain, through the
startled villages, over the highways, into the palm-bordered avenue
that bisected suburban Bethany. They dashed down the long hill from
whose top the turrets and spires of Jerusalem shone brightly in the
noonday sun. Still four abreast, they rode through the massive open
gates, a score of bewildered guards and revenue officers scattering
before them. They proceeded at full gallop through the narrow,
winding, crowded streets, indifferent to the shouts and screams of the
panic-driven crowds that scurried for safety in doorways and alleys.
Now they had reached Herod's imposing palace, the Insula, where they
drew rein. Lining up in precise ranks that filled the spacious plaza
fronting the huge marble Insula, they dismounted from their wet horses
and stood waiting while Aretas and the Councillors rode up the broad
white steps and across the stone-floored terrace and up another flight
of steps toward the impressive bronze doors.

A thousand Roman legionaries stood guard, but had received no order to
obstruct the mounted Arabians. Perhaps the Legate was stunned out of
his wits by the sheer impudence of these grim horsemen who had dared to
ride up to the very doors of the Insula.

It struck Aretas strangely that so large a force guarded the King's
palace. Surely he had had no word that the Arabians were making an
invasion; or, if he had ordered out his troops to repel an attack, why
were they standing there motionless?

Aretas shouted to the Legate, who approached respectfully.

'Take me to Herod!' he demanded.

'King Herod is dead, sire.'

'Have a care,' shouted Zendi. 'It is dangerous to lie to the King of
Arabia!'

'I have told you the truth, sire,' reiterated the Legate calmly. 'King
Herod died of a shock early this morning.' He gestured toward his
troops. 'This is a Guard of Honour.'

'Open those doors!' commanded Aretas. 'I came to see Herod and I mean
to see him--alive or dead!'

After a brief parley, Legate Julian gave the order. The great bronze
doors slowly swung open. The mounted detachment moved forward.

'But, sire,' protested the Legate, 'I hope you are not going to ride
your horses into the Insula! Surely you would show more respect for the
King of the Jews!'

'Stand aside!' growled Aretas. 'I am not here to show respect!'

They rode into the marble-lined palace, down the broad corridor,
inquired of a frightened sentry where Herod's body was to be found;
and, upon learning that it was in the Council Chamber, proceeded to
ride into the high-domed, beautifully appointed room. In the centre,
on a bier, reposed the King of the Jews. The military guard, numbering
a score, stood their ground. Forming a circle about the corpse,
the Arabians sat for a long moment in silence. Aretas pointed his
riding-whip toward the waxen face.

'It is clear we cannot take revenge on that!' he said calmly. 'And
we have no cause to hew the Roman legion to pieces. And there is no
Jewish army to fight.' Aretas dismounted and the Councillors followed
his example. With bridle-reins in hand, they stood in a circle around
the bier and held a conference. All were agreed that there was nothing
further to do in Jerusalem. Dumah, dissatisfied, suggested that they
hang Herod's body to a tree in the courtyard. Mishma--who was expected
to be appointed Chief of the Councillors--objected to this on the
ground that it wouldn't be dignified.

'It would be as dignified,' said Dumah, 'as what we are doing now!'
For Mishma's bay mare had taken a step forward and was inquisitively
sniffing the grey feet of the late king. Everybody chuckled. Even
Aretas grinned. They mounted their horses, rode out of the Council
Chamber and down the corridor and out into the warm sunshine. A report
was made to the cavalrymen. They were instructed to be at ease and do
what they liked until sunset.

Disappointed and disgruntled, they rode back into the business zone;
and, after the manner of idling soldiers, made a nuisance of themselves
in the shops and markets. No serious damage was done. One indignant
old goldsmith remarked, 'Kindly leave your horses outside. You are
welcome--but we have no accommodation for horses.' The Arabians thought
this was funny and laughed heartily at the joke as they rode about
through his bazaar, examining the expensive merchandise. Pleased that
the Arabs did not loot his store, the goldsmith cheerfully answered all
their questions.

'How do you happen to be doing business today?' they asked.

'We've had no order to close up,' replied the old merchant.

'You know that King Herod is dead, don't you?'

'Of course.'

'Sick very long?'

'Hadn't you heard?'

'Heard he was dead--that's all.'

'There's more to it than that! Prince Archelaus arrived from Rome
last night, and he and the King quarrelled. Somehow the Prince was
stabbed--accidentally, they say; and the King had a stroke--and died.'

The Arabians stopped browsing about the shop and surrounded the
goldsmith inquisitively. Was the Prince badly hurt? Yes; he was said to
be dying.

As the afternoon wore on some of the cavalrymen managed to find some
wine, which gave them renewed interest in their mission of vengeance.
They rode their horses into the lobby of the Temple, tore down several
exquisitely wrought tapestries from the walls, and set fire to the
High Priest's palace. But as for revenge--no one was satisfied. That
could come later--when they had access to Antipas. He was the ruler
of Galilee and would eventually return to his domain. Some day, they
declared, a few picked men of Arabia would pay him a visit.

At dusk they set off in the moonlight for their homeland. Next
morning, as if the expedition had not already acquainted itself with
a sufficient number of unusual incidents, the King's white stallion
misjudged the width of a cross-country wall and pitched his rider
violently to the ground. They hurriedly dismounted and gathered about
him. Aretas was dead.

Improvising a litter made of young saplings, they slowly bore the body
toward home. That evening they camped on the plain near Jeshimoth.
After their supper, eaten in silence, the troops assembled to hear
Mishma confer the Kingship of Arabia upon Zendi, the son of Ilderan.



Chapter III


To the satisfaction of Arabia, young Zendi dealt quite generously with
Princess Arnon. This he could well afford to do, for he had inherited
from his father Ilderan large flocks of sheep, herds of cattle, and
enough camels to outfit a dozen caravans on their regular journeys to
the sea.

It was his right as the new King to take over the entire domain
controlled by Aretas, but he immediately asked the Councillors to
cede a tract of the King's land to the Princess for the pasturage of
livestock bequeathed by her father.

In view of the sympathy which the Arabians felt for their unhappy
Princess, this warm-hearted display of kindness greatly advantaged the
boyish monarch as he entered upon his duties. And it was clear that
he would stand in need of his country's loyalty, for but little snow
had fallen during the previous winter and the competition for grazing
grounds would demand firm and wise control when the midsummer sun had
made the problem serious. By this magnanimous act, Zendi had made a
good beginning. Even Mishma, who had come so nearly being the new king
himself, expressed his belief that Arabia was in competent hands and
gave the son of Ilderan his full support.

With the approval of the Councillors, Arnon's establishment was set up
on a broad plateau two miles south of the King's encampment, and it
seemed very much like home, for she was entitled to all the furniture
and household retainers belonging to her father. At Zendi's gracious
suggestion, the royal ensign fluttered at her imposing entrance door
and its replica was embroidered on her apparel. 'And Fara is to wear
the royal crest on her clothing too,' Zendi had added, much to Arnon's
delight.

So many internal problems were distressing the King, the Councillors,
and the tribal chieftains as this trying summer wore on, that the
question of an immediate avenging of Arnon was abandoned. Affairs
in Arabia were quite difficult enough without the added risk and
responsibility of setting forth on a punitive errand requiring their
best men and much valuable time. Word had drifted in that Prince
Antipas and his disreputable wife had taken up permanent residence in
Galilee. Very good, said Arabia. We will know where to find him. Let
him be patient and wait our convenience.

A few of the more hot-headed young blades, still disgruntled over
the recent fiasco in Jerusalem, demurred at this postponement,
maintaining that the honour of Arabia was at stake and that any delay
to deal out retribution might be interpreted by the Jews as a sign of
indifference--or worse. To soothe the indignation of their reckless
sons and nephews, the Councillors prepared an imposing statement of
intent to right this wrong, which any impatient young Arabian might
sign--and act upon--whenever he wished.

In the King's main tent, where all state business was conducted and
Council meetings were held, there was a massive oak table elaborately
carved with devices relating to the interests of herders and
shepherds. This venerated table had long served as the equivalent of
a throne. Nobody remembered the name of the craftsman who had built
it, for he had been dead at least three centuries, but it had been
in uninterrupted use as a symbol of executive authority ever since
the reign of the fabulous Terah, whose deeds of strength and skill
had inspired the minstrels for many generations. On this table were
laid documents of high importance: petitions to and edicts of the
Councillors and decrees of the King.

After much deliberation, the Councillors drew up a formal vow,
impressively lettered in colours, stating that the undersigned hereby
pledged himself to avenge the Princess Arnon by destroying Antipas,
the Tetrarch of Galilee and Peraea. The avenger was to choose his own
time and manner of fulfilling his vow. It was his responsibility to
decide whether he would perform it clandestinely and alone or with the
voluntary assistance of others. But once he had pledged to do it, the
task was in his hands and Arabia would expect him to keep his promise,
whatever the cost.

The heavy sheet of papyrus was ceremoniously placed upon the table and
the word went forth that it was there--with a stylus and inkhorn beside
it--for any man to sign who felt urged to do so. But the blazing sun
continued to scorch the grass, and every man was fully occupied with
the desperate search for pasture to save what remained of his decimated
flocks. Everybody agreed that the contemptible Antipas must be put to
death, but he would have to wait for it until Arabia saw better times.

To Arnon, this tardiness to wreak vengeance upon Antipas was of small
concern. It would be a dangerous business and whoever attempted it
would almost certainly lose his life, for the stronghold in Galilee
would be well guarded by the man who doubtless lived in fear of a
reprisal. Quite enough unhappiness had already resulted from Arabia's
pact with the Jews. She said that to Zendi, upon learning of the vow
that the Councillors had prepared. 'I do not want to be responsible for
any more trouble,' protested Arnon. 'Why not let the matter rest?' And
Zendi had agreed that her suggestion was sensible enough, but added
that all Arabia would sleep more comfortably when Antipas slept without
prospect of waking.

There were some encouraging rains that autumn, much too late to benefit
the burned pasture-lands, but giving promise of better fare next
season. The winter, however, was bitterly cold and the snow alarmingly
scanty.

The Arabian shepherd was not without his superstitions, nor was this
fascination for the supernatural limited to the custody of lonely men
who guarded their flocks in outlying regions, where fears and dreads
were personalized. Almost everybody felt that an unusual epidemic of
misfortunes hinted at retribution. And while the more intelligent
disclaimed any interest in such witcheries, even the best of them might
be heard to remark--though pretending not to mean it--that Someone or
Something must have laid a curse upon Arabia.

For the following summer was the worst season that the oldest could
remember, and in the fall there were but few caravans carrying hides
and wool to the Port of Gaza. The young camels they would have brought
to market in Petra, Jericho, and Joppa were too lean and shabby for
profitable sale. There was very little surplus of grain to see the
livestock through the approaching winter.

The air was tense with complaint and constraint. Somebody was to blame.
The trouble all seemed to stem from Arabia's alliance with the Jews.
Everyone was able to recall now how he himself had predicted, at the
time, that no good could come of it. Of course no one held it against
Arnon, for clearly she had suffered from it far more than anybody.
And it would be cruel foolishness to frown upon the hapless child who
symbolized that unfortunate union. But--even so--the visits of Arnon's
friends became less and less frequent. She did not fret about it at
first, realizing that everyone was weighted with worries at home, and
in no mood for sociability.

Curiously enough, there was better pasture on Arnon's land than
anywhere else for many miles. Her neighbours did not openly begrudge
the Princess this bit of prosperity, but it did seem strange. One day
a sheik remarked half-humorously that wherever you found a Jew located
you might expect to see fat sheep.

'A Jew?' queried the friend who rode beside him. 'What Jew?'

'Had you not noticed Princess Arnon's pasture?'

'The Princess is not a Jew!' retorted his friend.

'No--but her child is.'

It was all but incredible, the speed with which this idle quip raced
across the browned face of Arabia until it was repeated in the coldest
tents of the hungry highlands.

But there were a few whose unswerving loyalty to the Princess made them
all the more eager to show her friendly attentions as this unfavourable
sentiment developed. Zendi and Rennah rode over every few days to
make sure of Arnon's welfare. Although she was now a Princess only by
courtesy, Zendi endeavoured to keep her informed of movements in the
kingdom, as if she still had a right to know. One day he talked of the
unfortunate expedition to Jerusalem, and reported that Emperor Tiberius
had decided not to appoint another Jew as a ruler of Judaea. Henceforth
the chief executive would be a Roman. The new appointee was already
located in Jerusalem. He had been elevated from the Prefecture of
Crete. His name was Pontius Pilate. Doubtless he would get along with
the Jews. He was said to be a tactful conciliator.

'Will this affect the position of Antipas--in Galilee?' Arnon wanted to
know.

'Probably not,' surmised Zendi. 'The tribute Rome receives from poor
little Galilee isn't worth what it costs to collect it. Antipas could
afford to pay their taxes himself and doubtless would do so gladly
enough, just to preserve the title of Tetrarch.'

Sometimes Zendi and Rennah gave Arnon an opportunity to speak of the
growing aloofness toward her, but she appeared not to be aware of it,
and the painful subject was not discussed.

Frequently Mishma's pretty daughter-in-law Kitra came to spend the
afternoon, bringing her four-year-old son Voldi, who had promptly taken
a fancy to little Fara.

The warm friendship of Kitra and Arnon, begun in childhood, had ripened
to a comforting intimacy, nourished perhaps by the fact that Princess
Arnon was no longer of the King's household, while Kitra had missed
being in that position by the mere accident of a delayed appointment
of her father-in-law Mishma as Chief of the Councillors and, as such,
the immediate successor to Aretas. They spent long afternoons together,
happily watching their children's absorption in one another, for Fara
had had no other playmates and Voldi had never taken such an interest
in another child. Sometimes the two young mothers would wonder whether
this tender little friendship might continue as their children grew up,
though they admitted that it wasn't customary.

 * * * * *

After three consecutive winters of such hardships as Arabia had never
known, succeeded by scorched summers presaging further endurance of
famine for both men and beasts, the snow fell in abundance. It fell
endlessly and everywhere; on the mountains, in the valleys, covering
great tracts of arid desert that had not seen any moisture for a score
of years. It snowed and thawed and snowed again until the wadis were in
flood. Spring came early, the sun was bright, all Arabia was a green
pasture.

Men who had become so deeply depressed over their losses that they
had actually debated whether, for the country's sake, it might not be
advisable to carry Princess Arnon's child back to Jerusalem 'where she
belongs,' were now glad that they had done no such thing, and some of
them felt sheepish over having shared in these conversations.

It was hardly to be expected that such good fortune could happen again,
but it did. Not only during the next winter, but the winter following,
heavy snows blanketed the entire nation; and in the succeeding autumns
long, heavily laden caravans trekked down the mountains and rounded the
southern shore of the Dead Sea, and slowly marched to the old 'salt
trail' from Engedi to Gaza.

Not infrequently some gratified shepherd, with silver jingling in his
pouch, would remark that the young daughter of Princess Arnon, far from
being a menace to Arabia, was bringing Jewish prosperity to the nation,
to which his neighbour would reply, 'I always said you were a lot of
fools for hating that pretty child!'

'But--you said yourself that she ought to be put out of the country!'

'If I did, that doesn't make you any less a fool for saying so.'

Everybody who had seen little Fara agreed now that she was the most
beautiful child in Arabia, which was unquestionably true. She had the
full, wide-set eyes and round face of a Jewess, and a much fairer
complexion than her attractive mother. Her slim, lithe body was
distinctly Arabian, as was her interest in outdoor life.

She had been lifted into a small saddle when she was barely five,
the worshipful old Kedar walking alongside the pony. It was not long
before she protested against such attendance. One morning when she was
no more than six she appeared alone at the King's encampment, to the
consternation of the household. Zendi himself rode home beside her to
make sure she arrived safely. Arnon, quite complacent, met them at the
door.

'You shouldn't let her do that,' reproved Zendi. 'She isn't old enough.'

'The pony is,' said Arnon. 'He wouldn't let her get into trouble. He
follows her about like a dog.'

'But ponies are treacherous, Arnon. I should much sooner trust a horse.'

'That is quite true, sire. I shall let her ride one of the horses.'
She had spoken half-playfully, but added, in a suddenly serious tone,
'Don't forget, Zendi, that my little daughter is every inch an Arabian!
You were taught to ride almost as soon as you were able to walk--and so
was I.'

This incident, trivial enough in itself, was reported to the
Councillors, who received it--and its implications--with smiles and
nods of approval. The child was unfortunately afflicted with alien
blood, but it was clear that she was predominantly Arabian and deserved
recognition as one of their own people. By the time the story was
well circulated, losing nothing in its travels, little Fara was an
accomplished rider, skilful and unafraid. And the rumour wasn't far
from the truth.

But if Arabia had an imaginary picture of this growing child as a
reckless rowdy, leaping half-broken racehorses over high hedges and
deep wadis with the firm hands and pliant knees of an experienced
cavalryman, there was another side of Fara's life which nobody saw but
her own family--and King Zendi. Thanks to Ione, Fara was receiving a
liberal education.

To all appearances, the beloved and indispensable Ione had fully
adjusted herself to her Arabian environment, but it was a sorrow to her
never to hear or speak a word of her native Greek. When little Fara
was learning to talk, Ione amused herself by teaching her Greek words
for familiar objects. When she handed the baby her porridge plate, she
would say, 'Pinakos.' And Fara, ever eager to please Ione, would lisp,
'Pinakos'; and because Ione seemed so delighted, she proudly repeated
the word, over and over. The little porridge plate was always 'pinakos'
after that, and the little cup was always 'poterion' and the napkin
was 'soudarion.' Arnon too enjoyed the game. 'Teach her to say "I love
you," Ione.'

Taking the child on her lap, Ione said softly, 'Fara, I love you. Philo
seh. Philo seh. I love you.'

'Philo seh,' repeated Fara dutifully, happily.

'Say that to your mother, Fara.'

Arnon reached out her arms and little Fara cuddled close to her.

'I love you,' whispered Arnon.

'Philo seh,' said Fara.

As the days went by, the intrusion of Greek words into their
conversation was no longer a novelty that made them laugh merrily.
Common nouns needed action. Words multiplied into sentences. Table-talk
was conducted in Greek. After supper, on winter evenings, Ione taught
Fara to write it. Happy to see her child profitably entertained, Arnon
joined in these exercises, though she never acquired the effortless
fluency with which Fara handled the strange language. By the time she
was nine the little girl spoke Greek by preference.

One day, King Zendi called to inquire about their welfare and overheard
Fara in the adjoining room talking to Ione. He broke off what he was
saying--and listened--and then grinned incredulously.

'How long has this been going on?' he inquired.

'Ever since she was a tiny tot,' said Arnon. 'It's Ione's doing. I
suppose there's no harm in it?'

'Harm? Of course not! I wish I knew some Greek myself.'

'But--you do; don't you, Zendi?'

'A mere smattering--picked up on my journey to Corinth. I often have
errands in Petra. It would be much to my advantage if I could speak
their language.'

Arnon laughed a little as she said, 'Perhaps Fara could help you.' To
her surprise, Zendi did not see anything funny about this. He frowned
thoughtfully.

'It just occurs to me,' he said, 'that we have, in our cabinet of
curiosities, a scroll that the people of Petra presented to your father
at his coronation. I shall bring it over. Maybe Fara might like to see
it.'

The next afternoon he brought the scroll. Ione was invited in to look
at it. She gasped with happy surprise. What a treasure! Unconsciously
ignoring the King, she breathlessly explained the subject of the scroll
to Fara in a long sentence utterly incomprehensible to their important
guest. And Fara clapped her hands with delight.

'I would give much for that knowledge,' said Zendi soberly.

'It's easy, sire,' said Fara.

When he left, shortly afterward, Fara walked beside him in the paddock.

He took her small hand. The old master of the stables led forward a
beautiful roan gelding. Fara's eyes shone.

'How do you like my new horse, Fara?' asked the King as he gathered up
the reins.

'Prosphilay!' murmured Fara reverentially, patting the gelding's glossy
shoulder. 'Prosphilay hippos!'

'What did you say?' demanded the King.

'Lovely!' said Fara. 'Lovely horse!'

Zendi chuckled and swung himself into the saddle.

'Kai megaleios hippikos!' ventured Fara coyly.

'And what does that mean?' the King wanted to know.

Fara shrugged a pretty shoulder, gave an enigmatic smile, and made a
graceful curtsey. Zendi waved a hand and rode away. It was evident that
Fara's final remark--whatever it meant--was complimentary.

After that the tribesmen were often amused to see their King cantering
alongside Princess Arnon's pretty child, evidently engaged in serious
conversation. One day, after a visit to Petra, Zendi presented his
young preceptress with an armful of scrolls which he had bought. Ione,
on her knees, laid them out in a row on the rug and caressed them with
worshipful hands, murmuring, 'Thaumasia! Thaumasia!' To have such a
rich library--it was indeed wonderful! Marvellous!

As for Fara's early knowledge of her origin, she had been contented
with the explanation that her father was a Prince who had been required
to leave them that he might perform his duties as the ruler of a
faraway country. Now that she was asking for a little more information,
Arnon would talk of the great cities in which she had lived with Fara's
father, carefully avoiding any mention of her unhappiness.

'Will my father ever visit us?' Fara had asked wistfully.

'He would find it difficult,' Arnon had replied; and this was the exact
truth. 'Great rulers,' she went on, 'have many cares.'

'But--does he not care--at all--for us?'

'A ruler's life, my dear, is not his own. His only concern is for the
welfare of his country.' Arnon despised herself for what, in this case,
was a ridiculous lie; but felt that it was an easy way out of a painful
discussion. The time would come soon enough, she knew, when the whole
matter would have to be faced; but she hoped to postpone it as long as
possible.

Fara was beginning to be aware of her loneliness and singularity. She
was nearing ten and growing very restless. She needed companions of her
own age. It had been a long time since Kitra had brought Voldi along
when she came to visit. One day Fara ventured to inquire how he was.

'Oh--that boy!' exclaimed Kitra, busying herself with her needlework.
'He thinks he is quite a man now. Growing so fast; tall as I am. You
know how boys of that age are, Fara. They don't want to play with
girls. All they think about is their horses--and hunting dogs--and
archery--and fencing.' Her eyes slid past Fara to Arnon. 'You may be
glad Fara is a girl. I never have a peaceful moment when Voldi is
riding that unruly horse of his!'

'Fara rides too,' said Arnon quietly.

'Yes--I know,' said Kitra. 'And Fara rides very well indeed!'

Then the talk veered off to another topic and Fara strolled away to her
own room. She languidly took up the little tapestry on which she had
been investing oddments of unoccupied time. Ione joined her. They sat
in silence for awhile, Ione exasperatingly tranquil, Fara recklessly
stabbing her needle into the stiff fabric.

'Don't you ever feel penned in, Ione?' The tapestry sailed across the
room and landed on the bed. 'How does it feel to be a slave?' Fara went
on savagely, as if she meant to offend. 'If I were a slave, I'd run
away! Why don't you?'

'Where would I run to?' asked Ione, blinking back the tears, for Fara's
rudeness had hurt.

'You could go home,' gruffly.

'But--this is my home, dear; same as it is yours.'

'Nonsense!' muttered Fara. 'You can't be contented here any more than I
can! This place stifles me! Sometimes I think I'll jump out of my skin!'

'Your mother would be very sorry, Fara, if she heard you say such
things,' reproved Ione.

'Well, she won't,' declared Fara. 'But'--suddenly dejected--'I had to
say it to somebody. Please forgive me.'

'Of course,' murmured Ione, quick to understand. 'It's natural for
children of your age to be restless. You're growing so fast that the
encampment isn't big enough to hold you. You will get over that when
you are older.'

Fara crossed the room, flung herself down on her bed, and lacing her
fingers behind her head, stared at the blue ceiling.

'Wouldn't you like to see something besides sheep?' she mumbled, mostly
to herself. 'And go to some place where they talked about other things
than the price of camels--and how are we going to find enough grass?
Wouldn't you like to live in a great house--in a great city?'

'No, dear,' replied Ione, when some rejoinder seemed necessary. 'I
have done that. I'm quite satisfied to be here--where I am, in these
beautiful mountains.'

'Maybe I should be satisfied too,' admitted Fara. 'I wish I was like
other people. There's something wrong with me, Ione,' she exclaimed
impulsively. 'I'm different! And I hate it!'

It was not until she was eleven that Fara learned how and why she was
different. She came by accident upon the soul-sickening truth about her
father's perfidy and her mother's incurable unhappiness and her own
defenceless position as a half-breed. She had ridden with Arnon, that
midsummer afternoon, to the King's encampment. Zendi was absent on a
tour of the eastern tribes. Rennah and Arnon lounged in the Queen's
suite while Fara and the spoiled young Prince Deran strolled about
indifferently inspecting the kennels and stables.

Tiring of this entertainment and agreeing that the sun was too hot,
the children returned to the spacious living quarters, where Deran,
eager to impress his guest, led the way into the huge, high-vaulted
tent which was set apart for the exclusive use of the King and his
Councillors. With a boyish swagger, Deran stalked about, explaining
the various appointments. Having casually seated himself in the King's
massive chair, he invited Fara to do the same. He wouldn't think, he
said, of letting anyone else sit there. Fara smiled prettily to show
her appreciation. Thus encouraged, Deran led her around the ancient
table, declaiming what he knew about the symbolic carvings, and--in a
hushed voice--called her attention to the impressive documents which
lay waiting official action.

Fara, who had come to have deep respect for ancient crafts and
historical writings, gave full attention to the table and its important
freight.

'You mustn't touch anything,' cautioned Deran.

Fara shook her head and continued to survey the awesome documents with
fascination. Presently she came upon a slightly faded, multi-coloured
sheet of papyrus which she read, with widening eyes and mounting
comprehension. Deran, a little younger but much taller, stood at her
shoulder, staring in bewilderment at her flushed cheek. She turned
abruptly toward him, searching his face, but he gave no sign of knowing
or caring what tiresome thing she had been reading.

When they arrived home shortly before sunset, Fara followed Arnon into
her bedroom, impulsively reported what she had seen in the King's
tent, and entreated her mother to tell her everything, which she did.
Everything!--the alliance, the marriage, the lonely days in Jerusalem,
the humiliating days in Rome! All the pent-up wretchedness of Arnon's
ruined life poured forth, accompanied by a flood of tears. When the
sad, sordid story was finished, the unhappy Princess dried her eyes
and was surprised to find that Fara, instead of sharing her mother's
grief, was standing there dry-eyed, with her childish mouth firmed into
a straight line and her brows contracted into an expression of bitter
hatred.

'And why has no one hunted him down--and punished him?' she demanded
indignantly.

'It's much too late for that,' said Arnon. 'When it happened our
country was in great distress. No one could be spared. And now that we
have such great prosperity, no one remembers.' She sighed deeply, and
went on, 'Perhaps it is just as well. Galilee is a long way off. The
Prince is well protected. Let us try to forget all about it, dear.'

Fara shook her head slowly.

'I shall remember--always!' she muttered.

That winter was long and severe. Arnon fell ill with a fever and
relentless fits of coughing. Fara through these anxious days had no
other concern but for her mother. Ione tried unsuccessfully to renew
her interest in the classics, in her modelling, in her drawing.

'Do persuade the unhappy child to get out and take some exercise!'
begged Arnon. 'She is so unlike herself, Ione.'

'It worries me too, Princess Arnon. Something has come over her.'

'She is fretting because I am ill,' said Arnon.

'Of course, Princess Arnon,' agreed Ione obligingly, 'but you will be
better when spring comes again.'

And spring did come again, and Arnon improved enough to be able to
sit in the sunshine and walk in the garden, but Fara's depression was
unrelieved. All her natural gaiety was gone.

One afternoon when Rennah came to call, she found Arnon and Fara
together in the garden. Almost immediately, Fara excused herself and
strolled away. Rennah followed her with troubled eyes.

'She is growing taller; but, Arnon, Fara does not look well. Is
something worrying her?'

'Fara has been fretting all winter about me,' said Arnon. 'She is a
most dutiful child.'

'But now that you are getting well--'

'I have thought of that, Rennah. She should be happy again. I wish we
could think of something that might divert her. She has no interest in
anything.'

'She will have a birthday soon,' remembered Rennah. 'How about having
a party?' Her face lighted. 'Would you let me have a party for Fara?
I know Zendi would be glad. We will make quite a day of it--with the
Councillors and their wives and all the children and grandchildren--and
races and games and plenty to eat.'

'It is like you, dear Rennah, to want to do such a kindness,' said
Arnon. 'I hope you will not go to too much trouble.'

'Zendi will approve, I know,' said Rennah. 'It's high time we gave that
sweet child some attention. We have neglected her too long. It should
mean something to the people that Fara's grandfathers were Kings!'

So, on the fifteenth of Adar, which turned out to be the fairest day
of that early summer, the King and Queen celebrated Fara's twelfth
anniversary with a party that greatly exceeded Rennah's original plan,
not only in the entertainment provided but in the number of guests;
for, having decided to do it, Zendi included all the sheiks and tribal
leaders with their families.

Fara had been dismayed upon learning of the project in her honour
and so seriously objected that she was all but in open revolt, until
Zendi himself explained that as a child of royal blood she was not
only entitled to certain favours but was expected to receive them
graciously. And when Fara continued to frown disapprovingly, Zendi's
patience gave out and he informed her that whether she wanted it or not
there was going to be a birthday party for her at the King's encampment
on the fifteenth day of Adar; and that, whether she wanted to or not,
she was going to be there, bright and early!

Late in the night, after the party was over and everyone had gone home,
Zendi told Rennah what he had said, so impatiently, to Fara when she
had begged him not to celebrate her birthday.

'If I had had the slightest idea of what was troubling the child,' he
confided, 'I should have yielded to her wishes. As it stands now our
celebration of her birthday has been of no advantage to her. Indeed, it
has done her harm. Everyone will think she is queer, if not definitely
out of her mind.'

The almost incredible thing that happened was reserved for the banquet
in the evening, attended only by the royal household, the Councillors
and their wives, and a few distinguished guests from Petra, where Zendi
was becoming favourably known.

Nothing unusual had marked the happy events of the day. There had
been exciting contests of strength and skill; acrobatic performances,
wrestling, fencing, foot races. Magicians had done baffling tricks.
Minstrels had sung. There were horseraces that would have done credit
to the famed elliptical track in Rome's mighty Colosseum. And there
were equestrian exhibitions staged by various groups of reckless young
Arabs, some of the contestants hardly more than children. As was to be
expected, there were a few bad spills, some broken bones and ruined
horses. The final event was a breath-taking hurdle race ridden by
youths in their middle teens. The hurdles were high and the race was
dangerous. Of the twelve horses that started, three finished.

Obliged by the circumstances to sit with the dignitaries in the royal
stand, Fara turned to her mother as the perspiring young victor rode up
to salute the King, and whispered, 'Who is that boy?'

Before Arnon could reply, Kitra, seated immediately behind them, leaned
forward to say, with a proud but nervous little laugh, 'Why--don't you
remember him, Fara? That's Voldi! You used to play together.'

Fara turned to her with a smile and a nod of remembrance.

'He is a wonderful rider,' she murmured, in the husky-timbred tone that
her voice had acquired.

Queen Rennah, overhearing, said, 'We will ask him to come up, Fara, and
renew acquaintance.'

Fara bit her lip and flushed a little. Meeting Arnon's eyes, she
frowned and shook her head almost imperceptibly. Arnon smiled, pursed
her lips, and nodded, as if to say, 'We mustn't object to that: it's
quite the thing to do.'

Presently Voldi, dismounting, came up into the royal enclosure, bowed
deeply to the King and Queen, and made his way toward his mother. They
gave him a seat beside Fara. She searched his brown, freckled face
with wide, sober eyes. Then her full lips parted in a smile of candid
admiration. He coloured a little through the tan, under this frank
inspection, and slowly met her smile with the bewildered expression of
one who has just come upon a valuable discovery.

Rennah, keenly observant, turned her head toward Kitra and whispered,
'Isn't that sweet?' Kitra nodded and smiled briefly, but there was
a trace of anxiety in her eyes. Rennah caught it, and thought she
understood.

'You grew up, didn't you?' murmured Fara, in her peculiarly low-pitched
voice that made everything she said sound confidential.

'So did you,' stammered Voldi. 'I shouldn't have known you.'

'That was really great riding, Voldi!' said Fara fervently.

'You ride too, don't you?'

'Not like that.'

'Want to take a ride with me, some day?'

'If you think it wouldn't be tiresome--to ride very carefully.'

Their mothers and the Queen, shamelessly eavesdropping, laughed at
Voldi's expense, but he was too fascinated to notice their amusement.

'Tomorrow afternoon?' he asked.

Fara nodded slowly, smiled a little; then suddenly retreated from the
enraptured eyes.

'You promised to spend the day with your grandfather, Voldi,' put in
Kitra.

'I'll tell him.' Voldi rose to go. 'Tomorrow afternoon, Fara.' They
all--except Fara--followed the tall boy with their eyes and saw him
pause to say something to his grandfather who soberly made a show of
concealing his pride in the youngster's obvious affection for him.

'Happy days for good old Mishma,' remarked the Queen.

'Yes,' said Kitra absently.

Noting the remote tone of Kitra's uninterested response, Arnon
involuntarily turned her head to seek a reason for it, but Kitra did
not meet her inquiring eyes. The little by-play was quite lost on Fara,
whose attention pursued Voldi as he strode down the steps and mounted
his tired horse.

In the evening oxen were roasted over deep pits of glowing coals, and
everybody feasted in the open but the royal hosts and their important
guests. Fara was the only young person present at the King's banquet.
There had been some debate whether to invite a few of the younger ones
of Fara's age, but it was difficult to discriminate among them and the
room would not accommodate them all.

After the elaborate dinner was served, brief speeches were made in
honour of Fara, whom they all addressed as 'Princess'. No one of
the eulogistic Councillors made any reference to the royal blood
contributed by Judaea, but memories were refreshed concerning the
wisdom and courage of Grandsire Aretas, who was already well on the way
to an exalted rating among Arabia's legendary heroes.

Throughout the ordeal--for it was nothing less than that--Fara sat
between her mother and King Zendi, attentive and sober-faced, as
became a young girl unused to so much adult acclaim. She seemed to be
listening to everything that was said, though close observers noticed
that her expression remained unchanged when Chief Councillor Mishma was
reminded of an amusing incident and everyone else laughed. Apparently
Fara had not heard it. It was evident that she had something on her
mind.

When the speeches of felicitation were ended and nothing remained to be
said except a word of adjournment, Zendi turned with a paternal smile
toward his young guest of honour.

'Now, Princess Fara,' he said kindly, 'it is your turn. You may make a
bow--or make a speech--or sing a song.'

They all applauded the King's half-playful suggestion, but stopped
suddenly when Fara rose to her feet. Arnon, seated beside her, glanced
up apprehensively as if to inquire, 'What is my child planning to do?'

Fara did not smile or speak. Slowly leaving her place she walked with
determined steps to the massive table. The audience leaned forward and
held its breath, wondering what was about to happen. Moving around the
table until she faced the King, Fara made a deep bow. Then, to the
amazement of everyone, she whipped a little dagger from her belt and
deftly drew a red streak diagonally across her left forearm. Bending
over the long neglected, unsigned vow of vengeance, she took up the
stylus, dipped it in her blood, and wrote FARA.

For a moment they all sat stunned to silence. Then Rennah rose and
hurried to Fara's side. Arnon, much shaken, quickly joined the Queen
and together they led the bleeding Princess out to attend to her wound.
Fara's face was pale but her eyes were bright and a proud little smile
trembled on her lips.

Zendi rose, instantly claiming the full attention of his silent,
bewildered guests.

'Some brave young blood has been shed here tonight,' he said solemnly.
'You may be assured that Arabia will not permit this gallant child ever
to risk her life in an attempt to keep her vow; but her courageous act,
done in all sincerity, is proudly appreciated by her country.'

'Aye!' mumbled old Mishma.

'Aye! Aye!' responded many voices.

There was a long moment of silence before Zendi signified with a
gesture that they were now free to disperse. The people stirred,
uneasily questing one another's baffled eyes. Mishma, standing at the
King's elbow, suggested that the unprecedented event should be kept a
secret.

'That would be most desirable, Mishma, if we could,' agreed Zendi. 'But
it cannot be done. It is possible to pledge three people--or five--to
keep a secret; but not fifty. Perhaps it is better to let them all talk
until they have tired of it--and then it will be forgotten. After all,
she is only a child.'

And so it was told throughout the whole Kingdom of Arabia that
Princess Arnon's young daughter had vowed to assassinate her Jewish
father. The first reaction was that of sheer admiration mixed with
amiable amusement. The little girl had shown great courage. She might
be part Jew, but she was all Arab! Of course her vow--considered
practically--was ridiculous. When she grew a little older, her
recollection of it would be embarrassing, no doubt. And after a
few weeks of free discussion, the strange incident--as Zendi had
predicted--was forgotten.

Young Voldi, completely infatuated and not caring who knew it, spent
more and more time at Arnon's encampment, to the mounting anxiety of
his parents, for he was a popular, well-favoured youth, giving promise
of a bright future. With his exceptional talents for making friends and
the reputation he had already won as a fearless sportsman, it was not
too much to hope that his country might some day confer honours upon
him. He might easily win an appointment to the King's Council. But it
seemed doubtful to Urson and Kitra that their idolized son could fulfil
these high expectations if embarrassed by an alliance with a young
woman of alien blood, especially Jewish blood. Whatever might be her
beauty, courage, and charm, Fara would be a heavy liability.

Nor was Voldi insensitive to his parents' uneasiness. He was deeply
devoted to them and their anxiety distressed him. There were no stormy
scenes. Perhaps it might have been easier for him to ignore their
wishes if they had angered him with stern admonitions--if Urson had
lashed out at him with bitter scorn or if his mother had become noisily
hysterical. The unhappy situation was hardly mentioned among them, but
it was ever present in their thoughts. Urson seldom laughed now. And
when Voldi, setting forth in the morning to spend the day with the
adorable young daughter of Antipas the scoundrel, turned in his saddle
to wave a hand to Kitra, standing before the doorway, trying to smile
through her welling tears, he felt like an ingrate.

And he had other misgivings. He was seeing very little of his
companions. Until recently he had spent most of his time with his
hard-riding young cronies. Indeed, he had been the acknowledged leader
of this adventurous crew. What were they thinking about him? What were
they saying about him, as they sat around their evening camp-fire in
the mountains after a long day's chase for wild game? It would be a
sore affliction if his friends were to chatter contemptuously of his
demoralizing love-sickness. He resolved to free himself of this dread.

One morning, having had word of their plans for a three-day stag-hunt,
Voldi arrived early at the accustomed rendezvous, fully equipped for
the excursion. There was a bit of embarrassment at first, but the
constraint quickly lifted. Voldi was one of them again. Intent upon
restoring himself to their good opinion, he led them for hours in the
maddest ride they had ever taken--leaping deep gulleys cut by mountain
streams, hurdling fallen timber, plunging through tangled underbrush.
Challenged by his recklessness, they did their utmost to follow. Young
Museph, the elder son of Councillor Tema, kept hard on his leader's
heels and brought down the largest stag of the three killed that day.
Voldi accounted for the others. Most of the party were out-distanced
and came straggling into camp in the late afternoon, weary beyond any
words to tell of it.

A camp-fire was built beside a noisy mountain stream. The stags
were hung up and dressed. Museph flung himself down on the aromatic
pine-needles that carpeted the ground; and when Voldi sat down beside
him, regarding him with a teasing grin, Museph opened one eye and
muttered, 'My brother, you have lost your mind.'

The last to arrive in camp was young Prince Deran, King Zendi's
arrogant son, attended by four members of the hunt who had reluctantly
tarried with him when the pace had grown too hot. The Prince had bagged
a little doe. No one ventured to rebuke him, but the general silence
expressed the party's opinion. Deran was quite aware of his companions'
disfavour, aware too that had he been anyone else than the heir to the
throne he would have been appropriately chastised. He cared nothing
for their unspoken disapproval. His manner said that if the King's son
wished to kill a baby doe, who had a right to oppose him?

After supper there were some acrobatics, a wrestling match, and a
fencing bout with wooden broadswords. It was proposed that they have a
duel with daggers.

'How about you and Museph, Voldi?' a voice inquired.

'I'm too tired,' said Museph. 'Besides, I'm no match for Voldi.'

'We will take him on!' shouted the Prince, getting to his feet.

All eyes--and they were sullen eyes--turned in his direction. They
covertly scorned the pompous youngster, hated his poor sportsmanship,
loathed his insolent 'we'.

'It wouldn't be fair, Prince,' said Voldi, trying to make his tone
sound respectful. 'I am older than you--and I have had more practice.'

'But not lately,' sneered Deran; 'or do you play with daggers when you
visit your Jewish friend?'

All breathing around the camp fire was suspended. Voldi flushed and
frowned.

'I do not wish to fence with you, Prince Deran,' he said.

'As we thought!' crowed Deran. 'That's what comes of consorting with
soft aliens.' He took a step forward and drew his dagger. 'Stand up and
fight, fellow!'

Voldi slowly rose, and observed, as had several of the others, that the
blade of Deran's dagger flashed brightly in the firelight.

'You're not intending to fight me with steel, I hope!' he said sharply.
A concerted murmur of disapproval instantly backed him up. It was a
shameful abuse of royal privilege. Every youth in the party knew the
Prince was not vulnerable to any injury. It would be worth any man's
liberty, if not his life, to hurt this boy.

Bewildered by his predicament Voldi stood with his thumbs under his
belt, making no move to defend himself. Young Deran, crouching,
advanced with short steps.

'You'd better draw, Voldi,' he growled, 'or admit you're a coward.'

Apparently it was the wrong word even for the King's son to use. Voldi
lunged forward, drove his right elbow into the Prince's midriff,
clutched the wildly flailing forearm in a vice-like grip, twisted the
dagger out of Deran's hand, and tossed it into the fire. Panting with
rage, the Prince again hurled himself at Voldi who, disregarding the
impotent fists, slapped the youngster full in the face.

'You'll pay for that!' squeaked Deran.

Gentle if disgusted hands led the infuriated Prince to his tent for
repairs to his royal pride and bleeding lips. Voldi resumed a seat on
the ground, a little way apart from the others, and sat with bent head
and slumped shoulders.

'I'm sorry,' he mumbled dejectedly, shaking his head.

It was a critical moment for all of them. No one cared to risk being
quoted as having said, 'Good work, Voldi! Just what he deserved! What
else could you have done?' At length Museph scrambled to his feet,
threw another pine stick on the fire, dusted his hands; and, sauntering
over to Voldi, companionably sat down beside him. Young Raboth, the
lean, hawk-nosed nephew of Councillor Dumah, crossed from the other
side of the silent circle, made a big business of poking the fire;
and, as he passed Voldi, gave him a friendly pat on the shoulder. The
rest of them breathed more freely and exchanged grins. Deran did not
reappear that night, and left for home early the next morning.

Voldi made no mention of the unpleasant affair at home, but for many
days he waited, in considerable trepidation, a summons to present
himself at the King's encampment; for it seemed almost certain that
Deran would have made a bad report of the incident. But apparently the
episode was to be overlooked. Either the Prince had decided to hold his
tongue or the King, having heard his son's story, had drawn his own
conclusions and had thought it prudent to let the matter drop.

But the true story unquestionably had got to the ears of the Council;
for a week later, Voldi was invited to spend the day with his revered
Grandfather Mishma. He went with anxiety pounding in his heart, for he
was devoted to the old man and would be grieved at his displeasure.
But it turned out to be a happy visit. Nothing was said about the
unfortunate incident in the woods. When Voldi left for home, Mishma
followed him out to the paddock and ceremoniously presented him with a
beautiful, high-spirited, black gelding.

With one arm on the superb young animal's neck and the other hugging
his grandfather, Voldi shouted his delight. The eminent Councillor
stroked his white beard complacently and a twinkle shone in his eye.

'This frisky colt's name,' he said, 'is Darik--after King Darik of old.'

'He was called "Darik the Just," was he not, sire?' asked Voldi.

'Right! Because he was always fair in his judgments,' said Mishma. 'It
is told of him that King Darik was of a quick temper and knew better
than most men how to handle a blade; but he never drew his sword
against a weaker adversary--no matter what the provocation.' The old
man laid his thin hand on the gelding's velvet muzzle. 'This horse,' he
reflected, 'will require some managing, but he is of good character.
See to it, my son, that he behaves himself.'

Voldi's visits to Fara continued. They rode together almost every day
throughout the summer, and when the early winter came, with blustery
weather driving them indoors, Arnon, observing their restlessness and
lack of occupation, proposed that Voldi join them in their lately
neglected studies. He consented to it with well-simulated interest. He
had no particular ambition to learn, but any pastime was agreeable that
would give him an excuse for hovering close to Fara. Ione was delighted
with his progress. He had an aptitude for Greek, she declared; he had
a feel for it; would soon be speaking it like a native! This was an
exaggeration, but it encouraged Voldi to do his best. Moreover, he was
able to tell his mother that the long winter afternoons in Princess
Arnon's home were profitably spent. Kitra would smile indulgently--but
it was plain to see that she was troubled.

And Fara too was troubled about Voldi's adoration, her intuition--and
the widening intervals between Kitra's visits--informing her that
he was getting into trouble at home because of her. Once she almost
decided to tell Voldi frankly that he mustn't come to see her any more,
but her courage failed, for she loved him devotedly. Sometime--no
matter how severely it hurt--he must be told; but Fara postponed the
day of their sorrow.

As the seasons came and went, Fara took on a maturity beyond her years.
The circumstances of her life had made her thoughtful even as a child;
now, with her sixteenth birthday in sight, she had the mind of an
adult. The conviction had grown within her that she was fated to be a
person unwanted; viewed with suspicion, an alien. The Jews would spurn
her for being an Arabian; the Arabians would ignore her for being a
Jew. What ailed the world that grown men and women should treat one
another so? Once she had put the question to Ione, who had replied,
with a sigh, 'It was always that way, my dear, from the beginning.'

'It's a lonely world--for some people,' said Fara.

'I know how you feel,' sympathized Ione. 'I have been lonely too.'

'Yes, but you have a nationality, Ione! You are far away from your own
country; but you do have a country. It isn't as if you were a mixture
of two countries that hated each other. Me--I am nobody!'

'Do not be depressed, Fara,' entreated Ione. 'There are many who love
you, who will always love you. No girl in the world ever had such a
devoted lover as Voldi.'

'I know,' murmured Fara, 'but--he shouldn't!' Her voice trembled. 'I
mustn't let him! He can't marry me! It would ruin him! Ione--what am I
going to do?'

 * * * * * *

Shortly before sunset the Princess Arnon, long ailing of infirmities
associated with a broken heart, slipped away so quietly that for some
little time they weren't quite sure.

It was Fara who first realized that it was all over. Since noon she
had been crouching beside the bed with her forehead pressed against
her mother's thin arm, now raising up tearfully to peer into the
unresponsive face, then dejectedly slumping down again to wait.

At mid-afternoon old Kedar noisily rolled up the leather panels on the
northern and eastern exposures of the octagonal tent, just as he would
have done at this hour on any other fair summer day. Kedar had seen
plenty of death in his four-score years and it no longer upset him.
Indeed, he was almost too casual in its presence today, strutting his
old bones about with something of a proprietorial swagger as if he and
death had a private understanding.

All day long the female servants, a dozen or more, had tiptoed in by
twos and threes to stand helplessly at a respectful distance from
the bed, regarding their dying mistress with compassionate eyes, and
had tiptoed out again as if remembering some neglected duty. Nothing
remained to be done for Arnon; or, if so, there was old Nephti who had
nursed both Princesses from babyhood, and the faithful Ione, hovering
close--and a bit jealous of each other.

The whole mind of the household at present was concentrated on Fara and
her probable plans for the future. Of course she would now marry Voldi,
whose constant attentions during the past few years had been unceasing
and whose intentions were unmistakable. It was generally taken for
granted that Fara had decided not to marry until her responsibility to
her mother had ended. And that responsibility had increased as Arnon's
strength declined; for the unhappy Princess had developed an immense
capacity for absorbing all manner of trivial but incessant personal
services. 'Hand me the small pillow, please. No--the other one, dear,
the blue one. Thanks, Fara, but I believe I'd rather have my shawl.
It's out in the pergola, I think. Would you mind getting it, darling?
I know I'm a dreadful bother.' And so she was; but it had never seemed
to annoy Fara, who stayed on duty day and night. Obviously she couldn't
bring much happiness to Voldi until she was free. It wouldn't be long
now.

But where would they live? This was the question that troubled the
servants; especially the older ones. Arnon's land had been ceded to
her only for her lifetime. It was inconceivable that Voldi, as Fara's
husband, would press a claim to it, or that the King could consent to
such favouritism. Voldi would be as nomadic as all others of equal
rating. The fact that his father Urson was the son of Mishma, who as
Chief of the Councillors was the heir-apparent to the throne, was of no
immediate consequence. Arnon's land would revert to the King's domain.
Voldi and Fara would follow the snow and the pasture. And the older
servants, long accustomed to soft living, might be considered too frail
for such a rigorous life.

Indeed, as they huddled in little groups, waiting, watching, they
wondered whether Fara herself was likely to be happy as a nomad. She
had never taken any interest in their herds and flocks. She had shown
much friendly concern for the shepherds and their families, but cared
nothing for the business that provided her own living. Of course, there
was no use trying to understand Fara. They had never known what to
make of this alien who had become more of an enigma as she matured.
She was as mysterious as she was beautiful. Doubtless that could be
explained by her racial heritages. It was an odd combination--Arab and
Jew. True, it was an arrestingly lovely blend, viewed objectively.
Arabian women were taller than Jewesses and more sinewy. At sixteen,
Fara's figure was slim, supple, almost boyish: in short, Arabian. Her
face was an interesting study in racial conflict. The old antipathy was
written there as on a map. The high, finely sculptured nose, with the
slightly flaring, mobile, haughty nostrils, had been Arnon's gift. The
childishly rounded chin and throat were Mariamne's. It was a readily
responsive face, well disciplined in repose, but of swift reactions
to any stirring event. She was capable of flashing Arabian rages like
sudden summer storms in the mountains, but it was well worth anyone's
patience and forbearance to wait for the penitent smile Fara had
inherited from long generations of highly emotional people who believed
in atonements and were never ashamed of their tears.

Arnon's last day wore on, and when the declining sun had been nicked by
the glowing tip of Arcturus, twenty miles away, old Kedar rolled up the
western tent-panels also, admitting a jasmine-scented breeze. Rousing,
Fara lifted her eyes to the breath-taking panorama of rolling hills
in the foreground descending to the green Valley of Aisne, with the
majestic Arcturus in the far distance; and, beyond the southern slope
of the mountain, the dazzling white shoreline of the Dead Sea.

Noting that Fara had been momentarily diverted from her vigil, Ione
drew closer to whisper that Voldi had come. Did she want to see him?
Fara shook her head.

'Tell Voldi not to wait,' she murmured; and, as Ione moved away, she
added, 'Tell him I cannot come now. He will understand.'

Fara's heavy eyes slowly returned to her mother's drawn face. She laid
her cheek against Arnon's breast and listened--and listened. Old Nephti
took a step forward and held up an outspread hand for silence, though
no place had ever been so quiet. At length Fara straightened and kissed
her mother on the forehead, very gently, so as not to waken her. Then
she came slowly to her feet. Her eyes were tearless now and her proud
face was composed. Lightly touching old Nephti's shoulder in a brief
caress and making a weary little gesture of appreciation toward the
others, she left the tent.

Voldi was waiting in the garden. Rising, he held out his arms and
Fara nestled her head against his breast. He could feel the silent,
convulsive sobs and drew her closer.

'She is gone?' he asked.

Fara nodded wearily, dejectedly.

'I will take care of you, dear,' murmured Voldi.

'Let us not speak of that now,' said Fara, gently releasing herself
from his embrace. 'There are many things to do, I suppose. Will you
ride over to the King's encampment--and tell them?'

'Of course; and then may I come back?'

'Voldi, I am so very tired. Perhaps tomorrow...'

He took her in his arms again and kissed her, but her response was
apathetic.

After Voldi had ridden away, Ione joined Fara, who had remained in the
garden, seated in her mother's favourite chair.

'What do we do now, Ione?' she asked weakly. 'I know so little about
it.'

'The men will come tonight, dear, and attend to the burial.'

'And--am I to have anything to do with that?'

'No--you will not be expected to go along. Nephti and I will dress her
for the burial.' Ione reached out her hand. 'Come now--and take some
rest. You are quite exhausted. I shall bring you something nourishing
to drink.'

Late in the evening, King Zendi himself arrived, accompanied by a dozen
neighbours. After a consoling word with Fara, he left her, saying that
he and the Queen would see her tomorrow. Fara lay on her bed, with eyes
closed and a pillow pressed hard over her head so that she might not
hear the sounds of retiring hoofbeats. When she roused, everything was
quiet. The full moon shone brightly through the tent-door. Ione slipped
in very quietly. Fara sat up, patted the bed, and Ione obediently sat
down beside her.

'I want you to do something for me, Ione,' said Fara, hardly above a
whisper, 'and I want you to promise me you will never, never tell.'

Ione's voice trembled a little as she promptly consented.

Fara faced her with sober eyes.

'I want you to hold up your hand, Ione, and swear by your gods that you
will do for me what I ask of you--and never reveal it to anyone!'

Ione hesitated and began to cry.

'I wish I knew, dear,' she said, brokenly. 'I hope this isn't something
you shouldn't do!'

'Let me be the judge of that!' Fara's tone was severe. 'Will you do as
I say--and keep my secret?'

Ione protestingly put up a trembling hand and said, 'Yes, Fara--I will
do as you wish--and never tell.'

Rising impetuously, Fara went to a small table where she kept her
needlework, returning with a pair of scissors which she handed to the
bewildered slave.

'You are to cut off my hair!' Fara wound her fingers about her heavy
braid, at the back of her neck. 'There! See, Ione? Just above my hand.
I am to be a boy. Cut it like Voldi's.'

Ione was whimpering like a child.

'You promised!' Fara shook her roughly by the shoulder. 'Don't sit
there crying! Do as I say--and do it quickly!'

Still gasping incoherent protests, Ione committed the crime. When it
was accomplished, Fara retired to the alcove and presently returned to
exhibit herself in the conventional garb of a well-to-do young Arabian,
the burnous patterned after Voldi's best.

'How do I look?' she demanded.

'Where did you get it?' asked Ione in a strained voice.

'Made it,' said Fara, 'a long time ago.'

'But why? What are you going to do?'

'I am going very far away, Ione, to keep a vow,' declared Fara.
'Now--see to it that you keep yours!'



The alarming news broke early in the morning. Old Kedar rode to the
King's encampment with the appalling report that Fara had disappeared
during the night. The fractious bay filly that she had insisted on
stabling in a separate paddock was gone. Zendi sent word to a score of
young cavalrymen, informing them of what had happened. In his opinion,
Fara, beside herself with grief and unable to sleep, had gone for a
reckless ride in the moonlight. Perhaps she had met with an accident.
They set off in all directions.

Voldi dashed away at a gallop along their favourite bridle-path
skirting the rim of the plateau. At places where the trail was narrow
and the descent precipitous, he dismounted and led his tired horse
slowly, searching for ominous signs. When the late afternoon came, his
hopes were fading. He was no longer meeting anxious friends engaged in
the quest, for he was many miles beyond the furthest point he had ever
travelled.

Slowly he retraced his course as the twilight settled down. At
intervals, where the path was dangerous, he stopped and listened into
the deep silence, and despairingly called, 'Fara! Fara!'



Chapter IV


Saidi, the bay filly, was independent and impertinent but sure-footed.
Old Kedar, increasingly prudent at eighty, distrusted her; but Fara,
better understanding the filly's caprices, knew that while Saidi was
mischievous she was not malicious.

For the first five miles of a gradual descent, Fara did not spare her.
Time was precious. At any moment old Nephti, though strongly admonished
to take her rest, might come in and find the bed empty. Immediately the
household would be roused and a search would begin forthwith.

At first Saidi--in need of exercise--wanted to play, changing her gait
without warning from canter to lope and pretending to be frightened at
every huge white boulder and pale grey clump of sage standing in the
bright moonlight, but Fara's spurs soon dissuaded her from the belief
that this was a romp.

After a while the grade levelled off for a few miles before taking the
sharp zigzags toward the valley floor. Here Fara dismounted and led
Saidi until she began to toss her head impatiently, for she always
objected to being led unless quite exhausted.

Occasionally they passed a weaver's hut: no lights visible, everyone
asleep except the little huddle of goats that stirred and lifted a
few heads inquisitively. The night was still. Fara thought it strange
that she was not lonely. Even her bereavement, not yet of seven hours'
duration, seemed to have occurred long ago; as indeed it had, for that
incurable sorrow had set in when Arnon's waning strength presaged the
inevitable end.

It was strange too, thought Fara, that she felt no apprehensions about
the grim and hazardous mission on which she had set forth. She made the
experiment of saying to herself that this was a very serious business,
a man's business, that undoubtedly would cause her much trouble long
before she reached her well-fortified objective in Galilee; in short,
that she was riding toward almost certain disaster as fast as Saidi's
slim legs could carry her. But this re-examination of her purpose
did nothing to discompose her, doubtless because she had so long and
earnestly planned this audacious undertaking that it had become the
sole aim of her life.

And there was dear Voldi. What a deal of anxiety she had caused him!
How much more kind it would have been, reflected Fara, if she had told
him firmly that she could never marry him; and, if pressed for the
reason, she could have said that she did not love him. But Voldi would
have known it wasn't true, for she had given him too many guarantees of
her affection. However--Voldi would not fret very long. A girl might in
similar circumstances, but a man would quickly forget. How fortunate
men were in their ability to pull their love up by the roots and
transplant it so successfully that it grew again without the loss of a
leaf or a petal. There was really no need for her to worry about Voldi.

Only one anxiety disturbed her: what success would she have in
masquerading as a young man? Of course there was no other alternative.
It was quite inconceivable that a sixteen-year-old girl could travel
alone from southern Arabia to northern Galilee without risking some
very unpleasant, if not positively dangerous, experiences; but this
effort to pose as a young man would be a very risky business.

A few facts were in Fara's favour. Her natural speaking voice was
low-pitched and throaty; it might easily be mistaken by a stranger for
the voice of a boy in his mid-teens. Too, the loose-fitting burnous
ignored the curves of her girlish figure. But, even so, it would
require much courage and self-confidence to maintain her role if
suddenly projected into the company of men. It had not yet occurred to
her that it would be quite as difficult to deceive another woman.

This dilemma had cost Fara many an anxious hour. She had privately
practised being a bold and bumptious youth, accustomed to rough talk
and capable of serving a large helping of convincing profanity. She had
stalked up and down her bed-chamber with long, stiff-legged strides,
jerking her head arrogantly from side to side as she scowled crossly
into her mirrors, and growling gutturally. Once the absurdity of it had
momentarily overcome her, and she had laughed at her reflection in the
highly polished metal plate that hung by her door; but had instantly
sobered at the sight of a pair of girlish dimples in this young man's
cheeks, and resolved that she would do no more smiling.

At the first signs of dawn Fara crossed the southern extremity of the
fertile Valley of Aisne and moved on into the arid Valley of Zered,
which skirted the eastern shore of the Dead Sea. It was a desolate
expanse of parched and blistered land, utterly without vegetation,
birds, rodents, or reptiles. There were even no insects, with which
most deserts abound. The Dead Sea had been aptly named. Saidi clearly
shared her rider's hope that they might soon be out of this forsaken
country, and quickened her pace, Fara straining her eyes for a
glimpse of the ancient village of Akra, which, she knew, maintained a
precarious existence on a bit of oasis at the southernmost tip of the
Dead Sea.

The sun was already hot when she sighted it, a clump of palms and
cypress, a straggling group of shabby cottages surrounding a large
brown tent. This would be the khan where travellers and their
pack-trains were accommodated. At the door of the tent, Fara dismounted
from the perspiring filly, handed the reins to a taciturn old Arabian,
and with long steps and an experimental swagger followed along to the
corral, where she gruffly gave instructions how her mount was to be
rubbed down and properly watered. And when the testy hostler growled
that he knew how to take care of a horse, Fara shouted untruthfully
that if he did he was the first old man she had ever seen who knew or
cared whether a hot horse was safely watered, and that she proposed to
stand by him until he had done it.

A wizened old woman glumly prepared a bad breakfast of stale eggs and
staler bread. Feeling that she had need of practice in maleness in the
presence of women, Fara complained bitterly about the food and reviled
the old woman in what she felt might be the customary terms for a man
to use on such occasions. Then she demanded a bed, and denounced the
old woman as a foul and dirty slattern when she saw the untidy cubicle
provided for her. This execration she attempted in Greek, aware that
her vocabulary of vituperation in that language--learned of the gentle
Ione--would need some polishing.

After two hours of deep sleep Fara was on her way again, after paying
her hosts twice what they asked and swearing manfully that the place
wasn't fit for a goat to live in; to which contemptuous accusation
the old man and his slovenly wife--grateful for their unexpected
windfall--respectfully agreed. Fara smiled complacently as Saidi
bounded away over the north-bound trail, her fears about her ability to
be a man having been somewhat alleviated.

Late afternoon, after a sultry, monotonous ride along the blinding
white seashore, she entered the town of Engedi, eastern terminus of the
old salt trail from the Port of Gaza. It was an incredibly ugly place,
its small, box-shaped houses built of sun-baked brick, suffocating
a narrow, dusty street. At the principal inn, a little further on,
the stableyard of which was crowded with camels, donkeys, and their
grimy attendants, Fara asked courteously for food and a bed for the
night. Instantly she realized that she had made a mistake when the
surly proprietor showed her a filthy pallet in a room containing half
a dozen similar cots. Backing disgustedly out of the room, she opened
her accumulated treasures of Arabian profanity and made it known to
the master of the inn that she wasn't in the habit of sleeping in
rabbit-hutches, dog-kennels, or pigsties. Thus advised, the innkeeper
deferentially led the way to a private room where the bed, if not
comfortable, was less dirty than the one she had rejected.

Fara gave this incident much earnest thought. It was obviously a
mistake to ask for anything politely. The public considered politeness
a sign of weakness. It had a very low opinion of gentle speech. To wait
patiently and take your turn or to accept unprotestingly whatever was
offered you meant only that you were accustomed to being pushed aside;
that you knew you could not defend your rights. It was a thoroughly
abominable world, decided Fara; but if it was that kind of world she
would try to meet it on its own terms. Contracting her brows into a
sullen frown and puffing her lips arrogantly, she marched heavily
up and down the bare, creaking floor. In this belligerent mood she
returned, with long steps, to the common room and flung herself into a
dilapidated chair. Crossing her legs she sat impatiently flicking her
high-laced boot with a finely crafted riding whip--a gift of Voldi's.

Well-dressed, good-looking men of affairs came and went, occasionally
nodding to one another. Almost everybody knew everybody else. Fara
honestly wished she were a man. They all seemed so effortlessly sure of
themselves. She admired their self-sufficiency; tried to make herself
think she was one of them. For the most part her presence in the big,
dingy room went unnoticed. Sometimes a young man, passing by, would
toss an impersonal glance in her direction and move on without giving
her a second look. This was good, and Fara breathed more comfortably.

Immediately to the left of her, in the row of battered chairs backed
against the wall, sat two men engaged in earnest conversation. They
spoke in Greek, though it was evident that they were Romans. Fara had
never seen any Romans, but she had been told how they looked.

The man in the nearest chair was probably forty. It was plain that he
was a person of some consequence. Like his friend, who was many years
his senior, he was smooth-faced and his greying hair was close-cropped.
His face was deeply tanned, except for a narrow strip of white on
his upper forehead which a bandeau had protected from the sun. His
sand-coloured tunic, trimmed in red, was of fine texture; his belt,
dagger-sheath, and tooled-leather sandals, strapped almost to the
knee, showed expensive workmanship. Fara surmised that they both were
directors of caravans, probably belonging to the same company. Another
survey of them revealed that the younger man had a small V-shaped notch
in the top of his ear. So--he was a slave. But apparently his servitude
didn't bother him much.

'I hope he is still there next week when we return,' the
distinguished-looking slave was saying. 'I should like to hear him
again. But it is doubtful whether he will be at large by that time. The
legionaries will have taken him in; for, as you have said, it was very
inflammatory talk. But, by the Gods, Aulus, it was all true--what he
was saying.'

'Yes, yes,' agreed Aulus, 'the world is bad enough to deserve a
drubbing, and it always was. But--the fellow is crazy as a beetle,
Tim.' The older man turned his full face and Fara saw a long scar
across his cheek; relic of a savage fight long ago, she thought.

'That's where we differ, Aulus,' countered Tim. 'What the hermit was
preaching showed him to be indiscreet, foolhardy; but no merely crazy
man could collect a crowd like that and keep them standing for hours in
the broiling sun listening with wide eyes and open mouths; and they say
he has been doing it day after day!'

'Oh, you know how people are,' said Aulus indifferently. 'This
half-starved fanatic, living on dreams and desert bugs, climbs up on
a big rock and begins to yell that the world is due for punishment.
Naturally the rabble, with nothing better to do, gathers around to
watch his antics and shudder at his predictions.' Aulus shifted his
position in the creaking chair and continued to extemporize. 'People
like to be scared, Tim. Their empty lives are without stimulating
sensations and they enjoy feeling the cold shivers run down their
backs--especially when their instinct tells them it's all a lot of
damned nonsense.'

There was quite a pause here, and Fara, who had been intently
eavesdropping, leaned forward a little, hoping that Aulus hadn't said
the last word. Presently Tim remarked soberly, 'I wonder if it is--just
damned nonsense.'

'Poof!' scoffed Aulus. 'The fellow is crazy as a beetle!' He rose,
stretched, yawned. 'And so are you,' he added. 'I'll see you at supper.
I must have another look at that lame camel.'

'Just a minute, Aulus.' Tim patted the arm of the adjoining chair and
his scar-faced friend sat down again with an indulgent grin. 'You have
been talking of that throng at Hebron as if it were composed entirely
of ignorant and lousy nobodies who would as gladly stand all day
watching a caged monkey scratch itself. But that doesn't account for
it. There were at least a dozen well-dressed, intelligent men in the
crowd giving serious attention to everything the hermit said.'

Aulus dismissed this with a negligent flick of his hand.

'Local citizens, no doubt,' he explained, 'annoyed by the fellow's
presence in their town, and waiting for him to start a brawl--so that
they could lock him up as a disturber of the peace.'

'But some of them had come from afar, Aulus. I asked a bright-looking
camel-boy if he wanted a job, and he loftily replied that he was in the
employ of an eminent lawyer, Ben-Judah, a member of the Sanhedrin in
Jerusalem.'

'What's this Sanhedrin?' demanded Aulus scornfully.

'The Jews' law-making body.'

'I thought Rome made their laws.'

'Just the laws on taxes. The Sanhedrin attends to the rest of it.'

'You surely have a strange talent,' observed Aulus, 'for collecting
useless information. What else do you know about Jewish laws?'

'Only that there are far too many of them. Why, a Jew can be arrested
for dragging a chair across his dooryard on the Sabbath! It might dig a
little furrow in the ground--and that would be ploughing.'

'I think you made that up, Timmie,' chuckled Aulus. 'But--be that as it
may--perhaps this wise Ben-Judah, in the course of a journey, turned
aside to listen to the prattle of this fool, just as we did--out of
curiosity.'

'Possibly; but it is much more likely that some influential people are
spying on this hermit. He himself is a Jew, and he is talking to his
own countrymen. Surely the Temple can't afford to let this fellow go
on, gathering up a bigger crowd every day, shouting that the world is
so bad it needs to be cleansed. That's the Temple's exclusive business:
to see that the world--or at least the Jewish world, which is all that
matters in this country--behaves itself. These learned lawyers and
rabbis surely cannot permit a fiery prophet to march across Judaea,
informing thousands of people that their land is filthy with graft,
greed, and injustice, all the way from top to bottom; and that his
God--who is also theirs--means to take the whole job of renovation
out of the hands of the recognized authorities, and attend to it
personally!'

Aulus grinned at this long speech and again rose to his feet.

'Perhaps you're right,' he drawled. 'In that case, they will probably
toss the hermit into a dungeon--and forget about him. And so will the
people. If a man dies a bloody death as a martyr to some new idea, the
people remember, and build him a monument; but if he gets pitched into
prison--Pouf! Let him rot!' Aulus dusted his hands and sauntered away.

After a while the handsome man with the deep crow's-feet at the corners
of his eyes and the notch on his ear turned his head slowly toward Fara
and coolly looked her over.

'Which way are you headed, young man?' he inquired in Aramaic,
signifying that he considered her a Jew.

'I am going west, sir,' replied Fara in Greek, 'as far as Gaza.'

'Ever been there?' asked Tim, and when Fara had shaken her head, he
remarked, 'Very fine place--to lose your shirt and have your throat
cut. Let me warn you to ride straight down the middle of the street and
have nothing to do with any of the inhabitants. Do not eat their food
or drink their water or believe their lies.'

'I gather that you do not care much for Gaza,' commented Fara. 'I shall
take your advice. The first large city to the west is Hebron, is it
not? Is that any better?'

'Much! Hebron has been sound asleep for two thousand years, so there's
nothing very lively about it; but at least it won't rob you or poison
your food or murder you in your bed.' Tim recrossed his long legs and
gave Fara a candid stare. 'How do you happen to speak Greek, young man?
You don't live in Greece, do you?'

'Nor do you, sir,' said Fara with equal bluntness, 'yet you speak
Greek.'

'I am a Greek!' declared Tim proudly. 'You are a Jew, are you not?'

'I am not!' replied Fara. 'I am an Arabian.'

Tim studied her face with interest, pursed his lips, and nodded.

'My mistake,' he muttered. 'No offence, I hope.'

'Not at all, sir. I have no quarrel with the Jewish people.'

Tim laughed quietly and said that he never thought he would hear an
Arabian say that.

'But it is not so long, sir,' Fara risked saying, 'since the Jews and
Arabians were in alliance.'

'What an alliance!' scoffed Tim. 'Of course you know all about that
wretched marriage. One thing I never could understand: I know many
Arabians--fine fellows who love nothing better than a good fight. Why
haven't they ripped the bowels out of that Jewish rascal who humiliated
your Princess? Surely it can't be that they have forgotten--or do not
care!'

Unable to think of an appropriate answer to that, Fara abruptly changed
the subject by saying:

'I could not help overhearing your talk about a prophet you met who
said the world was to be punished for its misdeeds. Does he propose to
attend to this chastisement?'

'No; not he,' said Tim. 'The fellow was careful to say that he himself
was only a courier, announcing the early arrival of a divine person
whom he depicted as a mighty avenger, a divinity to be sent from
Heaven with an axe in his hand. The rotten old growth we have called
Civilization was to be cut down so that something healthy and fruitful
might grow.'

'Coming soon?' asked Fara.

'You would think, from his talk, that the prophet expected the avenger
by next week--at the latest. If he had said it would occur a hundred
years from now, his prediction would have been less risky.'

'And less interesting,' added Fara. 'Do you think the prophet might be
there--at Hebron--tomorrow?'

'Unless he has moved further toward the hills. He was at least half a
mile north of the road when we sighted the crowd. Apparently he does
not study the people's convenience. They say he goes where he likes and
the multitude follows. If you are interested I suggest that you inquire
along the way as you approach Hebron. Almost anyone will tell you. The
air is full of him over there.' Tim rose to move away, and Fara also
came to her feet.

'Am I right in surmising that you were inclined to believe what he
said?' she asked seriously.

Tim tugged at his lip, debating a reply.

'I don't know rightly what I do think about it,' he answered, measuring
his words. 'The Jews are a singular people. They have always had their
prophets, and many of their predictions have proved true, even to the
dating of important events and the outcome of far distant wars. You'd
better hear this man John for yourself. He may be greatly mistaken, but
he is no fool!'

'Your friend says the man is crazy as a beetle,' said Fara.

'My friend,' drawled Tim, 'is a typical Greek who became a typical
Roman. He doesn't believe in anything he can't eat or wear or buy or
sell or ride.'

 * * * * * *

In spite of Saidi's strong objections to leaving the broad highway,
Fara turned off at the unmistakable spot where an improvised road,
fully fifty yards wide, led northward through a stubble-field. The
tilled ground had been trampled soft and the going was slow.

The deserted trail moved on across the field, across another less
travelled highway, through another harvested field, over a bridge that
spanned a little stream. It curved to miss a grove of cypress, climbed
a hill, traversed a pasture, forded a creek, and went on--and on.
After five miles of monotonous riding, Fara sighted a village. At the
cross-roads a stone said the place was Tekoa. The trail had bypassed
the little town, but Fara rode into it. Perhaps someone could inform
her how far she must go to find the prophet.

The village was quite abandoned. The small bazaars and markets on the
principal street were closed. Further on, in the residential section,
a frail old woman bent over the ledge of a community well, tugging at
the handle of the windlass. Fara drew up alongside, dismounted, and
lent a hand. The dripping chain brought up a large wooden bucket which
they pulled to anchorage on top of the low wall. The ragged old woman,
breathing heavily, gave Fara a toothless smile and offered a rusty iron
dipper.

'It is good!' said Fara. She filled the dipper for her hostess, emptied
the bucket into the stone trough beside the well, and slipped off the
filly's bridle. 'Saidi is thirsty too,' she added, lowering the bucket
again.

'Never knew of a horse named Saidi,' remarked the old woman. 'Where do
you come from, young master?'

'Arabia.'

'But you are an Israelite, I think.'

'No--we are both Arabians, Saidi and I.'

The old woman tightened her shrunken lips and scowled.

'How do you happen to ask a drink of me?' she demanded crossly.

'Because you seemed friendly; and, besides, I was thirsty,' replied
Fara, unruffled by the woman's surliness. 'I shall gladly pay you for
the water.'

'We don't sell water.'

'Here is a little gift, then.' Fara offered her a shekel.

The beady old eyes brightened at the sight of so much money, but the
white head shook vigorously. Fara laid the shekel on the ledge of the
well. The old woman turned and spat unprettily on the ground.

Suppressing her amusement, Fara said, 'I am looking for a Jewish
prophet. His name is John. Many people are following him, and I wish
to hear him. I think he has passed this way. Do you know where he has
gone?'

'He is a son of Satan!' shrilled the old woman. 'A blasphemer! Cursed
be all the infidels who listen to his revilings of Israel!'

Fara, who had been toying with her coin-pouch, unwound its thong and
asked quietly, 'Do you know where he is?'

For a moment the old woman maintained a sullen silence while Fara
poured a few silver coins into her own palm. Pouring them back into the
pouch, she vaulted into the saddle and gathered up the bridle-reins.
The wrinkled old jaw was quivering. Obviously her poverty and her piety
were in combat. Impetuously she pointed toward the north-east.

'They said he was heading for the river,' she shouted, 'and all Judaea
is following him! Everybody in Tekoa has joined the infidels!' Tears
ran down the leathery cheeks. 'My own son--and my daughter and her
husband--and their children--they too have gone mad, like the others.'

Honestly sorry for the pitiable old creature, who was now weeping
aloud, Fara asked quietly, 'But what has this man been saying--to
distress you so?'

'He scorns our ancient faith!' sobbed the old woman, scrubbing her
cavernous eyes with the skirt of her faded apron. 'He sits out there in
the desert for years, doing no work, helping nobody, never attending
the Synagogue, never bringing a gift to the altar; and now he comes
forth railing at the religion of his fathers!'

'He has a new religion then?' asked Fara.

'An angel is about to appear, he says, who will show us what to do--as
if we were heathen who knew no God.'

'Your priests are probably annoyed by such talk,' surmised Fara.

'Annoyed!' The old woman slowly nodded her head and drew an unpleasant
grin. 'You wait! They will soon silence his blasphemies! God is not
mocked!'

Fara opened her pouch and poured silver into the wrinkled hand. The old
woman clutched the money, scowled, and made an unsuccessful effort to
spit. Saidi, who had been pawing the ground impatiently, was pleased to
be on their way at a brisk trot.

 * * * * * *

Half an hour before sunset she found them, acres of them it seemed,
seated singly or in pairs or by families in a close-nibbled sheep
pasture on the high-banked shore of the Jordan. They were busy with
their supper, which they had been foresighted enough to bring with
them. Fara stopped a little way apart from the area where most of
the pack-animals were tethered, hung Saidi's bridle on the pommel of
the saddle, loosed the girths, adjusted a stout halter, buckled on a
well-filled feed-bag, and staked out the tired filly for a hard-earned
rest.

Strolling forward among the groups of people, she sat down near a
good-looking family--father, mother, two half-grown boys, and a pretty
girl of her own age. The girl turned her head toward Fara and smiled
shyly. Her father instantly muttered an inaudible command and his
daughter, with some reluctance, left her place and wedged in between
her parents. Fara was amused. She unwrapped her parcel of food and made
a leisurely survey of the great multitude. It was a strangely quiet
crowd. There was a low, inarticulate rumble of subdued conversation,
but all faces were sober, pensive, and there was no laughter to be
heard anywhere. A gentle but insistent, one-sided argument was in
progress near by. The mother of the adjacent family was pleading
earnestly with her husband. Yielding to her importunity he nodded at
length, and their well-favoured daughter rose to resume the place
where she had sat before. Her long black hair, unbound, was spread out
covering her shoulders and back, and she seemed troubled about it.
Turning to Fara with a smile she offered her a sweet roll, which was
accepted gratefully.

'My hair looks untidy,' said the girl. 'It's wet. I was baptized.'

'It's beautiful,' said Fara gallantly. 'How did you say it got wet?'

'The great prophet was baptizing this afternoon.'

'I'm afraid I don't know,' confessed Fara. 'What does that
mean--baptizing? This is my first time here.'

'The prophet leads us into the river and pushes us down under the
water. That washes away our sins--and we are clean.'

'And very wet, I suppose,' remarked Fara sympathetically.

The girl's full lips parted in a slow, reluctant smile that displayed
the tips of beautiful teeth. Unable to think of an appropriate
rejoinder to this dry drollery on a solemn occasion, she suddenly
sobered and nodded her head.

Nothing further was said for a while, Fara regretting that she had
spoken flippantly, the pretty Jewess, her face averted, apparently
wishing she knew how to explain the cleansing she had had in the Jordan.

'I cannot think that you have been so very sinful,' ventured Fara
gently.

'We are all sinful,' murmured the girl in a lugubrious imitation of
experienced piety.

'Yes--I suppose so,' admitted Fara with a companionable sigh. 'Do you
think the prophet is finished--for the day?'

'Oh no, he will speak again when the people have had their supper. It
should not be long now.' The young Jewess tipped her head toward the
groups who were rising and stirring about.

The girl's plump mother, now that her family had been fed, wrapped up
what was left; and, scrambling to her feet, came over and sat down
beside her daughter. She and Fara exchanged amiable smiles.

'I am glad you made friends with our Ruth,' she leaned forward to say.
'There are so few young people here of her own age. Hundreds of us
older ones and swarms of small children; but it seems that our young
people nowadays--' She broke off abruptly in response to an imploring
look from her daughter, but immediately continued, 'They don't seem to
know that they have souls to save from the wrath to come!'

Ruth turned her head slowly toward Fara, with an expression that
apologized for her zealous mother. Quite at a loss for a suitable
comment, Fara mumbled, 'Probably not,' quickly aware that it was the
wrong thing to have said, for it showed a deplorable unconcern. The
woman's eyes were alive with reproach.

'Young man,' she said severely, 'may I ask whether you have come to
seek salvation?'

'I came to see and hear the prophet,' replied Fara.

'But not your own soul's salvation?' demanded the woman.

'The prophet is interested only in his own countrymen, I think,' said
Fara.

'Of course! But you are an Israelite, are you not?'

'I am an Arabian.'

'Then you have no right to be here at all!'

'But--mother!' pleaded Ruth.

'Never mind! You come with me!' Rising, the indignant Jewess drew her
embarrassed daughter to her feet.

'Good-bye.' Ruth turned to say softly.

Fara, who had risen, bowed and said with her lips rather than her
voice, 'I'm sorry.' Striding through the milling crowd she observed
that the people well forward were seating themselves compactly in rows.
Finding an unoccupied spot, she sat down to wait. Presently a murmur
of expectation swept the great audience. The prophet John, who had
evidently been resting by the river's brink, appeared over the top of
the embankment.

He was indeed a striking figure, tall, lean, lithe, bronzed. His heavy,
tousled hair indicated an immense latent vitality. His massive head was
held high above broad, bony shoulders. The craggy face was bearded,
the forehead deep-lined, the dark eyes deep-set. He had the bearing
of a man who had thought much and suffered. The crowd was very still.
Stretching forth his long brown arms, the prophet began to speak in a
tone and mood of quiet entreaty. Fara found herself yielding at once
to the strange compulsion of his vibrant voice. It was as one speaking
from a great distance; from another age; from another world.

God had been patient--long--long. Of old He had planted a garden of
delicious fruits and scented flowers for the delight of the human
creatures He had made. It was a spacious garden, watered by cool
springs and graceful rivers, along whose green banks were to be found
much gold and many precious stones. On the hillsides jutted various
metals which man's ingenuity might fashion into ploughs, pruning-hooks
and other implements of husbandry. Great quarries bulged with enduring
granite and delicately tinted marbles with which man might build
temples and monuments. There were tall forests filled with all manner
of trees from which might be hewn boats and shelters. Innumerable
beasts pastured in the valleys, some to provide food, some to bear
burdens. And had God's fortunate children been content to preserve and
bequeath their rich heritage, their posterity might still be living
comfortably and at peace in a garden.

Here the voice of the prophet rose to a little higher pitch as he
proceeded to relate how this paradise was permitted to grow rank with
weeds and brambles.

For, from the very beginning, God's children cared nothing about
the garden. The first man flouted God's instructions. The elder of
his two sons slew his brother and fled to the jungle. Restless and
dissatisfied, humanity abandoned their paradise and began to roam,
everywhere, without food, clothing, shelter, or destination, hoping
only to escape the reproving eyes of their disappointed Father.

Sometimes, after long and aimless wandering, a group or tribe would
settle in a fertile valley and till the soil. Another nomadic tribe,
jealous of their neighbours' small prosperities, would come upon them
with spears and swords and stones, killing the workers together with
their old and helpless ones and their little children. Their Father
had endowed them with inventive minds, so that they might make better
and better tools, but their most ingenious inventions were not better
tools but deadlier weapons. Stone was not quarried for the building
of temples and monuments, but for great fortifications. Iron was not
moulded into implements of husbandry but into instruments of war.

Everywhere there was fear, hardship, hunger. Pillage, rapine, and
slaughter spread over the face of the world until there was no peace at
all, anywhere at all, and a man was not safe even in the home of his
brother.

But--John was continuing with mounting heat--throughout all these
dreadful ages of hatred and oppression, God had waited, waited
patiently, anxiously for the world's great ones to become aware of
the poverty of their ill-gained wealth, and the empty sham of their
vaunted power, and the shabbiness of their royal raiment, and the stink
of starvation in their pilfered food. Now and again some brave voice
would be raised in warning, but it would soon be stilled. Many were the
messengers, sent of God, who were beaten, imprisoned and slain; fed to
wild beasts, sawn asunder.

As a child, Fara had heard the legends about the world's creation, the
disobedience of Adam, the wickedness of his posterity, and the great
flood that had drowned them all--except one family. But the ancient
tales, as John recited them, seemed fresh and frightening. For now
his voice was at storm! God's patience was exhausted! He finally gave
up hope of seeing His incorrigible children develop any beauty, any
grace, any goodness, any peace. He determined to wash the world clean
of them--thoroughly clean of them--and their filth and their spoor and
the ravages of their hands until not a trace or a track or a trail of
them remained! He told one peace-abiding old man to build a boat for
his household; and the rain began to fall. The rain kept on coming--and
coming--day after day after day. It poured as no rain had ever poured
before!

Fara had listened, quite unmoved, when the wandering minstrels had sung
of the fabled rain, but today the graphic picture of that appalling
disaster made her draw her burnous tightly about her shoulders. The
story made her flesh creep, as she heard the hoarse cries and strangled
gasps of the doomed, clutching at one another in the swirl of rising
waters, while the livid sky roared and the tempest screamed and the
lightning stabbed relentlessly at the tossing debris.

And then--there was a sudden calm. The waters stilled and subsided.
The sun was shining again; not upon a garden this time, but upon a
stripped, deserted world of ruined cities levelled to the ground, and
of empty thrones half-buried in the mud. Now men could begin anew
and try to build a better world. But it was without any success--and
without any promise.

John's voice took on a tone of deep sadness--and of shame too--as
he reported how these men, wading out of the ooze and slime, began
again to plot against one another as before. Prophets came and went,
reminding the people of the great calamity that had befallen their
fathers and predicting more trouble if they did not now obey God's
command for peace. But the stronger ones ignored them and those who
sought the favour of the stronger ones laughed at them, and even the
weak, who were set upon daily and robbed of their very rags--they too
mocked the prophets and threw stones.

Here John paused for a long time--and bowed his head. The awed
multitude sat transfixed, far-eyed, holding its breath, though well it
knew what was coming.

'So--now--in these latter days,' he went on sadly, measuring his
phrases, 'it is our fate to witness another outpouring of God's wrath.
It is not a flood this time, but a purge of the world's wickedness. You
will ask, "When is it coming?" And I shall answer, "It is not coming:
it is here!"

'And do I hear you say, "It is not my fault that the world is wicked:
it is the Empire that enslaves and robs and kills; am I to be punished
for the crimes of Caesar?" Then I must answer you that every one of
us is guilty!' John's words came fast now, fast and scathing. 'Do not
blame all injustice, all cruelty, all meanness on Caesar's Empire!
For each one of you is a little empire filled with lust and greed and
hate! It is easy enough to condemn the government, which is, indeed, a
rapacious thing that God will cleanse and cleanse until its bones show
through! Easy enough to denounce the Temple for its well-fed lethargy:
it deserves and will receive just punishment! But if any peace is to
bless this sick world, salvation must first come to you--to you, the
lonely shepherd in the hills; to you, the farmer at the plough; to you,
the carpenter at the bench; to you, the housewife at the loom; to you,
rabbi; to you, lawyer; to you, scribe; to you, magistrate. For--except
you repent, you shall perish! It is so decreed. God has again spoken.
There is One near at hand to rid the world of its iniquities!
Indeed--He is now here!'

Suddenly a black-robed, distinguished-looking man of middle age, at
the far end of the second row, arose from the small group of similarly
well-groomed company surrounding him and called out in a loud voice
that turned all eyes his way:

'Meaning you, Baptizer? Are you, then, this avenger who will wreak
God's wrath upon Caesar--and the High Priest--and upon us all?'

'No, I am not He,' answered John humbly. 'I am but His courier,
unworthy to stoop down and buckle His sandal-straps. I am but a voice,
crying in the desert. I am commanded to say: make the way straight for
the oncoming of the Anointed One. Level the road! Lift up the valleys
where the poor despair! Pare down the mountain-tops where the powerful
have sat in their arrogance and pride! Level the road for Him in your
own hearts!'

Here the impassioned voice lashed out like the crack of a bull-whip.

'Do not be content with saying that the world might find justice and
peace if the Greeks stopped hating the Egyptians and the Romans stopped
robbing the Greeks! Look to yourselves! Let the Macedonian merchant
stop hating the Syrian camel-driver! Let the Jew stop hating the Arab!
Let the Pharisees and Sadducees stop hating one another! Let the poor
farmer with two cows and an ass and twenty chickens stop his sneering
at the poor farmer with only two goats and ten chickens! Let the
woman with the fine cloak for Sabbath and the wedding-feast stop her
haughtiness toward the woman with only a week-day cloak and no wedding
garment!'

Another man of the little company of critics now stood up in his place
and said, 'Does this avenger come with a sword--to make peace?'

'Not with a sword,' said John, 'but none the less with a power so
mighty that the whole world will be shaken by it! He comes with an axe
and a flail! The axe will be laid at the roots of all the trees. Every
tree that bears fruit will be spared, but every tree that is barren and
an encumbrance to the ground will be cut down and burned! His flail
will thresh the harvest of your deeds. He will save the grain, but the
chaff will be blown away!'

It was some moments before the crowd realized that the prophet had made
an end of speaking, for he stood in silence before the people, with his
head bowed in weariness; or perhaps, Fara thought, in silent prayer.

At length he lifted his head, turned slowly, and walked away toward
the neighbouring hill to the north. Their eyes followed him until he
disappeared among the scraggy olive trees. Wordlessly and without
looking at one another, they rose and moved toward the camp-sites they
had chosen in the broad pasture-field.

Dazed and bewildered, Fara followed the slow-moving crowd. She found
herself abreast of the family she had met at supper. The pretty girl,
Ruth, gave her a sidelong glance and smiled. Her mother, alert to her
daughter's behaviour, scowled and muttered intentionally loud enough
for Fara to hear, 'Any more of that and I shall tell your father!'

 * * * * * *

Having brought no camping equipment except a pair of camel-hair rugs,
Fara slept for the first time in her life under the open sky. She
retired early, for there was little else to do. A half-grown boy had
been given a few pennies for bringing water to Saidi, after which
Fara had removed the saddle and bridle, carrying them to a grassy
spot near a cypress tree. During the slow twilight the people quietly
pitched their simple camps, and by the time the stars appeared in full
splendour the pasture-field was still. Occasionally a tired baby cried,
a dog barked, there was a brief argument among the pack-asses; but
the people were quiet. Fara wondered whether they slept or reflected
soberly on the strange words they had heard. The distinguished men
from the city--what were they thinking? Ruth's mother--did she say to
herself that at least she was innocent of any fault? And what would
this peace-loving prophet think if he knew that one of his interested
auditors was on her way to kill her own father? It was a long time
before her mental confusion gave way to her bodily fatigue. She went
to sleep wondering whether Arabia, too, would be warned of what was
coming. And would anyone speak to the Romans about it? Surely the world
was larger than Judaea.

Even before dawn there was a stir of activity. Fara rubbed the sleep
out of her eyes, sat up and combed her boyish hair, drew the red
bandeau down over her forehead, rolled up her rugs, and set off to see
how Saidi had fared. Saidi was gone! There was the stake to which she
had been tethered, but Saidi was nowhere to be seen. Doubtless she had
contrived to tug loose and wander away. She might even be well started
for home. Intelligent horses were known to do that.

After fruitless inquiries of the men and boys who were attending to
their beasts, Fara decided to climb the hill for a wider view. As
she reached the summit, her heart beating hard with the exertion and
alarm, she shaded her eyes and carefully surveyed the plain below,
every rod of it, from the faraway north to the congested encampment;
but there was no sight of Saidi. She suddenly felt so weak and faint
that she laid a hand against the trunk of a tree for support against
the westerly morning breeze. She started at the sound of a voice
immediately behind her.

'What are you looking for, daughter?'

Fara turned slowly to confront the prophet, who was regarding her with
sober eyes.

'My horse,' she replied unsteadily, returning to her search of the
valley. 'She must have wandered away in the night.'

'May have been stolen,' suggested John, advancing to stand beside her.

'Surely no one, among these people, would steal!' said Fara.

'There is no place in this greedy world, my daughter, where men do not
steal.'

There it was again--'my daughter.' Fara hoped she had misunderstood,
the first time; but there was no doubt about it now. Somehow he knew.
But she must listen, for he was speaking quietly, almost as if to
himself.

'They steal. They steal anything, everything, anywhere, everywhere;
anything from a horse to a halter; anywhere from a scroll in the
Synagogue to a vase in the graveyard. They steal on the farm, in the
marketplace, on the highway, at the inn, at the goldsmith's, at the
rag-picker's, in the gambling-house, and in the Temple. There is no
limit to it. They steal from babes and pennies from dead men's eyes.
They steal from bankers and beggars. Where do you live, young woman,
that you should be incredulous of theft?'

'I am from Arabia,' said Fara.

John chuckled briefly, but without smiling.

'You must have lived a sheltered life,' he said dryly. 'Your people
have taken no prizes for honesty. Perhaps you are not very well
acquainted with your countrymen. Have you always lived in Arabia? I
detect an accent on your tongue, though I must say your Aramaic is
correct. How do you happen to speak it? And you look Jewish--as much
Jewish as Arabian. Tell me, daughter, why are you wearing a man's
burnous; and why that shorn hair?'

Fara's knees were giving way now, and she sat down. The prophet seated
himself on a small boulder near by. Slowly turning her face toward him,
she encountered a searching gaze that compelled frankness.

'I am on an errand, sir, that could not be safely performed by a young
woman. I told you that I am an Arabian because I prefer to think of
myself that way; but it is only half true. My mother was an Arabian. My
father is a Jew.'

'Your mother is dead?'

'Only three days ago.' Fara turned her eyes toward the valley.

'And that sent you on your errand, I think; and your errand takes you
to Judaea, and your father is a Jew. Perhaps you go to notify him of
your mother's death.'

'Ye-yes,' stammered Fara, hoping the answer might suffice.

There was a considerable silence before John spoke.

'So it is something else besides telling your father. Has he not lived
with your mother in Arabia?'

'Not for many years.'

'How did they happen to marry?'

'It's quite a long story, sir. I have no wish to detain you.' She
looked again into his inquiring eyes. 'Must I tell you?' she asked, in
a voice that seemed a little frightened.

'Not if you don't want to,' said John kindly, 'but perhaps it might
help--if you confided in someone you could trust.'

'I am on my way to find my father,' said Fara. 'He lives in Galilee--at
the city of Tiberias.'

'Then he must be in the employ of the Tetrarch,' surmised John. 'There
is little else in Tiberias but the great establishment of Antipas.'

Fara nodded and turned her eyes away. Tardily and in a barely audible,
reluctant voice she said, 'Antipas is my father.'

John seemed a person not easily surprised, but he impulsively rose to
his feet and exclaimed, 'You don't mean it!' He searched her face,
and apparently satisfied that she was telling the truth, he said, 'Of
course I know the story. Everyone does. You have no cause to be proud
of your father.'

'I am quite aware of that, sir,' agreed Fara.

'But--surely--after the cruel and shameful treatment he gave the
Princess of Arabia, you are not going to Tiberias to live with this--'

'I have vowed to avenge my mother,' interrupted Fara huskily.

'You mean--you would kill your father?'

'If I can.'

'But you can't!' exclaimed John. 'In the first place, it's quite
impossible. The place is fortified like a besieged city. I was born
a Galilean, and my friends have told me that the Tetrarch lives like
a fugitive, heavily guarded by night and day. You would only lose
your life to no purpose at all. And--even if you succeeded, which is
inconceivable, your crime would haunt you all your days. No good ever
comes of revenge.'

'I heard you say yesterday that there was One arriving now to avenge
God,' said Fara. 'Is no good to come of that?'

John did not have an answer ready. After some delay, he said, 'That is
a far different matter, my daughter. Vengeance is permitted only to
God. He will repay!'

'But I mustn't!' Fara's tone was satirical. 'It's all right for God to
seek vengeance--but it is wrong for me to do it. I'm supposed to have a
finer moral character?'

'That remark,' reproved John, 'does you small credit, daughter. It is
irreverent.'

'But practical,' defended Fara.

'And excusable, I suppose,' reflected John. 'You probably had no
religious training--in Arabia.'

'Why not?' Fara demanded. 'The Jews and Arabians worship the same God,
do we not? Abraham is our common father; is that not so?'

Any further discussion of this matter seeming fraught with more heat
than light, John nodded absently.

'Perhaps you may see the Anointed One in Galilee,' he said. 'I wish you
might be able to talk with Him. He lives in the town of Nazareth. He is
a carpenter.'

'Disguised as a carpenter?' wondered Fara. 'Same as I am disguised as a
boy?'

'No, He really is a carpenter, and a very good one, whereas you are
only pretending to be a boy--'

'And not doing so well at it,' she broke in, with a pensive smile.
'However,' she added, 'you are the first one to discover.'

'You mean--I am the first one to tell you.' John paced back and forth,
frowning thoughtfully. 'But this is no light matter,' he went on. 'You
have vowed a vow. I shall not be the one to induce you to break it.
A vow is a vow. You are intent upon going to Tiberias. Very well. Go
first to Nazareth: it is not far from there. Tell your story to the
Carpenter--Jesus. Abide by His counsel. You will make no mistake if
you do as He tells you...I must leave you now. Since your horse is
gone, you will proceed on foot, I suppose. Follow the Jordan. It is
much shorter than by the travelled roads and it will be safer for you.'
Pointing to an angling path down the northern slope of the hill, he
said, 'May God be with you, daughter, and keep you safe from any harm.'
He extended a big, bony hand, and she confidently gave him her small
one. Turning it about for inspection, he smiled. 'It is not a boy's
hand. You must be very careful. I can't advise you, now that your hair
is shorn, to dress as a girl should; but,' he repeated gently, 'you
must be careful. Those riding boots, that fine burnous. You should get
into less conspicuous clothing--peasant's clothes--as soon as possible.
You could be thrown into prison for this, you know.'

'That would be unpleasant,' said Fara. 'They say that prisons are very
uncomfortable.'

'I have never been in one,' said John, 'but I expect to be--at almost
any hour now. The authorities will arrest me as a disturber of the
peace.'

'But there is no peace,' said Fara.

'No--there is no peace,' agreed John soberly.

'Is it the Temple that would silence you?'

'Yes--but the Temple has no authority to imprison me.'

'Who, then?'

'The provincial government; and as I am a Galilean I shall be taken
before Antipas.'

'Then--we may meet again--in prison.' Fara smiled grimly.

John shook his shaggy head in reproof of her ill-timed levity.

'It is quite clear that you do not realize the utter hopelessness of
your undertaking, my child,' he said sadly. 'I do not expect ever to
see you again...Farewell.'

'Until we meet,' persisted Fara.

Halfway down the long hill, she turned and looked back. John was still
standing where she had left him. She waved a hand and he extended his
arm, as if to give her his final blessing.



Chapter V


It was early morning on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee. Enough
remained of an unusually hot summer to strip the fishermen to the
waist, but intimations of autumn were in the smoky haze that overcast
the distant mountains, obscured the dome of the new Synagogue in
Capernaum, and dulled the sheen of the Tetrarch's marble palace.

The ugly huddle of weather-beaten shacks and wharves where the
fishermen kept their tackle and dried their nets had come alive to
the day's work. Browned, bushy, bare-footed men and youths scampered
about on the docks, loading flat-bottomed dories with equipment for
the larger craft which rocked indolently in the quiet cove, tugging in
unison at their anchor-chains.

Fully a score of these boats, of all shapes, sizes, ages, and degrees
of dirtiness and disrepair, were congregated in the bay, waiting for
their skippers and crews to haul up the much-mended sails and wallow
forth to what they hoped might be promising fishing-grounds.

Haughtily apart from the clutter of nondescript old tubs, and
conspicuous for their trimness, lay a fleet of three blue-hulled
schooners moored side by side and so closely lashed together from
midship to stern that their freshly painted gunwales would have chafed
but for the heavy hempen pads that cushioned them. Built for stability,
they were broad in the beam and sat low in the water; and they were of
identical design, though the central ship, The Abigail, carried three
masts and was somewhat larger than her two-masted companions, The Sara
and The Rachael. Tethered loosely about their prows bobbed half a dozen
empty dories.

On the closely yoked afterdecks the combined crews, totalling thirty
and ranging in age from sixteen to sixty, sat cross-legged a few feet
apart, forming a circle around a huge net that plainly needed extensive
repairs.

Alone on the broad tiller-seat of The Abigail a gigantic, hairy, deeply
tanned Galilean of thirty-five--as busy with his awl as were his
employees--occasionally looked up to survey their work, and sometimes
they met his eyes as if to inquire whether he was satisfied with what
they were doing. They all worked skilfully, swiftly, and in silence,
though their faces did not indicate that they were hard-driven. It
was obvious that the relation of the master and his men was cordial;
indeed, it was better than cordial, for there was evident in their
diligence a desire to please. Especially was this loyalty noticeable in
the attitude of the younger ones, who seemed proud of their employment,
as they had reason to be, for it was a testimonial to a man's
seamanship if he was signed on to sail under Simon the son of Jonas.

Among the Galileans the name of Simon was so common that it had to
be tagged for better identification. Every Simon bore a special
designation: Simon the tanner, Simon the weaver, Simon the clubfoot,
Simon the juggler, Simon the little, Simon the scribe, Simon the sot,
Simon the bald, Simon the son of Jonas. Doubtless if the skipper's
sire had been less distinguished, an appellation appropriate to his
characteristics would have been promptly contrived for him by the
community. In that case he might have become known early in his youth
as Simon the brawler, or Simon the scoffer. But to the neighbours and
relatives who had known him since childhood he was Simon the son of
Jonas; and--they were likely to add--not much of a credit to the good
old man; for nobody was more fanatically devoted to the Synagogue than
Jonas, and nobody had less use for it than his tough and burly son
Simon.

It was inevitable, however, that the huge, noisy, quick-tempered,
lamentably irreverent son of Jonas should become known by a more
colourful name. All up and down the western shore, throughout
Capernaum, Magdala, Bethsaida, and the hamlets between, and at the
Roman fort, and among the servants in the great villa of the Tetrarch,
and on the lake, and in the country round about, Simon the son of Jonas
was referred to as the Big Fisherman.

From early boyhood the sacrilegious and belligerent Simon had been
a growing affliction to his parents. True, he obeyed the laws,
specializing in a scrupulous observance of the Fifth Commandment,
which in this case was not easy; for the religious duties of Jonas,
his diligent attention to all the fasts and feasts, his frequent
pilgrimages to Jerusalem, and his unctuous exhortations on the streets
and in the market-place left him but little time for any gainful
employment; and had it not been for the industry of Simon and his elder
brother, Andrew, their parents would have lived on meagre fare.

As for the docile bachelor Andrew, his idea of keeping the Fifth
Commandment had required his regular attendance at the services of the
Synagogue and a strict observance of the stated fasts, but it had laid
no such burden on Simon, whose conception of honouring his father and
mother did not go any further than being kind and respectful to them
and seeing to it that they were well fed and clothed. By the time he
was twelve Simon heartily despised the Synagogue and everything it
represented, because, he felt, it had made a loafer and a tiresome bore
of an otherwise fine man.

By a practice of great restraint, he never disclosed his private
contempt for his father's sanctimoniousness. Sometimes it was difficult
to exhibit a proper respect when, on business in the markets, he
would come upon Jonas parading the aisles, scroll in hand, solemnly
haranguing the customers, who rarely paused to give heed and more often
grinned and winked at one another as he passed by. But if Simon's
attitude toward his father was circumspect, he found a measure of
relief for his pent-up feelings by a forthright excoriation of religion
when in the company of his young contemporaries. He was still beardless
when all the friends and acquaintances of the family referred to him as
an infidel--and an uncommonly noisy one. Jonas knew it and deplored it
with tears, and prayed aloud in the public places for his wayward son;
but ate with relish the provender that the incorrigible sceptic brought
home.

Beginning as a mere roustabout and chore-boy on a dirty trawler, his
wages paid in low-grade mud-suckers, which he peddled from door to door
among the very poor, Simon had gradually made himself useful enough to
be in a bargaining position among the fleet-owners; for he was strong
as an ox and fearless to the point of foolhardiness. In weather that
tied up most of the ships in the cove at Tiberias--for the little
sea could be dangerously rough on short notice--Simon would be eager
to go out and do battle with the waves; and the catch--taken in such
circumstances--fetched higher prices for lack of competition.

And so it was that before he was twenty-three Simon owned a half-share
in a fairly good fishing-smack. At twenty-eight he owned it fully
and had taken on a crew of four. And now he was master of the most
prosperous and best known fleet on the lake.

As his self-made success increased, the Big Fisherman's character
reflected both his earlier frustrations and his current achievements,
not always to his credit. Conscious of having missed almost everything
that lent enchantment to a normal childhood, he was inclined to be
contemptuous of youngsters who wasted their time at play when they
might be making themselves useful. He had never been to school; could
hardly read and rarely tried to write anything more than his own
name. In consequence of this illiteracy, he scoffed at education and
considered the professional scrivener an object of ridicule. Physical
weakness he viewed with smiling condescension.

As for his loyalties and enthusiasms, Simon, though stridently
irreligious, possessed a passionate love of his race. Not to be a Jew
was equivalent to not being anybody at all. In his regard all nations
except Israel were of one ignominious category. If they were in any way
different, their distinctions were trivial. Never having travelled more
than twenty-five miles from home--and privately sensitive about his
provincialism--he had accumulated quite a lot of prejudices about the
world beyond little Galilee. He spoke derisively of people who lived in
cities, even Jewish cities. The Greeks foolishly pretended to be better
scholars than the Romans, when the fact was that they were only lazier
than the Romans and idled their time away on such fripperies as stone
statues and the spinning of arguments concerning theories on which one
man's guess was as good as another's; with nothing to come of it, no
matter who was right. The Romans had proved themselves better fighters
than their weaker neighbours, but so were dogs better fighters than
conies, when it came to that. The Egyptians were in decay and thought
only of building tombs to house their bones. And Arabia had never been
anything but a murderous horde of liars, cheats, and robbers. Israel
was not only the Chosen Race but the Human Race. The rest of the people
were no better than animals. Simon could and did discourse on this
subject by the hour. He was an Israelite indeed!

And he was loyal to his comrades. From boyhood he had shown an
extraordinary talent for making friends among all classes of people.
He had an instinctive love of common justice and fair play, though he
was not always himself a cheerful loser. He liked practical jokes but
preferred not to be the object of them; and, sometimes, when finding
himself at a momentary disadvantage, the Big Fisherman would display a
childish petulance that seemed amusingly incongruous when exhibited by
a man of his heroic stature.

In short, success had turned Simon's head a little. Having come
up through many tribulations into a conspicuous prosperity, he
was intolerant of other men's failures to achieve. He liked to be
complimented upon his accomplishments and was not reluctant to speak
pleasantly of them himself. But--for all his vanity, his intolerance,
and his wide assortment of showy weaknesses, his employees idolized
him, worked long hours for him, applauded his strength, laughed
immoderately at his clumsy witticisms; and, when off duty, imitated his
swagger.

By the time the Big Fisherman had won his prowess as a fleet-owner,
saintly old Jonas and his mousey wife Rachael had been summoned from
their cottage in Capernaum to an abode Elsewhere, leaving him free to
marry young Abigail of Bethsaida, who lived with her widowed mother
Hannah. Andrew, who rarely offered any unsolicited advice to his more
resourceful brother, perhaps because he was an employee, had gently
cautioned Simon against this marriage; for Abigail, though winsome and
pretty, had no health at all. Doubtless it was her very flower-like
fragility that had attracted the big, brawny fellow whose latent talent
for tenderness had never been given a chance to develop.

He had been very considerate of Abigail. As she slowly faded, the
common solicitude and sorrow shared by Simon and Hannah greatly
endeared them to one another, and when his girl-wife died he continued
to live with his much-cherished mother-in-law in her commodious home
on a quiet, shady corner in the northern suburbs of Bethsaida. Andrew
joined them; though, unwilling to burn his bridges until satisfied
that this arrangement was mutually agreeable, he kept the old family
residence in Capernaum intact and often went there to tend the flowers.

Now that the shadow was lifted from the small household in Bethsaida,
it took on an unaccustomed brightness, for Hannah was gifted with a
quiet drollery and an inexhaustible good humour refreshing to the
brothers who had found so little to amuse them in their parental home.
Andrew, sober and taciturn, allowed many a quip to pass unnoticed,
though he could be depended upon to give an amiable, bewildered smile.
Simon's big, booming laugh, on an open-windowed summer evening, could
be heard a long way off. Near neighbours often wondered, rather
testily, what manner of entertainment could produce such hilarity. It
was the general opinion of the conservatives in that part of the town
that the Big Fisherman had added little to the gentility of Bethsaida.

But though they regarded Simon with scant respect, there was one thing
about him that stirred their curiosity--and their envy too. He seemed
to be on friendly terms with David, the wealthy, haughty Sadducee. Up
the cross-street which bounded Hannah's property on the north side and
rose gently for a quarter-mile to the east, lay the spacious grounds
and imposing old mansion of the eminent Zadok family, now reduced in
numbers to a pair of unmarried, middle-aged aristocrats and a score of
elderly servants.

Old Zadok, the departed grandfather of David and Deborah, had held
himself aloof from the town; nor had Bethsaida made any effort to
intrude upon his lofty isolation, for he was a Sadducee, the only
Sadducee in all that region, and if he wanted to live in seclusion
Bethsaida was willing he should do so, the Sadducees being of a
cynical, supercilious sect that affected a social superiority. Nor
was that all that ailed old Zadok and the Sadducees, in the opinion
of Bethsaida. It was a known fact that he hated the government of
Galilee and had been heard to speak scornfully of Antipas the Tetrarch.
It was a wonder he hadn't got into trouble about that. Of course he
paid exorbitant taxes. Rich men who paid large taxes might be able to
speak their minds more recklessly than poor people, who for the same
indiscretion could be clapped in jail. Maybe it was better not to have
much to do with the Zadoks or any other Sadducee.

Just why David had retained his residence at the old palace on the hill
was a mystery, for until his recent retirement he was seldom at home.
Maybe it was the commanding view of the lake that had held him and
brought him back for his summers. Surely it was inconvenient for him to
have lived there during his active life, for his law practice was in
Caesarea and the only local client he served was Jairus, whose large
estate lay in the foothills above Capernaum.

Now David, it seemed, was home to stay; and on fair days it was his
habit to stroll slowly down the hill, with bent head, apparently in
deep meditation. Persons meeting him did not venture to speak, nor did
he lift his eyes. Doubtless he was too busy with his own thoughts to
take any account of them.

It was not surprising, therefore, that Hannah's neighbours should
have been amazed the first time David stopped beside her white picket
fence to engage the Big Fisherman in what seemed to be a serious,
man-to-man conversation. And this happened again and again, usually
of a late afternoon when Simon had returned from his work. Sometimes
Hannah joined them, presumably at David's suggestion. It was all very
mysterious.

But while this friendship between Simon the uncouth and David the
refined was incomprehensible to the Bethsaidans, whose social status
was approximately level, it was not so unaccountable as it seemed;
for though aristocracy might shudder at the thought of contamination
with persons a notch or two lower in the social scale, it was willing
to unbend pleasantly for those who, everybody knew, had no rating at
all--and would not be expecting an invitation to dinner.

In this case, however, there was still better reason for the friendship
of the lawyer and the fisherman. The seed of it had been sown many
years before, when Simon, a self-conscious, ragged, immensely overgrown
youngster, had regularly delivered fish at the Zadoks' kitchen door.
David, his senior by a decade, occasionally encountered him on a garden
path and stopped to feel his bulging muscles in about the same careless
manner with which he tousled the ears of his dog; and Simon would grin
and mumble 'Yes, sir' to David's playful comments on the astounding
number of his freckles and the prodigious size of his bare feet. And
then David had gone away to school in Athens; absent for five years.
Returning, he had joined an eminent law firm in Caesarea, then rapidly
becoming a metropolis, and was seen only rarely, briefly, in Bethsaida.
At wide-spaced intervals Simon passed him. David would nod and smile,
absently.

Even after arriving at something like dignity in his lowly occupation,
Simon had continued personally to deliver choice fish to a few
important patrons: to the Tetrarch's palace, of course, and to the
Zadok mansion, and--for a while--to Jairus' beautiful villa, though
latterly he had given that up; it was too far.

Now that David, slightly stooped and grey, had come home for good,
Simon often saw him sauntering about on the grounds. One day they met.
Without any preliminary greeting, David said, 'Still peddling fish, eh?
Surely you should have found a better job by now.'

Simon was offended, but kept his temper.

'I do have a better job, sir. I do not peddle fish. True, I still
select them carefully for you and bring them myself to your house--and
to the Tetrarch--but I could easily send them.'

If Simon had thought to flatter his customer by mentioning that the
House of Zadok and the Villa of the Tetrarch were somehow of the same
standing in his esteem, he was quickly set right about that. David's
lip curled unpleasantly.

'So--that abominable drunkard eats fish, eh?' he muttered. 'I had
supposed he lived exclusively on beverages.'

Simon didn't care to risk a comment on this seditious speech, but he
nodded perfunctorily; and David, dismissing the subject with a flick of
his fingers, said, 'You're doing well, then. Perhaps you own a market.'

Simon's lips twitched with a grin that hinted at something better than
a market.

'No, sir. I am still a fisherman, but I own my ships and have a score
and ten men in my employ.'

'That is very good,' commented David. 'I am glad you have prospered. I
dare say you have a home--and family.'

Simon explained briefly about that, and David was respectfully
sympathetic. After a little pause, he remarked, 'Perhaps you have some
office in the Synagogue, now that you have done so well in business.'

'No, sir,' replied Simon almost bluntly. 'I have no time for the
Synagogue.'

'You mean--you are not religious?' inquired David, surprised.

'Well, sir...' Simon shifted his weight, deliberating a reply. 'I
believe in the God of our fathers--who made the world--and gives us our
life--and the sunshine, rain and harvests. I do not believe that He
takes any notice of our small doings--or cares whether we roast calves
and lambs in His honour.'

'Very well spoken,' said David soberly. 'You are thoughtful...I bid you
good-day.'

That brief conversation had marked the beginning of an acquaintance
that was ripening to a friendship. There were frequent talks
thereafter, Simon encouraged to speak his mind freely and David nodding
his approval. Even when Simon had ventured quite beyond his depth and
it was obvious that he didn't know what he was talking about, David--in
need of diversion--would slowly nod his head and smile.

Then came the visits at the fence, which brought all that section of
Bethsaida to the window. And one afternoon David consented to come into
the yard and sit down with Simon in the shade of the tall cypress, and
Hannah brought them cups of pomegranate juice.

 * * * * * *

The early morning haze had lifted now. The sun had scented the old
tarred ropes and softened the pitch in the deck-seams. The sailors
worked in silence, deftly spreading open the frayed cords of the net
and weaving into them the new twine.

Simon straightened his back, scratched his bushy head with his awl,
and shaded his sweating brow for keener observation of the dory that
was slowly approaching from the docks. His face lighted up. Other eyes
followed his inquisitively.

'Who's that with John?' mumbled Andrew.

'I don't recognize him,' said Simon. 'Some youngster wanting a job
maybe.'

'Looks like a tramp,' thought James.

'That would be John--all over,' remarked old Zebedee, from the adjacent
deck of The Rachael, 'always bringing home a lost dog to feed.'

'Well--he might do worse,' rumbled Simon deep in his throat. 'Go
forward, Thad, and toss him a rope.'

Work on the net was resumed without much enthusiasm, all of them
curious to see what sort of passenger John had picked up. But, whoever
the stranger was, the Big Fisherman would doubtless approve of his
coming aboard. Anything that Johnny did was agreeable with Simon. Every
member of the crew took that for granted.

Sometimes newcomers to the fleet were a bit annoyed over the skipper's
partiality toward this absent-minded youth, but they soon accepted
it without jealousy; for nobody could help liking him. Johnny was
shamelessly lazy. On warm afternoons when everybody else was diligently
fishing, Johnny could be found lying flat on his back staring up into
the sky. If Simon teasingly queried for a report on what he saw in the
white clouds today he would raise his arm and dreamily finger a pattern
of a dome, a tower, a bridge, a city; or perhaps a winged angel.

'You're not much good as a fisherman, Johnny,' Simon would say, 'but
it's worth something to see pictures in the sky.'

It is doubtful, however, whether Simon would have tolerated any such
indolence had that been the boy's only distinction. In emergencies
he was amazingly industrious, resourceful, and courageous. In fair
weather, when the sails were hoisted or reefed, the crew had to
step over him while he indifferently viewed their labours through
half-closed eyes. Let there be a storm, Johnny astonished them with his
seamanship. If a ravelled rope fouled a pulley high on the main-mast in
the midst of a howling gale, everybody knew that the drenched sailor
inching his way up the swaying ratlines was Johnny the dreamer.

Perhaps Simon loved the boy for his reckless bravery, perhaps for
his visions in the white clouds, perhaps for both of these disparate
talents; but whatever may have been the grounds of his affection it was
sincere and ever on display. Nor was it a one-sided devotion. Simon was
Johnny's hero. It was a relationship that gave something of fragrance
to an occupation much in need of it.

Now John and his unrecognized companion--a ragged youth of his own
age--were climbing over the forward rail. Waving a hand, he led the
diffident stranger into the little galley in the forecastle.

'Feeding him, no doubt,' guessed Andrew. 'He certainly looked hungry.'

'Johnny missed his calling,' said Simon. 'He should have been a public
almoner.'

'It would have increased the taxes,' remarked old Zebedee. 'The boy has
no regard for money.'

'No--Johnny will never be rich,' said Simon, 'but he will always have
friends.'

'And they will have him to bury sometime,' muttered Zebedee.

'You wouldn't expect him to bury himself,' said Simon.

They all chuckled a little at this, but gave full attention as John
appeared from the galley and came slowly aft, their curiosity about
his movements whetted by the fact that he had been absent since noon
yesterday. Stepping with the carefulness of a cat he walked across the
big net and sat down beside Simon, who edged over to make room. They
all put down their work and waited for explanations.

'Camel-boy,' said John, tipping his head toward the galley. 'Hasn't had
anything to eat for a couple of days; very tired. I found him sitting
on the dock. He looked as if he had been crying; face all smeared and
dirty. He said he had run away from a caravan bound for Damascus on the
coast road, because they beat and starved him.'

'You showed him where to wash--and gave him some food?' inquired Simon.
He took up the net again as a hint to the crew, and they bent over
their work. John nodded--and smiled.

'I never saw anyone eat before,' he remarked to Simon; 'not like this
boy. The poor chap must be hollow all the way to his heels.'

'Did you question him?' asked Simon.

'No--I thought I'd let you do that. He may be from the south. He speaks
Aramaic--the Judaean kind; only down south further, maybe.'

'Well--we'll see,' rumbled Simon absently. Leaning closer, he asked in
a low voice, 'Did you go out there, yesterday, as you intended?'

John nodded dreamily, averting his eyes; then shook his head.

'Well?' snapped Simon, with a sudden impatience that widened his
audience. 'Did you go--or didn't you?'

Again John nodded, slowly lifted cloudy eyes, entreatingly shook his
head, and tapped his hand gently on the Big Fisherman's knee, as if
begging that his story might be deferred until he could tell it in
private. But this signal for secrecy, now that the crew had become
interested in the pantomime, nettled Simon.

'And did you find this cracked Carpenter who has turned vintner--and
makes wine out of water?'

The crews of the three ships were leaning forward now, wide-eyed with
curiosity and frankly amused at the discomfiture of the skipper's pet.
And when John still remained silent, crestfallen, Simon went on with
his ridicule.

'I suppose the Carpenter urged all the poor farmers and shepherds to
band together and storm the Roman fort with flails and pitchforks.'

This brought a laugh. Everybody had heard Simon's savagely expressed
opinions of the rumours afloat concerning the Carpenter from Nazareth,
and it would be prudent to share his contempt. The Big Fisherman
appreciated this loyal acceptance of his views and gave his men another
occasion for a guffaw. Turning toward John, he said:

'Perhaps you saw the Carpenter turn a field of rocks into a pasture
full of fat sheep! Speak up, lad! You were bent on going out to see the
Carpenter--and I gave you the day off. Tell us, now, what did you make
of him?'

'I--I don't know,' said John thickly. He compressed his lips and
shook his bent head. Presently he straightened, faced Simon with an
expression of utter bafflement, and repeated lamely, 'I don't know,
sir. It's all very strange.'

'Hmm; so I gather,' muttered Simon. 'And what was so strange about
it--the man or his talk or his tricks? Can't you tell us? Or are we too
stupid to understand?'

'Please give me time, Simon.' John seemed to be speaking from a
distance. 'The whole thing is mysterious. I can't think straight today.
Let me tell you about it--a little later.' He lowered his tone until it
was inaudible to any but Simon, and added, 'But I won't expect you to
believe it.'

'Humph!' grunted Simon.

At this juncture the tension was eased. The emaciated camel-boy--in a
tattered and grimy brown tunic and trousers, easily recognized as the
garb of a caravan lackey, ambled slowly toward them. Uncertain what to
do with himself, he halted and leaned against a capstan. Simon beckoned
to him and the net was relaxed for his crossing. Obedient to the
master's invitation, he sat down on what was left of the tiller-seat.
The crew looked him over without visible prejudice.

'Did you have something to eat, son?' The Big Fisherman's voice was
friendly.

The newcomer nodded gratefully, and said in a husky tone inaudible to
any but the master and John, 'You are very kind, sir.'

'That was John's doing,' chuckled Simon, apparently anxious to set
himself right with his offended favourite, who sat demurely reflecting
on the ridicule he had suffered. 'Johnny attends to the feeding of
visitors...So--you're lost, maybe. Well--don't worry too much. You
look as if you needed a rest. Where have you been sleeping lately--in
haystacks?'

'No, sir; under the hedges along the roadside. They don't want you
sleeping in their haystacks.'

'They can't be much blamed for that,' commented Simon. 'Tramps are
always breaking down their berry-bushes and grapevines--and frightening
the cattle...What's your name, boy?'

'Joseph.'

'I suppose they call you Joe.'

'Y-yes, sir. That--and a lot of other things lately.'

Simon acknowledged this grim little pleasantry with an appreciative
grin. Evidently the ragged waif was not stupid.

'Where are you from, Joe?' he asked, kindly.

'Far south, sir; near the Dead Sea.'

'Idumea, maybe?'

The boy nodded tardily, his reluctance being quite understandable; for
no one had ever been heard to boast that he was a native of Idumea.
Simon's lips tightened involuntarily and he regarded the youngster with
a frown, but instantly relented as he looked into the drooping eyes.

'I suppose you know, son, that we Jews don't have much to do with
Idumeans.'

'But Idumeans are Jews, sir,' meekly protested the boy.

Simon sniffed and shrugged. 'Several centuries ago,' he remarked
crisply. 'Your people haven't been very good Jews--not for a long time.'

'King Herod came from Idumea, sir,' ventured the boy softly.

'Well,' drawled Simon, 'that doesn't improve Idumea's reputation very
much.'

The sailors laughed a bit nervously. Old Zebedee cackled loudly.

'I always say,' he shrilled, 'it's cheaper to feed an Idumean and let
him go on his way. Then--maybe--he won't steal from you.' The old man
grimaced for his immediate neighbours, feeling that he had scored a
point.

'I never stole anything in my life,' retorted the stranger, without
turning to see where the insult had originated.

'I believe you, Joe!' declared John.

'Yaa!' railed his father, 'you'd believe anything, anybody! That's your
trouble. You're too easily taken in.'

'I believe you too, my boy,' said Simon, so pointedly that old Zebedee
suddenly busied himself with his awl. Then, turning to John, the Big
Fisherman inquired in a low tone. 'Many people out there? Where was it?'

'Up on the hill--on the road to Cana.' John's voice was guarded. It was
apparent that he had no intention of explaining to the whole company if
he could avoid it. 'There were about a hundred people; perhaps more.'
It had grown very quiet. All work had stopped. Everyone was candidly
eavesdropping. Simon observed it--and grinned.

'May as well speak out, Johnny. They're all interested...We're talking
about the Carpenter, boys. Johnny went out to see him, yesterday...Go
ahead, Johnny. Tell us all about it.'

The men were pleased to be included in the conversation. They pocketed
their awls. Some rested their elbows on their knees and cupped their
chins in their hands. Even the weary young tramp showed a sudden
interest at the mention of a carpenter whose doings had excited public
curiosity. John was hesitant to begin; studied his slim, brown fingers
as if he had never seen them before, and moistened his dry lips.

To fill in this awkward pause, Simon announced, 'I gave John leave
yesterday to go out into the country and see what this hullabaloo
amounted to. There have been all manner of wild tales, and it's high
time somebody came forward with the truth.'

'Yaa!' yelled Zebedee. 'That yarn about his turning water into wine,
over at Cana! You can't find anybody who will stand up and say he saw
it himself. It's always the cousin of a brother-in-law who saw it--and
he lives over in Samaria somewhere.'

Simon turned about and faced the old man with a scowl.

'If that is all you have to say for the present, Zebedee, we will give
your son a chance to talk.'

There was now no way out for John, except to tell the story. He lifted
his head and began his strange narrative.

'Learning that he had left Cana and was headed in this direction, I
went out, hoping to meet him. On the hill I came upon quite a multitude
of people gathered about him. Many of them had followed him from Cana,
and apparently the others had joined the crowd along the way.'

'What did he look like?' broke in James.

'It was late afternoon when I arrived,' continued John, with a brief
little gesture that postponed a reply to his brother's query. 'I tried
to question a few on the edge of the crowd, but they gave no heed. They
were all closely packed together, pushing in on him until he had hardly
room to stand. I thought it was quite rude of them, though I soon found
myself wanting to do the same thing.' He paused reminiscently, shook
his head, and muttered, 'It was all very strange.'

Simon hitched about impatiently.

'Get on with it, Johnny! What was the fellow saying?'

'He wasn't what you'd call a big man,' continued John, with a glance
toward his brother. 'Simon would overtop him by a good six inches.'

The Big Fisherman squared his shoulders and listened more complacently.

'But not meaning that he was frail,' amended John. 'His skin was much
whiter than ours, though he wore nothing on his head and the sun was
hot enough to burn him. He seemed very warm--and tired. His brown hair
was curly and the sweat had coiled some tight little rings of it on
his forehead, softening his face until it might have looked boyish if
it hadn't been for his short beard. Even with the beard he looked much
younger than he talked. His eyes...'

John broke off here and fumbled with the old net while his audience
waited in silence. Presently he gave a deep sigh, shook his head--and
went on, in a monotone of reminiscence.

'He didn't talk in a loud voice; not like a teacher or a preacher. You
know what I mean: the way the scribes talk to people--as if they were
reciting something to the woods or the moon; but not to anybody in
particular. The Carpenter didn't seem to be speaking to the crowd as a
crowd, but to each person, as if they were alone together, apart...That
was the first thing I noticed about his talk. I couldn't help feeling
that he had singled me out and was speaking directly to me. Maybe that
was why I wanted to get closer. I suppose that was why everyone crowded
in, wanting to get closer.'

'Very well! Very well!' prodded Simon. 'You wanted to get closer.
Now--what did he say?'

'That's what we're all waiting for, John,' shouted old Zebedee.

'He was talking about freedom--and happiness. Our country was never
going to be free, he said. We should make up our minds to that. He said
that if we were ever to have any happiness at all we must accept this
bondage as something we couldn't alter, and plan to find our happiness
within ourselves--seeing that our land would be subjugated, as long as
we lived--and longer.'

'Wants us to be contented with our slavery, does he?' called Alphaeus
from The Sara.

'No--it isn't that he approves of our slavery,' John went on, unruffled
by the interruption. 'He said that all men everywhere are governed by
conditions that curb their freedom, and--'

'Doesn't believe in government, eh?' commented Andrew dryly. 'The
Tetrarch will soon cure him of that.'

'What does he know about all men everywhere--this Carpenter from
Nazareth?' scoffed Simon.

'He didn't say that he was against the government,' answered John,
weary but patient. 'He said that every man could find freedom for
himself, regardless of the laws. Freedom for his spirit. The richest
gifts, he said, are beyond the control of any oppressor; property which
nobody can carry away or withhold from us--'

'Such as what?' sniffed Simon, in a tone of raillery that made the
sailors laugh.

'Dawn,' said John diffidently, knowing they would laugh again.
'Dawn--and the sunset--the mountains--the songs of birds--and'--his
voice fell to an almost inaudible murmur as he queried their grinning
faces--'and the warm rain--and morning dew on the grass--and wild
poppies growing on the hill-slopes--'

'Wild poppies!' broke in Thaddeus from across the old net. 'Wild
poppies! Songs of birds! Dew on the grass! Why didn't someone ask him
how to make these things up into a porridge to feed the family?'

This was so good, and they all enjoyed it so much that Thad,
embarrassed by his own wit, yawned widely to show that his sally didn't
really amount to anything and he could be funnier than that if the
occasion arose. It pleased him particularly to hear the Big Fisherman's
roaring laugh. John accepted the general merriment with no sign of
irritation. It was what he had expected.

'The Carpenter talked about that, Thad,' he said quietly, when the
hilarity had subsided. 'He thinks that most people spend too much time
making things up into porridge, fretting about porridge, thinking
that nothing is any good unless it can be made up into porridge;
spending their lives worrying for fear they might be short of food next
winter--and in their old age. Worrying--until they have no happiness at
all...He said the birds did not worry--and yet they were fed.'

'Yaa!' yelled Zebedee--'but they've got to scratch for it!'

There was a gale of laughter. Old Zebedee was a pest, but this joke was
excellent. The applause delighted him, and he repeated his witticism
again and again for his nearest neighbours. 'Yes--they've got to
scratch for it!...He! Ha!...Scratch for it!'

'That about the birds,' said Simon, 'sounds just like my old father. He
never worried about where the next meal was coming from.'

The men chuckled discreetly. Zebedee, to show that he knew more than
any of the younger ones about the pious improvidence of Jonas, laughed
himself into a noisy fit of coughing. Andrew effectively shut off this
racket by scowling at him, as if to say that if Simon wanted to jest
a little about their righteous but unemployed father, that was his
business; but there was no occasion for any comment from Zebedee, whose
back always hurt him when there was anything to do.

Feeling now that his audience was neither sympathetic nor particularly
interested in what he had been saying, John dug deep into his pocket,
fetched up an awl, drew the edge of the old net across his knees and
set to work.

'Aren't you going to tell us anything more?' asked Simon.

'Not at present,' said John remotely. 'I'd much rather not talk about
it now. It's too serious...It isn't at all a laughing matter.'

'But--please, Johnny!' entreated James. 'We will be quiet.' Glancing
about the circle, with his sober eyes coming to rest on his father's
smirk, he added, 'My brother has an important story to tell if we will
let him. I, for one, would like to hear it.'

Slowly pocketing his awl and giving James a grateful smile, John
continued with his strange narrative--and the men listened.

How to find happiness: that was the thing. Few of us would ever be
wealthy, no matter how hard we tried; no matter how greedily we grabbed
things out of other people's hands. And the possessions we got, whether
by fair means or foul, would turn out to be encumbrances. We would
always have to be on the lookout for thieves. We would be afraid to
leave home, even if we left a watchman, for he might be dishonest. We
would sleep with one eye open, and we would be suspicious of strangers.
And it was not only the threat of theft that would keep us disquieted.
Our possessions would be menaced by moths--and rust.

'Surely he didn't object to our having a bed and a couple of stools to
sit on and a roof over our heads,' commented Alphaeus.

'First of all,' John went on, undiverted, 'we must stop fretting and
complaining about our national servitude. Instead of flying into a
rage when some gruff legionary imposes on us, we should quietly obey
his orders, however unjust. If the soldier encounters one of us on the
highway and hands us his pack to carry for a mile, let us take it and
carry it for him--a mile--two miles.'

There was some subdued grumbling here, but nobody spoke up. Old Zebedee
vigorously shook his grey head and made a sour grimace. Simon clenched
a big fist and waggled it experimentally. The dirty camel-boy yawned.

'This led him to talk about the bearing of burdens,' pursued John.
'That was the best way to find happiness--bearing burdens for others,
whether they were friends or foes. If enemies, they regard you more
mercifully; if friends, they love you for it.'

'I don't believe that!' objected Thaddeus. 'Toadying to enemies
doesn't make them a bit easier on you. They get the idea that you are
afraid--and then they do lay it on!'

Many of the fishermen nodded their agreement. John did not pause to
take note of this general disapproval.

'He said the way to find your happiness and peace is in helping other
people carry their heavy packs--whatever they are.' Here John paused so
long that they thought he was through. They shifted their position for
better comfort, and a few of them made as if to resume their work on
the net. Simon stretched, yawned prodigiously, and rubbed his eyes with
his big knuckles.

'And that was all there was to it?' he queried. 'Nothing very exciting
about such talk. You say the crowd listened?'

'Yes--we listened. We listened with our mouths open, so our breathing
would not interfere with our hearing. As I told you--there is something
peculiar about the Carpenter's voice. He doesn't talk as other men do.
Nobody--ever--talked--like that!'

'But he didn't do anything--out of the ordinary?' James wanted to know.

'I had decided not to say anything about that; at least, not now,'
faltered John. 'Because--I know you won't believe it.'

They all came promptly to attention and were very quiet.

'It was while he was talking about our finding happiness by bearing
burdens. There was a man standing only a few feet away from me who had
a paralysed arm--or something had ailed it so that it was much shorter
and thinner than the other. But for this bad right arm, he was a pretty
husky fellow. I had noticed him petting his short arm as if he was
proud of it and wanted people to see it. All of a sudden, he broke into
the Carpenter's speech, and held up this poor thing of an arm, hoisting
it up by his good hand; and he shouted out, "How about me, sir? You can
see that I cannot bear burdens!"'

Here John stopped, closed his eyes, and shook his head like an emerging
diver.

'No--no--I cannot tell you!' he muttered thickly. 'You will not believe
it! If any one of you were to tell me this, I'm sure I wouldn't believe
a word of it!'

'Say on, Johnny!' commanded Simon. 'What happened?'

'The fellow's arm!' John's voice trembled. 'It was well, I tell you! It
was sound! It was as long as the other!'

The fishermen stiffened their backs and stared at young John as if he
were a stranger. Simon broke the silence.

'No, John, no!' he muttered. 'We can't have any of that, you know!'

Old Zebedee scrambled to his feet, pointed a shaky finger at his son,
and shouted, 'That's the first time I ever heard you lie!'

James, habitually tolerant of his father's incessant airing of his
views, now surprised them all by rising to face the noisy old man with
a stern rebuke.

'My brother is not a liar, sir!' he exclaimed. 'Johnny may have
misunderstood what he saw, but I will not sit here silently and hear
him reviled as a liar--not even by his father!'

'It's a long, hard climb--up that hill,' put in Andrew, 'and yesterday
was a hot day.'

'Aye,' nodded Alphaeus, to his immediate neighbours, 'the boy must have
been a bit out of his head.'

'No, Johnny,' mumbled Simon, 'that's much too much! Such things don't
happen.'

John hung his head, not as if he resented their disbelief, but
regretful that he had consented to tell the story. Suddenly the murmurs
ceased as Simon held up a hand for silence.

'Well, Johnny, you may as well go on with it,' he said roughly. 'You
can see that you've nothing to lose. Nobody believes you--but we'd
better have the rest of it, if there is any more. Did this fortunate
fellow, with the healed arm, thank the Carpenter--and maybe hand him a
shekel?'

'The people were stunned!' muttered John, without looking up. 'A woman
standing next to the man fainted and crumpled up on the ground. The man
himself was panting hard, making queer little squeaks in his throat.
You couldn't tell whether he was trying to laugh or cry. Everybody
was quiet--and pale. I felt a little sick in my stomach, the way you
feel at the sight of a bleeding wound--only--I think--the shock of
seeing a deformed arm suddenly made well is worse than seeing a bad
accident...While we were all standing there, gaping at the arm, the
Carpenter said, "Now, my friend, you can bear burdens. See to it that
you do--or a worse thing might come upon you."' John's voice was
unsteady as he finished his story. After an interval of silence, he
rose slowly and faced the company with sober eyes. 'I know that you do
not believe what I have told you,' he declared--'but may God strike me
dead if it is not the truth!'

'Blasphemy!' yelled old Zebedee.

'I'm not saying you lied, Johnny,' said Simon, 'but I do think you have
been seeing things--like the strange animals you find in the clouds.
It's no harm to imagine things in the sky--but this is different! I
only hope you aren't losing your mind! Tell us truly now: were you out
there at all? Did you really see this Carpenter? I think you dreamed
it--all of it--while you were asleep under a tree.'

This brought on nervous laughter.

'Run along, Johnny,' said Simon, as if to a mere toddler. 'You've done
enough for one day. Go somewhere and rest your dizzy head.'

Flushed with humiliation, John moved slowly across the net and walked
with uncertain steps toward the bow. James watched him with troubled
eyes.

'I think I shall go too,' he said.

'Maybe you'd better ask permission,' advised his father.

'You may go, James,' growled Simon. 'Talk your flighty brother out of
this nonsense and bring him back when he's cured of it.'

'My brother may not want to come back,' said James, 'after the shameful
treatment he has had!'

'He may do as he likes about that,' snapped Simon hotly. 'The fleet can
get along without him...And you needn't come back, either, if you're so
easily offended.'

'Hear that?' shouted Zebedee. 'You'll be losing your job if you aren't
careful!'

James made no reply, but followed his brother. A moment later the
silent sailors heard the clatter of oars in a dory's rowlocks. Craning
their necks, they saw the little boat making toward the beach. Simon
stood to watch it, frowning darkly. He turned about and faced Andrew.

'I'll not go out today,' he said. 'Finish with the net, and take the
fleet over to the south shore where we fished yesterday.'

Andrew followed him as he stalked forward, overtaking him amidships.

'What do you want done with this young tramp?' he inquired.

Simon gave a wry smile and stroked his jaw. Now that Johnny had turned
out to be an ungrateful fool, he would teach him a lesson by giving his
flouted friendship to this ragged waif. Johnny would come creeping back
tomorrow to find that he had lost his place as the skipper's pet. He
beckoned to Joe, who came promptly to his side.

'Come with me, son,' he said, kindly. 'You shall have a clean bed to
sleep in tonight.'

Old Zebedee had wriggled forward and stood by, rubbing his wrinkled
hands.

'I'm sorry my boys acted that way,' he whimpered.

'You'd do well to mind your own business,' growled Simon.

 * * * * * *

There had been almost no conversation between them as they trudged
along on the well-beaten highway to suburban Bethsaida. The sun was
high now--and hot. A few steps in advance of his young companion, the
Big Fisherman marched steadily with long strides, moodily preoccupied
and quite oblivious of the sandal-patter behind him. These shorter
footsteps were erratic, for the camel-boy frequently turned about
to survey the huge marble palace of the Tetrarch, sometimes walking
backwards for a dozen steps and shading his eyes for better vision.

They were entering the residential district now where well-kept houses
sat back from the dusty street, partly hidden by tall acacias, cypress,
and olive trees. A corner was turned to the left. At the next corner
Simon slowed, encouraging the camel-boy to come abreast of him. Opening
a small wicket-gate, he led the way toward a commodious grey-brick
cottage. The door yard was shady. A pleasant-faced woman of middle age
was raking leaves.

'What brings you home so early, Simon?' she inquired, with a side
glance at the dishevelled stranger. 'Anything the matter?'

'You sit down here on the stoop, son,' said Simon. 'I want a word with
you, Hannah.'

The Idumean tramp was gratified by this tentative hospitality, and sank
down wearily on the step, legs aching from trying to keep up with the
long steps of the Galilean giant. The woman had put down the rake and
they had entered the house. The skipper would confer with this Hannah,
who was probably his mother--though she seemed too young for that--and
she would shake her head and say, 'No--please, Simon; not an Idumean!
And he looks so terribly dirty! He's probably lousy too.'

After what seemed a very long time, they came out on the little porch
where Joe sat. It was a relief to see a cordial smile on the woman's
face.

'My mother-in-law, Hannah, has consented to let you rest here with us
for a day or two, seeing how very tired you are,' said Simon. Turning
to Hannah, he added, 'I may not be home for supper.'

'Perhaps you should have a bite to eat before you go.'

'I'm not hungry.' Without a farewell word Simon walked rapidly to the
gate and down the street as if his errand might be of some urgency.

Hannah sat down on the step, a little way apart from her guest, caught
up a wisp of greying hair that had fallen over her temple; and, after
soberly searching the tired, long-lashed eyes, smiled a little.

'Your name is Joe,' she said pleasantly. 'And you are from away down in
Idumea.'

Joe nodded, but offered no further facts about himself.

'We do not see many Idumeans up here,' said Hannah. 'In fact, I never
saw one before.'

Joe sighed deeply, but had nothing to say about Idumea.

'You would probably enjoy a bath,' said Hannah.

'Ohhh!' breathed the dirty boy. 'Would I!'

'Then--come with me.' Hannah rose and led the way into the cool,
well-furnished house. 'That bedroom straight ahead of you, Joe. I shall
bring you a tub of water. You will find towels in the room.'

'Please let me do that!' insisted Joe. 'Show me where it is--and I will
help myself.'

Hannah darted an inquiring glance into the waif's eyes. She had not
expected any graciousness on the part of this young vagabond. Showing
him the large wooden tub in the store-room off the kitchen, and
pointing to the cistern, she returned to her leaf-raking. Presently she
retraced her steps and tapped at the bedroom door.

'If you will hand me your soiled clothes, I will wash them, and hang
them out in the sun to dry.'

The splashing ceased and there was quite an interval of silence. At
length the boy made a flustered reply.

'Oh--but I didn't expect you to do that!'

'Surely you are not intending to put those dirty garments on again?'
Hannah's voice rose in indignation. 'They have got to be cleaned--for
our sake if not yours! Open that door now--a little way--and hand them
to me!'

After some silence and delay, the door was reluctantly opened wide
enough to accommodate a small, brown, wet hand holding a shabby jacket
and a pair of coarse trousers, clothing worn only by the poorest of
peasants. Hannah took them gingerly with her finger-tips and made a wry
face.

'Didn't you have anything on under these dreadful rags?' she inquired.

'Y-yes,' stammered Joe; 'but, please, I can wash them myself.'

'Don't be foolish!' snapped Hannah. 'I won't have those filthy things
in my house--not another minute! Let me have them!' And when there was
no immediate response, she called sternly, 'I'm waiting!'

Again the door opened slightly, grudgingly, and the damp hand delivered
two badly rumpled under-garments which Hannah grabbed impatiently.
Averting her face, she carried them to the back door and pitched them
out on the grass. She was more than disgusted with the task she had set
for herself. She had been foolish to take this dirty tramp into her
house. Simon had no right to ask her to do it.

Then something attracted her attention. She stepped out on the ground
and inspected the under-garments with wide-eyed curiosity. They were
dainty and exquisitely made of the finest, sheerest linen she had ever
seen. Unquestionably they were a woman's clothing. This Joe was a thief
then!

She might have known it.

She sat down on the grass and fingered the gauzy material. Where could
this tramp have come upon such articles? What opportunity would he have
had to steal clothing of this value? And--imagine a camel-boy wanting
to wear a woman's clothes! Now an utterly preposterous idea arrived
to confuse the problem. Could this Joe be a girl? Hannah recalled her
wonderment at the extraordinarily long, curling lashes when she had
looked into the boy's weary eyes. And the small, slim hand. But--even
assuming that the youngster was masquerading, that didn't explain this
expensive underwear.

She held up the shirt, woven of costly linen. On the left breast
there was embroidered a peculiar device. Hannah studied it with
mystification. The emblems in the blue oval meant something: she was
sure of that. There was a new moon, done in gold thread, circling about
a silver star; and crossing through the slim moon and the star, a white
sword and a shepherd's crook.

Suddenly Hannah resolved to make an experiment that might solve the
mystery. She returned to the bedroom door and listened. It was very
quiet in there now.

'Joe,' she called.

'Yes.' The voice was sleepy--or was it frightened?

'I've found out something about you.'

There was no reply.

'Joe--you're a girl!'

'Y-yes,' weakly, wearily; 'I know.'

'Well'--Hannah's voice was unsteady--'after you've rested, look in the
closet for some clothing.' Her tone had softened. 'In the chest you
will find under-garments--not nearly so fine as yours, but serviceable.
They belonged to my daughter--who died.' And when there was no reply,
she added, 'Or would you prefer to go on pretending you're a boy?'

The answer was muffled and inaudible.

'Perhaps you might enjoy being a girl again,' persisted Hannah
gently--'just for a day or two while you are here...I wouldn't tell on
you.'

'Yes--please,' murmured the girl brokenly. She was crying...And so was
Hannah.

After she had washed the clothes--and it had taken more time than
such a task should have called for in any other circumstance--Hannah
hung them out to dry. It had gratified her to find that while the
rough outer garments were badly soiled, the dainty underwear, though
wrinkled, was fairly clean. Apparently these garments had been recently
washed, perhaps in some forest brook.

Although consumed by curiosity to learn the girl's story, Hannah had no
thought of disturbing her now: she was utterly spent and would probably
sleep for hours. There was still much leaf-raking to be done, and it
seemed that the leaves which needed immediate attention were close to
the north fence. Incidentally, David would be strolling by before long,
as was his custom. David was learned and widely travelled. He would be
almost sure to know what these strange symbols meant. Should she ask
him?

More than an hour had passed, with Hannah becoming very warm and
weary, before the eminent Sadducee appeared, sedately marching down
the hill. He paused, laid a hand on the fence, and offered the usual
greeting. The conversation did not flow freely. Yes, Hannah agreed, it
was indeed a warm day for this time of the year. But she had enjoyed
the exercise--and the leaves must be gathered up before it rained. No,
Simon wasn't there and might not be home until late.

When it appeared that nothing remained to be said, David bowed soberly
and was taking his leave. Hannah advanced a step and halted him with a
diffident query. She had come upon a bit of linen, she said, that bore
some strange tokens. It was blue and oval in shape, and in the centre
there was the figure of a new moon and a star.

David, smiling condescendingly, broke in with surprise that she did not
recognize the well-known star and crescent of Arabia.

'But that wasn't quite all,' continued Hannah. 'Crossing through this
moon and star there was a sword and a shepherd's crook.'

'Impossible!' muttered David. 'Where did you find this?'

Hannah was visibly embarrassed and her heart raced. She had not
reckoned on a question that would demand fuller explanation and her
expression showed that she now regretted having introduced the subject.
Her confusion spurred the lawyer's curiosity. He stepped closer and
soberly searched her eyes.

'This morning a hungry and ragged camel-boy appeared on one of
Simon's ships,' began Hannah nervously, 'and Simon--you know, sir,
how big-hearted he is--took pity on the young fellow and brought him
home--to rest and be properly fed for a day or two. I made him take
a bath; and, while he was doing that, I washed his clothing. These
strange figures were embroidered on one of his garments.'

'I should like to see it,' said David.

'It's still wet, sir--from the washing,' said Hannah.

David impatiently assured her that it wouldn't matter at all if the
garment was wet. He wanted to see it, and he wanted to see it now! So
Hannah brought it and handed it over.

'This is a woman's raiment!' said David.

Hannah dropped her eyes--and nodded.

'You will keep it a secret, sir, won't you?' she entreated. 'I gave her
my word I wouldn't tell.'

'I should have no motive for betraying you, Hannah.' He handed back the
garment. 'It is better that no one be told--about this insignia.'

'Not even Simon? When he discovers that his waif is a girl, he will ask
many questions. She has consented to wear my daughter's clothing while
she is here.'

'Let Simon think whatever he likes about the girl's having disguised
herself. She may or may not confide. If I were you, I should not press
her for her story.' David was again on the point of moving away, but
paused to inquire, 'Is she Jewish in appearance?'

'Yes, sir. She told Simon she was from Idumea. That's Jewish, is it
not?'

'Idumea? Nonsense!' snorted David. 'Had she been from Idumea she
wouldn't have wanted to bathe. No, indeed! That shirt did not originate
in Idumea!...I shall see you again tomorrow...I bid you good-day.'
He turned slowly and was retracing his steps toward home, with bent
head, and hands clasped behind him. After he had gone a little way, he
suddenly straightened, turned about, and came back.

'You say the girl looks Jewish. Think hard now! If someone were to tell
you she is part Jewish--and part Arabian--what would you say?' David's
eyes invaded Hannah's earnestly.

'I wouldn't know, sir,' she replied, shaking her head. 'I don't know
how the Arabians look. The girl is a little taller than most Jewish
women of her age--and more slender, too.'

'What--would you say--is her age, Hannah?'

'Sixteen, perhaps; or seventeen, maybe.'

David made no comment on that; but stood silently, thoughtfully,
counting his fingers. Having finished the addition, he nodded to
himself, drew an enigmatic smile, and withdrew. 'I bid you good-day,
Hannah,' he said absently.

For a long time the bewildered woman stood watching the venerable
Sadducee's deliberate march up the hill. It was evident that David had
been deeply impressed. Hannah hoped she wasn't getting into trouble.
She wished she could feel free to confide the whole matter to Simon.
But if the girl was--as David seemed to suspect--of Arabian blood,
Simon would undoubtedly be angry and turn her out. He hated the
Arabians. On the other hand, if he weren't told and found out later, he
would have good cause for being enraged over the deception. Any way you
looked at it, the situation was disturbing. Hannah was not experienced
in dissembling.

After standing there irresolutely until her legs were weary she
returned to the house. The door of the guest's bedroom was now open.
The girl, in a simple white dress of Abigail's, was sitting on the
edge of the bed, combing her cropped hair. Hannah smiled, but her eyes
brimmed with tears. The girl instinctively guessed why.

'I'm afraid it makes you sad,' she said softly, 'to see a stranger in
this keep-sake dress. I am sorry.'

Hannah brightened and dabbed at the tears.

'It was just for a moment, my dear. I am glad to see my
Abigail's clothing put to some good use. She was a beautiful
child...And'--impulsively--'so are you!...What shall we call you--now
that your name isn't Joe?'

There was a momentary pause before the girl replied: 'You may call me
Esther.'

'Though that is not your name--either,' commented Hannah,
disappointed--and hurt.

'I am told that Esther was the name my father chose for me,' said the
girl, eager to make amends.

'Shall I suppose, then,' persisted Hannah, 'that others in your family
preferred another name for you, and that their wishes prevailed?'

Esther nodded, absently, diligently preoccupied with her combing.

Hannah waited uneasily in the doorway for a fuller confidence, and
when the girl responded only with a childish little smile of entreaty,
she turned away with an impatient gesture that said, Oh--very well,
then--if it's such a secret. Presently the dishes clattered in the
kitchen as if they too were annoyed. It was clear that Hannah was
offended by her guest's reticence. Esther felt very uncomfortable. She
had a momentary impulse to follow the friendly woman and make a full
disclosure of everything. On second thoughts she decided that too much
was at stake.

 * * * * * *

Having inflicted upon Hannah the thankless job of looking after the
ragged young Idumean--an impetuosity that had already caused him some
appropriate misgivings--Simon hurried away as if late for an important
engagement, though the fact was that he had no plans for the day. He
had never been so restless in his life. As he neared the highway, his
long strides shortened and slowed to an indecisive saunter; and at the
corner, he looked both ways, gnawing his bearded under-lip.

Daily habit suggested that he return to the fleet, but the idea was
rejected. Simon had no relish for reappearing among his men so soon
after the quarrel with Zebedee's boys, an affair which, he now felt,
might easily have been avoided. Besides, Andrew would probably have
sailed by this time. And, as for the Tetrarch's fish, doubtless one of
the crew had been sent to deliver them, seeing the skipper had said he
would not return today.

With no plausible errands in the direction of Tiberias, Simon turned
the other way and walked slowly toward the sleepy little business
zone of Bethsaida, for no reason at all except to keep in motion.
He couldn't stand there on the corner any longer. Salutations were
offered along the road, to which he responded grumpily, in no mood for
neighbourly conversation.

Not for a long time had Simon been in this part of the town, but
nothing had changed. Nothing ever changed in Bethsaida. Old Seth still
sat where Simon had seen him last, on the stone flagging before the
open door of his pottery-shop, hugging his thin knees tight against his
bearded chin.

'Don't see you down this way very often,' shrilled the old man,
unexpectedly stirring from his torpor. It was an invitation to tarry
and talk, but Simon merely grunted and ambled on. At the wide doorway
of the blacksmith's shop he paused only long enough to agree with
sooty-faced, leather-aproned Ben-Abel that it was a hot day. Ben-Abel
clanked down his hammer, advanced to the door, and further deposed that
we needed rain. Simon nodded and moved away.

On the broad steps of the Synagogue lounged a beggar whom he
distastefully recognized by the bulky and filthy bandage on a
perennially sore arm. The loathsome creature straightened, grinned,
and began to unwrap his odorous merchandise. Wrinkling his nose, Simon
signed that he didn't want to see it, and dropped three copper pennies
in the battered cup.

'No use going out there now,' advised the beggar. 'Everybody that's
going today has gone a good two hours ago. Time you get there, it will
be all over.'

'What will be all over?' demanded Simon gruffly.

'The Carpenter! That's where you're going, isn't it?'

'What gave you that foolish idea?'

'Oh--I can tell,' snickered the beggar. 'Some of them try to pretend
they're going somewhere else, but I can spot 'em. Take yourself now.
I know you. You're the Big Fisherman, that doesn't hold with the
Synagogue and curses religion. But what business brings you out here,
on your way up the hill? You're not carrying any fish and there's
none to be had where you're going. You want to have a look at this
Carpenter, same as everybody else. Heh! Heh!'

'If you are so interested in this miracle-working Carpenter,' growled
Simon, 'why don't you show him that stinking arm? Maybe he would heal
it for you. But perhaps you don't want it healed.'

'The fellow is a fraud and a blasphemer!' The beggar rattled his cup
and made a wry face. 'Three pennies! And the Big Fisherman owns three
ships! It isn't enough to buy a measure of leeks!'

Simon muttered a curse and strode angrily away, the beggar calling
after him, 'It won't do you any good to climb that long hill, I tell
you! He'll be gone. You'll be meeting all the other fools on their way
back.'

The Big Fisherman had left the town behind him now and the highway
was stiffly rising. He had been walking rapidly, stomping along still
angry over his encounter with the impudent beggar. The dirty, insolent
beast should be locked up as a public nuisance. However, he was a canny
fellow; you had to say that much for him. He knew where Simon was
bound for, even when Simon hadn't clearly decided on it himself. The
impertinence of the filthy rascal! Simon had a notion to turn about and
retrace his steps, just to show the beggar he had been wrong in his
surmise; but then he might think that Simon had decided to take his
advice. Simon wasn't in the habit of taking advice from beggars--or
anyone else, for that matter.

The afternoon was hot and the Big Fisherman was not accustomed to
climbing steep grades. He sat down in the shade of a wayside tree to
rest and get his breath. He must be growing old. Sooner or later, men
did grow old. Their muscles got flabby, and their lungs and their
hearts--yes, and their heads, too. An old man got more and more testy,
surly, quarrelsome, cantankerous, like an old dog; like old Zebedee,
who was always saying the wrong thing, making himself ridiculous.
Fortunately for Simon, he wasn't that old yet. He didn't pick quarrels.
No man should be blamed for defending his beliefs.

Well--what had happened had happened: it was too late to do anything
about that now. Johnny had walked out in a huff and wasn't likely to
make the first move toward a reconciliation; and, naturally, the wilful
boy wouldn't expect his boss to hunt him up--and coax him to come back.
There'd be no living with the youngster after that: he'd think he was
an admiral or something.

No; the only sure cure for Johnny's folly was the exposure of this
Carpenter as an unscrupulous mountebank...Simon rose, wincing, and
plodded on, every step an effort...The Carpenter must be pretty sure of
himself, expecting people to climb a mountain to find him.

The sun was all but setting when Simon's aching legs brought him over
the shoulder of the plateau. There he paused uncertainly, amazed at the
size of the crowd. Johnny had guessed there might have been as many
as a hundred out here yesterday. There were more than that today. He
sauntered slowly forward toward the closely packed, silent, attentive
multitude, wishing he might make himself invisible. It would be very
annoying if he were recognized and a rumour spread that he had been
seen there. It would be useless to explain his reason for coming. What
if Johnny should see him? Simon walked slowly, softly, and stood at the
rear of the crowd. No one paid the slightest attention to him. He felt
somewhat less uneasy. And presently he left off thinking about himself
at all.

Having come here to criticize and, if possible, to discover some
trickery, the Big Fisherman had approached with a scowl. He was angry
at this Carpenter for creating so much hubbub and for trying to
deceive a lot of weak-minded people; but, in all honesty, the fellow
did not look like an itinerant showman. It wasn't the impudent face
of a juggler, nor was it the brazen voice of a street-hawker with
some nostrum to sell. Johnny had been right about the man's voice.
It was calm, deliberate, conversational, as if addressed to a single
individual, a personal friend. You had to listen closely or you
wouldn't hear, certainly not from where Simon stood; though it was to
be observed that even the people in the forward rows tipped up their
good ear. It was not a harangue. And the man was not exerting himself
to compel attention. It was indeed a voice such as you had never heard
in a public address: it singled you out. You! Yes--Simon--you!

He edged in closer against the backs of his neighbours. A head taller
than most, he had no trouble seeing the Carpenter clearly. The man
was tired. Surely the people should be able to see that. They had
crowded in on him until he had hardly standing-room, nor could he
retreat for the great rock immediately behind him. What the Carpenter
needed, reflected Simon, was somebody to keep the crowd off him. This
heedless pack of curiosity seekers were suffocating him; wearing him
out. One would think he might have found at least one friend to stand
by and protect him. Perhaps he didn't want any close friends. Maybe
you couldn't get acquainted with him, even if you wanted to. But that
conjecture was not in tune with the tone of the voice that appealed to
your spirit of neighbourliness--if not, indeed, to your comradeship.
Johnny was right: there was something very strange about the man. Not
much wonder the boy had stammered--and groped for words.

Simon's animosity had cooled now. He had come hopeful of hearing
something revolutionary, something seditious; something that would get
the Carpenter into trouble. He intended to be on the alert for it; and
if he heard anything incriminating, he would be willing to testify when
the matter came to court, as it surely would. The rabbis would see to
that. They too were eager to show him up as a seditionist. Simon hadn't
given any thought to this phase of the problem, and it now annoyed him
to foresee that he might presently be on the side of the rabbis. No--he
didn't want to have anything to do with it personally. Let the patrols
and the priests attend to it.

The extreme weariness of the Carpenter made a bid for Simon's sympathy.
If it weren't for making a spectacle of himself, he would like to get
down into that front row and use his elbows. He wouldn't be above
cracking a couple of heads together. Simon had often done that in a
general brawl; suddenly grab two handfuls of hair, and whack! It was
always effective. Yes, he would enjoy nothing better than a chance to
teach these yokels better manners.

The soft voice was talking now about the Day of Atonement. Simon
wouldn't be interested; wondered what the Carpenter could find to say
on such a dull subject; surely the multitude wouldn't have climbed
the long hill to listen to that. The farmer in front of him twisted
his head around, looked up fretfully, and lifted a cramped shoulder.
Simon had unwittingly crowded in on the fellow until he couldn't stand
straight. The sour look suggested that some people should mind their
manners and stop pushing--even if they were big as Goliath and knew
they could impose on smaller folks. Simon moved back a step and tramped
on a squirming toe.

He had quite forgotten that tomorrow was the Day of Atonement. And
today, too, if you obeyed the Scriptures. It was a two-day affair. On
the first day you went about paying debts, returning things borrowed,
and making up with people you had injured; though almost nobody ever
did anything about that. On the second day, if you were religious,
you went to the Synagogue with such an offering as you could afford,
ranging in value from a pair of pigeons to a fat steer, and received a
blessing.

Time was when his father had talked of nothing else for a fortnight
preceding the Day of Atonement, but it had been many a year since Simon
had so much as made the motions of honouring it. He always dismissed
the crews on the big day, the real day, the day of the Synagogue
ceremonies. That was common practice. You gave your employees the
day off: they could do what they pleased with it. It never had been
customary to dismiss your help on the first day, the day you were to go
about making things right with people you had defrauded or otherwise
offended. As for himself, he usually spent the Day of Atonement mending
ropes and oiling pulleys. Sometimes respectable people, marching
soberly toward the Synagogue in their Sabbath garb, would regard him
with reproach when they met him on the highway in his workaday clothes.

Now the Carpenter was going to flog the old straw; for surely there was
nothing new to be said about the Day of Atonement. We would be told how
important it was to go to the Synagogue and have our sins forgiven; not
forgetting to take the yearling lamb along.

Simon came to attention. The Carpenter was talking about the first day
of the Atonement event. That was the important day. That was today!
What had you done about it? How about the quarrels you had had--since
last Atonement Day? Were you and old Naaman still refusing to speak
to one another because of that trouble over the line fence? Had you
gone to see the old man today? If not--you would only be wasting
your mutton tomorrow. How about that feud with the Ben-Gileads? You
remember--the chickens that got into your garden and caused such a
rumpus that everybody in the neighbourhood took sides. And cursed one
another and threw stones. Is that old quarrel still smouldering? Did
you do anything about that today? The sun is setting. Are you going to
do anything about that before you sleep tonight? If not--there's no
sense in taking your pigeons to the Synagogue tomorrow; nor will the
lamb do you any good; and you'd better sell the steer for whatever it
will fetch, or slaughter it and eat it. Forgiveness and peace are to be
had--but not bartered for beef.

Simon liked that. It was sensible. Not much use asking for pardon and
peace if an old friend has something against you, especially if the
quarrel was your own fault. The Carpenter was talking about peace of
mind, considered as 'property.' You could toil all summer in the fields
and fill your barn with grain. That was property, too; only the barn
might take fire or the rats destroy the wheat. Peace was the kind of
property that wouldn't burn, and you didn't have to set a watchman over
it to see that it wasn't stolen...Make things right with your offended
brother; then go to the Synagogue with your fat lamb--and be blessed.

There was some restlessness in the multitude now. What the Carpenter
was saying was reasonable enough, thought Simon, but it would just
go in one ear and out the other. You couldn't change human nature
very much...Take Johnny, for instance. He was probably in this crowd
and listening to this good counsel. But--do you suppose the stubborn
youngster would take it to heart--and apologize? Of course he
wouldn't!...It wasn't much wonder that the Carpenter looked lonely. If
he really practised what he taught, people would think him a queer one.
Friendship with the man would be embarrassing.

The Carpenter had stopped speaking now and there was a perceptible stir
in the crowd. It shifted its weight to the other leg, straightened its
back, and stretched its neck for a better view.

A tall, broad-shouldered, bearded man stood forward from the pack and
faced the Carpenter. He had a small boy in his arms. Whatever happened
then, it was done so quickly that Simon could only guess that the child
had received some attention; for the man who carried him turned away,
apparently satisfied, and was making his escape through the craning
multitude. There was much jostling, the crowd swarming about the man,
blocking his way. The little boy was crying shrilly.

Simon impulsively went into action. Reviewing it later on his way home,
he could not decide whether he had elbowed his way savagely into the
mob because of his indignation at the people's rudeness, and a desire
to rush to the man's defence, or to satisfy his own curiosity; but,
whatever inspired him to plunge through the crowd, he made a success
of it, thrusting a shoulder and a knee, tugging at collars, elbowing
ribs, pulling hair, tramping on feet, until he had mowed a swath to the
defenceless man in the centre of the congestion.

'Stand back!' he shouted. 'Make way there!' Planting the heels of his
open hands on the nearest chins, Simon cleared a path. Presently he
and the rescued were out in the open, and almost alone; for the crowd
seemed reluctant to follow. The child's frightened cries had subsided
to convulsive sobs.

'Thank you, friend,' murmured the exhausted man. He lowered the boy to
the ground.

'No, no, grandfather!' pleaded the little fellow. 'It hurts! Lift me
up!'

'What's the matter with him?' asked Simon.

'A crooked foot. Born that way. I heard of this Jesus and hoped he
might heal the child. I carried him--all the way from Sepphoris.'

'That's a long tramp.' Simon peered down at the foot. 'Apparently it
hasn't done the lad any good.'

'Are you a believer in this man?' inquired Justus soberly.

'No, I'm not. We've been hearing many strange stories about him--over
in Tiberias. I came out to see. My name is Simon.'

'Mine is Justus, Barsabas Justus...Now, Jonathan, see if you can't
stand on the lame foot. Grandfather will not let you fall. Try it, my
boy.'

The child clung for a moment, but consented to be put down, whining
with fear. He took an uncertain step.

'It hurts!' he whimpered. Justus gathered him up in his arms.

'Let's have a look at it,' suggested Simon kindly. They inspected the
foot.

'It's hard to tell,' muttered Justus. 'It was bent over, like this.
Seems straighter, don't you think, Simon?'

Simon felt both feet.

'They're about alike, I should say. But why can't he stand on it?'

'Perhaps it's the rough ground,' said Justus, still hopeful. 'He
never stood squarely on that foot before. It's tender as a baby's.
Besides--the lad's frightened.'

The crowd was dispersing now, many pausing to gape at the child. Simon
glanced toward the rock where the Carpenter stood. He was gone.

'Well, I'll be on my way, friend Simon,' Justus was saying, 'I hope we
may meet again.'

'You've a long journey ahead of you, Justus, carrying the lad. Perhaps
I should go with you, part way.'

'You are kind; but there will be moonlight presently. The boy is not
heavy. I shall stop for the night with friends in Cana.'

Simon was reluctant to see Justus leave. He walked beside him to the
southern brow of the hill, where they paused.

'I wish I knew--about the boy's foot. What do you think, Justus? Has it
been healed or hasn't it?'

'I don't know,' mumbled Justus. 'Maybe it's too early to tell. I only
hope so.'

'Yes--so do I, Justus. It would be a great blessing to the child.'

At that, Justus turned to face Simon with a sober stare.

'Do you--honestly--hope that?'

'Why, of course!' declared Simon. 'What a question! Who could wish it
otherwise?'

'Because,' muttered Justus, 'if this village Carpenter can change
the laws of nature, nothing will ever be the same again; not for any
of us! Do you realise that, Simon? Nothing you ever thought--about
anything--will be true; not any more--ever!'

Having no ready rejoinder to this surprising speech, Simon said he
supposed it would affect one's views somewhat. They bade each other
farewell; and Justus, shifting his burden to his other arm, made off
down the road, where he was promptly joined by many people who had
tarried to wait his coming.

He was a peculiar fellow, thought Simon, as he walked away toward the
other rim of the plateau; evidently had given a bit of careful thought
to this business of miracles; not only was inclined to be sceptical
about it, but wasn't sure he wanted to believe it. If it was true,
nothing would ever be the same again; not for anybody! If a man could
go about straightening crooked feet and restoring paralysed arms,
everything would be topsy-turvy.

On his way down the hill the Big Fisherman's long legs and urgent
thoughts overtook and passed everybody. He recognized no one, but as he
moved aside to pass one group that had slowed to discuss whether they
had seen a miracle or not, the voices were abruptly hushed and he heard
his name spoken in a half-whisper. It annoyed him more than a little.
He had as good a right to be out here as anyone. What business was it
of theirs? But--let them gabble! He didn't care. To hell with them!
Simon was angry now--angry at himself; out here on this fool's errand!
Miracles? Rubbish! He had seen quite enough of this Carpenter: it was
high time to put all this nonsense out of his head.

Careless of his footing he stumbled along through the pale moonlight,
finally reaching the valley. His legs were lame and his feet were hot
and sore. He was exhausted in body and mind. It was to be hoped that
Hannah had retired. Simon was in no mood for talking. Hannah, if awake,
would be anxious to know where he had been. She wouldn't ask a direct
question, but she would probably have it out of him somehow.

Bethsaida--at last! He sat down wearily on the stoop and took off
his dusty sandals. Tiptoeing softly through the silent house and out
through the kitchen door, he found a basin by the cistern and washed
his blistered feet. Hannah appeared and handed him a towel, for which
he thanked her briefly. In a tone of finality he bade her good-night
and retraced his steps down the hall to his own room.

'I'll have a surprise for you--at breakfast,' whispered Hannah.

'Honey cakes, I suppose,' muttered Simon apathetically...Anything to
detain him--and make him talk--he thought.

'Want to guess again?' pestered Hannah sweetly.

'No--not tonight, Hannah. I am very tired.' And because he didn't care
to risk any further conversation with her, he closed his door--not
noisily enough to give offence, he hoped, but with sufficient emphasis
to accent his desire to be let alone.

It turned out to be a bad night for Simon. He tried to sleep, but
his busy brain shuttled to and fro from one dilemma to another. Life
had been suddenly stripped of all its brightness. Everything was in
confusion. There was Johnny, to whom he was as devoted as he might have
been to a son; Johnny had found another master, the Carpenter. If it
hadn't been for this Carpenter, everything would have continued to be
in order; the way it ought to be.

The more he thought about it, the more sure he was that his first
impression of the rumours had been correct. The fellow--for all his
gentle voice--was a deceiver; enticing people to follow him about and
listen to his prattle; pretending to heal diseases; advising them to
own nothing--and live like the birds. He deserved to be exposed.

This man Justus: he knew it was a fraud. Oh yes--the poor man had
pretended to be hopeful, but you could see he had lost faith in it.

Simon turned the pillow over, dug his big fist into it, buried his face
in it, and returned to Johnny. The boy never had been worth anything as
a fisherman. He was worse than no help at all, a bad influence on other
lazy men. If Simon hadn't liked him so much, he wouldn't have signed
him on; not even if he had worked for nothing--and brought his own
dinner!

Rolling over on his back, Simon stared wide-eyed into the darkness and
reviewed every unpleasant detail of yesterday's quarrel. The boy had
behaved badly. Doubtless there was some weakness in his character that
might account for it. Surely he hadn't inherited his disposition from
old Zebedee, who couldn't see beyond the end of his leaky nose and
talked so incessantly that he never had time to think. We might as well
discharge the old bore; would have done it long ago if it hadn't been
for the boys.

Of course Johnny hadn't inherited anything from his silly mother.
Mothers didn't bequeath any of their traits to their children:
everybody knew that. But Naomi could have had an unhealthy influence
on him. She was for ever nagging the lad to find a job where he could
earn more pay; lamenting that he hadn't trained to be a scrivener,
which, she thought, would give the family a better social standing.
Zebedee had been a fool to marry Naomi; almost old enough to be her
grandfather. Well--he was getting paid off for wanting a young wife.
Naomi had the old codger saddled and bridled; made him do most of the
housework; beat him with a broom, according to reports. Maybe that was
why Zebedee was such a nuisance on shipboard: had no chance to express
himself at home. No; Johnny hadn't learned any star-gazing from Naomi.
All she thought about was how to make her menfolk earn more money, the
greedy little devil. More than once she had embarrassed the boys by
waylaying Simon, in their presence, with a whimpering plea that they be
paid better wages.

Johnny was a queer one; no doubt about that. He loved to look at the
waves: the bigger they rolled the better he liked them. He saw pictures
in the clouds and a brilliant sunset would set him off into ecstasies.
Maybe that was what had drawn him to this Carpenter.

Sunsets! Wild poppies! Bah! Lilies wear good clothes without having
to spin and weave; better clothes than kings wear. Why should anybody
work? The birds don't work. If you meet a soldier, carry his pack.
Grin--and like it. Johnny would love that kind of talk. Simon wished
he had said to Johnny, 'How about making an arrangement for all of
the people to work part of the time, so that everybody can get better
acquainted with the poppies--and the birds--and the sunsets--and the
dew on the grass?'

But there was that paralysed arm. Johnny wouldn't lie. Why, if that
tale were true, everything in your life goes overboard! If the
Carpenter has enough wisdom--and power--to do a thing like that, then
whatever he says must be true. If he tells you to take counsel of the
poppies and the birds, you'd better do it. Yes--and if he tells you
that the right way to walk is on your hands instead of your feet,
you'll have to do it; for the Carpenter will know best...But it was
all nonsense!...In a few days the legionaries would have the fellow
in jail--and the deluded people could get back to work. Then Johnny
would want his job again. Well--if the boy came--in the right state
of mind--admitting he had been a fool to go out and listen to the
Carpenter in the first place--Simon would be willing to forgive him.



Chapter VI


After a wretched night of tossing about, of laboriously taking the
puzzle to pieces and reassembling it in patterns equally perplexing,
and of fantastic dreams--in one of which Johnny, pretending lameness,
limped up to the Carpenter and had himself healed--Simon roused dully
and prepared for breakfast. His head ached and he was very much out of
sorts.

His place alone was laid at the table, which meant that Andrew had
eaten and gone and that Hannah too had breakfasted. As for the Idumean
ragamuffin, Simon hadn't given him a thought since leaving him
yesterday in Hannah's care. Doubtless the youngster was well on his way
by this time.

Seating himself, Simon folded his huge, hairy arms and rested them
on the table. He knew that Hannah was aware of his arrival in the
little dining-room, for he could hear her gentle voice in the kitchen
monotonously reciting the Shepherd's Psalm, by which measure she
habitually timed the boiling of his eggs precisely to his liking.

Presently he heard the door swing open behind him. That would be Hannah
bringing him the eggs and a platter of wheaten bread and a large mug of
spiced pomegranate juice. He did not look up. By that sign Hannah would
know that he didn't want to talk and would slip quietly out again to
wait until he summoned her. She already knew, of course, that he was
disturbed about something. She was ever quick to perceive his moods;
much too quick, indeed. Their close comradeship made it difficult for
him to withhold confidences from her.

Now that the bread and butter plate had been put down before him, and
the small earthenware bowl containing the eggs, Simon stared hard at
the hand that served him. It was not Hannah's hand; it was younger and
smaller. He slowly turned his head and gazed up into a stranger's face,
his mouth sagging open in bewilderment. Whoever she was, the girl was
beautiful, the most beautiful he had ever seen.

She smiled down into the Big Fisherman's dumbfounded eyes, a
mischievous little smile that she seemed to be controlling with some
difficulty.

'Are you surprised, sir?' she asked, in a throaty tone that he
remembered having heard before.

For a moment Simon continued to stare at her, unsmiling and speechless.
He shook his big, shaggy head. Something queer had happened to the
world. Miracles could be had now for a penny a dozen. Cripples walked.
Water became wine. Dirty and ragged camel-boys were transformed into
comely young women. He lowered his eyes, blinked rapidly, and rubbed
his fingers through his hair. Hannah came in from the kitchen, beaming.

'Joe turned out to be a girl,' she said unnecessarily.

Simon nodded, and gazed at his mother-in-law as if he had never seen
her before.

'Her name is Esther,' explained Hannah, rather wistfully, as if hoping
that Simon might overlook the girl's deception; and, when he had
offered no comment, she said, 'The dress is Abigail's. You don't object
to Esther's wearing it?'

'Sit down--both of you,' commanded Simon huskily, 'and tell me whether
I am losing my mind.' This was said with such sober sincerity that
Hannah laughed until she had to pat the tears from her eyes. Esther
smiled shyly.

'There is a great deal about it, Simon, that Esther hasn't had time
to tell me'--Hannah glanced at her encouragingly, as if to say that
she expected to have the full story out of her by nightfall, at the
latest--'but this much she wants us to know: her home was broken up
by the loss of her parents, and now she is on her way to find her
uncle, who lives somewhere in Galilee; not far from the lake, she
thinks. It would have been unsafe for a young woman to travel alone in
a strange country; so she cut off her hair, put on a boy's clothing,
and--well--here she is.'

'You were lucky not to have got into trouble,' commented Simon,
munching his bread. 'Risky business, I'd say. Anybody would know at a
glance that you're a girl.'

'She fooled you,' said Hannah.

'I didn't look at her closely,' retorted Simon. 'I had other things on
my mind...Haven't you any relatives, down there in Idumea, who might
have objected? Maybe you ran away.'

'Yes, sir,' the girl admitted. 'They would have detained me. I ran
away.'

Simon devoted himself to his breakfast, frowning thoughtfully.

'Her story sounds reasonable enough,' said Hannah.

'So did her other story,' muttered Simon ungraciously. 'You think this
uncle of yours lives in this vicinity, eh? What's his name?'

'Joseph, sir.'

'We have a number of Josephs hereabouts. What is your uncle's
occupation?'

'He is a stone-cutter.'

'Think he will be able to support you--on a stone-cutter's wages? They
are not very well paid.'

'My uncle is not a common labourer,' ventured Esther. 'He is skilled.'

'In that case,' said Simon, 'he is probably in the employ of the
Tetrarch. They are rebuilding the stables at the palace.'

'Stables!' Esther's tone indicated that her Uncle Joseph was not likely
to be at work on a stable, not even the Tetrarch's.

'Stone stables!' explained Simon.' White marble stables! The
Tetrarch's Arabian horses live in mansions, while most of his subjects
live in hovels; and they eat good food while the little children
of Galilee often go to bed hungry...The Tetrarch's stables are
beautiful--ornamented with statues!...But your uncle would not be found
at work on such carvings.'

'No?' Esther's uplifted brows wondered why her uncle wasn't competent
enough to do sculpturing.

'He is a Jew, isn't he?' demanded Simon; and when Esther had nodded
he said gruffly, 'You should know that the Children of Israel are not
permitted to make graven images.'

'I thought that rule applied to the carving of idols,' said Esther.

'Apparently you Idumean Jews do not know the Commandments. High
time you learned them! Hear the law: "Thou shalt not make unto thee
any graven image or any likeness--of anything! Anything--that is in
heaven above--or in the earth beneath--or in the water that is under
the earth!"' Simon pushed back his chair, still glowering over Uncle
Joseph's defection and his attractive niece's ignorance. 'However,' he
added, as he moved toward the door, 'I have an errand at the palace
this morning. I shall make inquiries. Perhaps you would like to go with
me.'

'Let her rest here today, Simon,' urged Hannah. 'Tomorrow will do as
well.'

The Big Fisherman paused in the doorway to remark testily that he
wouldn't be going to the palace tomorrow; that if Esther wanted to find
her uncle she might as well be about it without further delay; and
Esther, thus advised that she had worn out her welcome so far as Simon
was concerned, promptly consented to accompany him.

His frown cleared momentarily, but deepened again as he noted Hannah's
expression of disapproval. For some reason she didn't want the girl
to go. Simon shrugged and petulantly mumbled something that meant he
didn't care a damn whether she ever found her uncle. Embarrassed by his
asperity, Esther was tardy with a reply: and Simon, tugging on his cap,
left the house without a farewell word to either of them. After the
outer door had banged, Hannah remarked gently that Simon seemed to be
upset about something.

'Me--perhaps?' inquired Esther.

'I don't think so,' said Hannah. 'You have done nothing to annoy him,
my dear...I never saw him--quite like this--before. Perhaps it has
something to do with the fleet. I feel sure that Andrew knows, but it's
hard to get anything out of Andrew. I never knew anyone who could keep
his mouth shut as long--and tight--as Andrew. He was unusually quiet
this morning; didn't say where he was going: perhaps to potter about
the old house in Capernaum, for the fleet won't be going out today.
It's a holiday.'

Esther offered no help in Hannah's dilemma. It occurred to her that
Simon's quarrel with Johnny might account for his disaffection, but
that was none of her business and she decided not to mention it. After
a moment's indecision, she rose and announced that she would go--at
once--and try to overtake Simon.

'He has been very kind--and I have offended him,' she said.

'Let me go with you,' said Hannah, 'as far as the highway.'

Even before they reached the gate it was evident that some unusual
excitement had stirred the neighbourhood. People were pouring out
of their doorways and walking rapidly toward the corner where the
quiet street met the broad thoroughfare. Already a sizeable company
had collected there, intent upon a procession approaching from the
direction of Tiberias. They quickened their steps.

Observing David standing austerely apart from the others, but
apparently waiting for whatever had brought them out, Hannah moved
toward him to inquire while Esther sauntered on into the swelling crowd.

'The Tetrarch,' explained David absently, his eyes following Esther
with undisguised interest.

'Of course,' remembered Hannah. 'The days have been so like summer, I
hadn't realized it was time for their voyage.'

'So--that's the girl, eh?' rumbled David. 'A most attractive young
creature! Bring her here, Hannah: I want to meet her.'

'You won't give me away, sir,' pleaded Hannah, and when David had
reassured her, she followed Esther into the craning pack and told
her to come and meet a good friend of Simon's. The girl only half
heard. She was standing on tiptoe, completely fascinated by the slowly
advancing cavalcade. Hannah took her arm.

'I suppose you know what this is about. The Tetrarch and his household
journey to Rome every year at this season, to spend the winter.' And
when Esther had nodded abstractedly, without taking her eyes off the
road, Hannah urged, 'There will be plenty of time to see them. Come,
please, and meet Master David.'

Esther turned reluctantly and followed.

'I told him I would bring you,' Hannah explained. 'David is our
friend--but he is an eminent man, a lawyer, very learned, widely
travelled...' At that, Esther's steps lagged.

'But why should a man of such importance want to meet me?' she
protested. 'And why does he stare so?'

'All old men stare,' said Hannah. 'They can't see very well.'

'They don't have to be old,' retorted Esther, 'to stare.'

Hannah thought this amusing and they were both smiling when Esther was
presented. She curtseyed, but dodged the intrusive eyes. David bowed
gravely, to Hannah's mystification and the girl's anxiety.

'Welcome to beautiful Galilee, my child,' he said in a tone of studied
formality. 'It would be a pleasure to see more of you if our good
Hannah consents. We must not detain you now. You are eager to have a
glimpse of our beloved ruler and his charming family.' There was such
forthright malice in his sneer that Esther darted an inquiry into
his crafty eyes. Was he inviting her to share his contempt for the
Tetrarch? Momentarily confused she fought her way out of the little
dilemma by asking to be excused, and drifted quickly away to merge into
the waiting crowd. David turned to Hannah and lifted an inquisitive
eyebrow.

'She has told me a little more,' obliged Hannah. 'Her mother died
recently, leaving her without a home. She is searching for an uncle, a
sculptor, who, she thinks, lives near the lake.'

'What has become of her father?'

'Dead, I suppose. She didn't say.'

'Is this uncle presumed to be an Idumean?'

'I think so.'

'Well--I don't,' growled David. 'They do not produce sculptors in
Idumea. I'll wager there isn't a chisel to be found in all that
country. Their favourite tool is the dagger...Has she offered any
information about the device you found on her clothing? No? I thought
not. And you didn't inquire: that was right.'

They moved closer to the highway where Esther was sighted in the front
row of the spectators, the tall Sadducee observing that the girl was
utterly absorbed in the approaching cavalcade, the vanguard of which
was now only a few yards distant. Hannah noted that David's interest
was not concentrated on the garish spectacle but devoted entirely to
her mysterious guest.

The procession was led by a company of gaudily uniformed cavalry from
the Roman fort at Capernaum. They rode four abreast, their mounts
jingling with polished trappings. After the military escort had passed
there was an open interval of a full hundred yards before the second
unit came on, led by a distinguished figure on a superb white horse
unmistakably of Arabian origin. The man was richly clad in a black
tunic trimmed in red, red riding breeches, and glossy black boots. He
rode alone. His grey hair was close-cropped and circled with a silver
fillet.

Esther gazed hard at the haughty, dissipated face, at the wide-set,
bulging eyes that negligently drifted over the crowd with a bored
unconcern. Now the roving eyes swept the upturned faces of the area
where Esther stood, transfixed, with a dry throat and pounding heart.
An instant later they returned to her, the finely sculptured brows
lifted a little and a mere wisp of a smile--compounded of surprise,
insolence, admiration, and amusement--twitched the Tetrarch's lips.
Esther's wide eyes gave no response. She was frightened.

There was a considerable interval before the luxurious litters were
carried by. There were three of them, single-file, each borne by eight
stalwart slaves--Greeks, Esther thought. The curtains of the first
of the litters were tightly drawn. It bore Herodias, no doubt. The
second was open, and the lounging occupant, a heavily-jewelled woman of
thirty, smirked impudently through her paint. This, Esther knew, would
be Salome. However notorious, she was indeed a beautiful woman: even
her awareness of her beauty did not mar it. The curtains of the third
litter were closed. Esther hoped she might hear a name whispered by
someone in the crowd, but the occupant remained unidentified.

There came now a score or more of camel-borne men and women, most of
them in their twenties and thirties; household servants, no doubt. The
majority of them were handsome. They were evidently in a carnival mood,
exchanging banter that made them laugh. Whatever might be said of the
Tetrarch, it was plain that his retainers were well cared for and had
no quarrel with their employment.

Trailing the camels, at a considerable distance, came a long pack-train
laden with baggage.

Losing interest now, Esther was about to turn away when there was a
sudden stir among her neighbours. A brilliantly uniformed cavalryman,
leading his horse, had paused beside her. The people, with amazement
and apprehension in their stares, drew hastily aside to make room.

'Your name, please,' demanded the soldier, crisply but respectfully.

Esther's knees trembled. She felt sick and weak. Before she was able to
stammer a reply, a hand was laid gently on her arm.

'I will answer for this young woman,' said David, calmly. 'She is a
member of my family. Who wants to know her name, Centurion?'

'His Highness, sir!' retorted the soldier. 'And who are you?'

'I am David--of the House of Zadok. You may bear my compliments to His
Highness and assure him that this young woman is not in need of his
solicitude.'

The Sadducee had spoken with such haughty self-confidence that the
Roman seemed at a loss for an appropriate response.

'Well!' he barked. 'We will see about that! You will wait here until
I return!' Mounting his horse, he galloped forward. The crowd stood
stunned, silent, gaping at Esther.

'Come,' said David, quietly. 'There is nothing more to see. We will go
home.'

'But--the man!' whispered Esther. 'Are we not to wait?'

'He will not return.' David laid a protecting hand on her shoulder and
gently propelled her through the bewildered pack.

Hannah was pale with fright when they rejoined her. David smiled
reassuringly as he walked between them.

'Have no fear, Hannah,' he said. 'No harm will come of this. Our
Tetrarch is ever interested in a pretty face. He likes to have
good-looking people about him. In this instance he has made a
mistake--and probably knows it by now. It is not to his advantage to
accumulate any more enemies. You need not give it another thought.'

'I do thank you, sir, for coming to my rescue!' Esther's voice was
still shaken.

'It was my pleasure to serve you.' David bowed. 'I bid you both
good-day.' With lengthened steps, he strode majestically away and
proceeded toward his home. The women faced each other with inquiring
eyes, puzzled over Esther's predicament.

'You had better come back with me,' advised Hannah. 'Search for your
uncle another day. The people will recognize you and think it peculiar
to see you alone on the highway after what David said.'

'About my being a member of his household? I wonder why he did say it:
he might have had to prove it.'

'Evidently he had no fear of that, Esther. David is a man of great
influence--greater, perhaps, than I had realized.'

'Even so, he took the risk of offending the ruler. Why should he put
himself in jeopardy--for me? I mean nothing to him.'

Hannah's eyes were averted as she remarked, in a vague undertone, that
it wasn't always easy to understand David. At that, Esther came to a
stop, laid a hand on Hannah's arm, and asked abruptly: 'How much have
you told him--about me?'

'There wasn't much to tell, was there?' countered Hannah, with a
reproachful little smile. 'Look! He is waiting for us, beside our
fence. He has thought of something more he wants to say.'

'He will be wanting to talk to you alone, I think,' said Esther,
turning about. 'I shall go now--and try to overtake Simon.' And before
Hannah had time to protest, she had hurried away.

 * * * * * *

As he set off for Tiberias after breakfast, the Big Fisherman was
confused and unhappy. The mysterious girl's account of herself and her
errand in Galilee--a much amended story--was anything but satisfactory.
It was plain to see that Hannah was worried. He had been a fool to
bring the waif home with him.

There was nothing to do today. The crews were off duty, supposedly at
the Synagogue, but more likely to be found loafing at the wine-shops.
However, there were always some odd jobs to be done on shipboard. He
would net a basket of fish from the live-box at the wharf and deliver
them to the palace. The rest of the empty day he could spend alone,
tinkering at trivial chores on The Abigail.

A quarter-mile down the road a procession was coming, led by a large
contingent of cavalry, the sunshine flashing from their polished spears
and the burnished bosses of the shields.

Still farther away a rising cloud of yellow dust, suspended over the
rear of the parade, meant that a long train of heavily laden pack-asses
was already scraping its hooves, though a laborious three-day journey
lay ahead. Simon knew what it was all about: Antipas was setting
forth, as was his custom, on the annual excursion to Rome. The party
would travel to Caesarea and embark. Galilee would see no more of its
Tetrarch until the flowers bloomed again.

Not that it mattered. He meant nothing to Galilee. The people's welfare
did not concern him. He was more a Roman than a Jew. Nobody would care
if he went to his precious Rome and stayed there. But he would be back,
as usual. Returning, he would hold court for a month at the Galilean
embassy in Jerusalem, at the time of the Passover fast and festivities;
and then--with much pomp--he would come home to Tiberias, accompanied
by a horde of other rich idlers, and sit half-naked in the sun--and
swill his expensive wines--and splash in his celebrated pool--until it
was time to go to Rome again...But Galilee would be no better off under
another ruler: provincial governors were all alike. Indeed, Antipas
might be preferable to a more ambitious ruler: he was much too lazy
to stir up trouble among the people. Perhaps the best ruler you could
have, after all, was a drunken loafer who would let the province govern
itself.

Ordinarily, when Simon sighted the Tetrarch's garish cavalcade making
off toward Caesarea, he indifferently sneered and spat on the ground.
Today--he was cross, anyhow--the pageant made him hot with indignation.
This renegade, Romanized Jew had so little respect for the cherished
traditions of Galilee that he thought nothing of setting out on his
pleasure trip while the people were on their way to the Synagogue! The
insolence of it! Fine way, indeed, to observe the Day of Atonement! It
was little he cared about the feelings of the people! Antipas ought
to be in the Synagogue today, at least going through the motions of
honouring the religion of Israel. He was a disgrace to the province!

Simon wondered how many of the servants, and which ones, would be
left behind, this time. He hoped Leah and Anna would remain at the
palace. He always enjoyed their banter. Yes--and that impudent minx
Claudia, too. It was impossible to have any respect for her: she was an
outrageous flirt; and, besides, she was a Roman; but she was witty. And
the Greek girl, Helen, who never had anything to say, but always smiled
shyly as if she understood. Maybe she did. Sometimes he playfully
winked at her, and she would show the tips of very pretty teeth.
Helen often lingered for a while in Simon's thoughts, after he had
discharged his errands at the service entrance, but he always put her
out of his mind with a 'Pouf!'--for however winsome, she was a heathen.
But--heathen or not--there was something very attractive about this
Helen; her physical frailty, perhaps. Simon often asked himself why he
had so much interest in fragile women when he was so contemptuous of
any physical weakness in men.

Sombrely dressed pedestrians along the road were withdrawing to the
weeds and brambles where they waited, gaping. Some sat down on the
low stone fences. Simon plodded doggedly on, resolved that he would
not leave the highway until it was necessary; nor was he going to do
Antipas the honour of staring at his damned parade. Entering the little
hamlet of Magdala, he turned off into a lane to wait until the thing
was over and the dust had settled. He eased himself down on the dry
grass in the shade of an old olive tree with his back to the highway.
The metallic clatter of the approaching cavalry was insisting that he
should turn and look, but he scowled and closed his eyes.

Everything was going wrong for Simon, lately; everything! It had all
stemmed from this mad Carpenter who had taken it into his head that
the people would be better off if--if--they weren't quite so well off;
that's what it came to: own nothing--and be happy.

And why did anyone in his right senses listen to it? Because they had
heard a rumour that the fellow could cure diseases. Well, supposing he
could: was that what we wanted, a man who went about defying nature?
Before the Carpenter had added this confusion to one's thoughts, life
made some sense. To be sure, it had its difficulties, but you learned
to accept them. Simon glanced back at his own complacency and wished
he might recover it. He had never been one to bother himself about
riddles. Such dizzying old problems as 'What are we here for? What is
the good of it? What is it all about?' had never cost him a moment's
anxiety.

As a lad he had been forced to assume a man's responsibilities,
requiring him to work early and late while other children were at
play, but it had never occurred to him to complain that the world
was mistreating him or that Jehovah had singled him out for target
practice. A lot of people were for ever whimpering that God had 'hidden
His face' from them, when probably nothing much was the matter except
that their cistern was low or a few of their chickens had died of the
pip.

That's what you got for being so tangled up with religion; you were
always in a dither about God. The new calf was a heifer and God was on
your side; your donkey went lame and God was angry at you. Better not
worry so much about God, who was probably not worrying much about you.

Simon's religion--what little there was of it--had been quite simple.
He assumed that there must be a Great Mind in charge of the stars and
the sky and other large undertakings, but he couldn't believe that
God ever stooped to such trivial engagements as wilfully breaking the
windlass-chain at the Abrams' well because the old man had walked a
little too far on the Sabbath. Simon's God was a neat and trustworthy
housekeeper, who put the sun out in the morning and took it in at night
with a regularity you could count on, and He arranged that the seasons
should come along in a dependable procession. Nothing ever got out of
kilter.

Pursuant to this elementary creed, the Big Fisherman had not considered
his childhood drudgeries as a visitation of God's displeasure. Indeed,
he had taken pride in his ability to endure hard knocks and prosper in
the face of obstacles. Never in his life had Simon looked up and cried
'Why?' Not even when poor little Abigail died. It didn't occur to him
that perhaps God was paying him off for his misdeeds. He knew he had
made plenty of mistakes--mostly by letting his temper get the best
of him, to other men's serious discomfort--and he had missed many a
religious fast that he might have observed; but he couldn't think that
God had decided to take an interest in his small indiscretions. And
when the elderly Rabbi Ben-Sholem, visiting them the day Abigail died,
had implied as much, Simon had retorted, bluntly: 'I don't believe that
God would do a mean thing like that!'

Sounds from the highway indicated that the company of cavalry was
passing now; the jingle of expensive harness, the clipped beats of
well-shod hooves, the creak of new leather, the sharp bark of a
military command, the crack of a whip. Simon listened to it, hated it,
and returned to his reveries.

And next morning after the burial, he had gone back to work, quiet and
sad, but spending no time in useless brooding; for life was like that;
people sickened and died--even young people like Abigail; even little
babies who had had no chance to live at all. But why ask questions
about it when you knew that nobody could give you an answer; not even
the Rabbi, who should know if anyone did?

Now everything was in disorder. Now you couldn't count on anything!
Johnny was not a liar; and that business about the little boy's foot,
last night, was very peculiar--to say the least. Of course there was
a possibility that the Carpenter had planned a hoax to deceive the
people; but what could he expect to get out of it? He would be exposed;
probably thrown into prison. There was nothing in it for him. He
charged no money for his supposed healings; apparently had no money and
didn't want any; owned nothing; saw no value in anything--but birds
and flowers. That didn't sound as if he hoped to fill his pockets by
fraudulent practices.

It was quiet on the road now. But, Simon well knew, it was not because
the Tetrarch's pompous parade had passed. No, this was just the gap in
the procession. Presently Antipas himself would ride by on his mincing
stallion. None of this belonged to Galilee: a Roman ruler on an Arabian
horse! Surely poor little Galilee had enough to confuse it utterly
without having the Carpenter on its hands!

Assuming that this Nazarene was entirely honest; that he really could
change water into wine and heal cripples--where did that leave you?
The man must get his power from Heaven. If so--God did trouble Himself
about a silly yokel with a short arm and a small boy with a crooked
foot. If you admitted that He did things like that, maybe it was true
that the Abrams' water-bucket was lost in the bottom of their well
because old Abrams had absent-mindedly walked too far on God's dull and
doleful Sabbath Day.

There was another interval of silence; and then the rhythmic lisp of
sandal-straps. They would be carrying the hussy Herodias. Simon had
seen her once, in the palace garden: she had stared brazenly at him
for a moment before shrugging a shoulder and tossing her head and
turning away. Herodias was a hard one--anybody could see that; the most
important woman in Galilee: the enormity of it! What had poor, pious
little Galilee ever done to deserve such a humiliation? Perhaps God
would wreck the Tetrarch's ship, this time, if He had determined to
take a hand in the cure of afflictions. There was silence again on the
road.

Now we had this mysterious Idumean girl to deal with. It was clear
that Hannah didn't know what to make of her. Suppose she couldn't find
her uncle: then what? Hannah wouldn't want to turn her out. Simon
felt lonely; couldn't expect to be entirely comfortable anywhere; not
on the fleet, where his men--some of them, anyway--would resentfully
remember his quarrel; nor could he feel at ease in his own home with
that deceitful Idumean at the table. What a fool he had been to take
the dirty beggar home with him.

There were more whispers of sandal-straps. That would be Salome's
tall slaves, bearing her costly litter. Simon had often seen Salome
on the road, always with a detachment of mounted guards. She was a
graceful rider; very pretty, too. It was common talk that she had no
more chastity than a cat. It was also rumoured that her mother hated
her because the Tetrarch showed her too much attention. You couldn't
believe everything you heard, but where there was so much smoke there
must be some fire. You couldn't blame the Galileans for believing
any evil tale about this young woman. They hated her: why, indeed,
shouldn't they?

Simon shook away the contemptuous thoughts about Salome; and, for
better comfort, shifted his position against the tree. He absently
plucked a dry seed-pod and slowly tore it apart. How wretchedly he
had handled all that business with Johnny! It was Johnny's fault, of
course, but he needn't have been so rough on the boy. After all, he
had only reported what he imagined he had seen and heard; and they had
all urged him to tell it. He said he had seen it with his own eyes,
in broad daylight; had been standing beside the fellow; and a woman
had seen it and fainted; and the man had made funny little squeaks,
though you couldn't tell whether he was laughing or crying. Simon tried
unsuccessfully, a couple of times, to make a funny little squeak like
that; for this detail had impressed him deeply.

Now there was much clamour on the highway. The air was full of dust and
the raucous shouts of the donkey-boys and the thud of blows on the bony
rumps of over-burdened beasts. The Romans were cruel to animals; seemed
to enjoy beating anything or anybody who couldn't fight back. And they
ruled the world! If God was going to concern Himself with the behaviour
of mankind, here would be a good place to lend a hand. Maybe we could
have another flood; like the one that had drowned everybody but Noah
and his family. Simon grew drowsy waiting for the donkeys to pass and
the dust to clear. Noah had spent forty days in the big boat, along
with all the animals; landed on a muddy mountaintop; nothing living
but a grapevine. And Noah had made some wine--and got drunk. Well, you
couldn't blame him much.

Of course, if Johnny had really seen what he reported, he wouldn't
care whether he had a job or not. He would follow along after this
Carpenter, and be content to live on bark and berries. Well, we would
have to wait--and see. The boys might come creeping back in a day or
two. They had to eat, didn't they? Nobody could nurse a grievance
very long on an empty stomach. Simon came to his feet, stretched his
long arms--and yawned mightily. Yes--they would be coming back. Their
silly mother would see to that. Naomi would raise all hell until they
returned to their jobs.

 * * * * * *

The fleet rocked gently in the cove. A dory was tethered to the prow of
The Abigail. That would be one of the boys doing his trick as watchman.
The rest of them were on holiday, supposedly attending to their
religious duties, though Simon surmised that they would be strolling
idly about on the quiet streets of Capernaum, consorting with drunken
legionaries from the neighbouring fort and guzzling raw new wine. That
was about all a religious holiday came to: the older folk would be
huddled together in the Synagogue, praying for their wayward whelps,
who would show up an hour late in the morning with white tongues and
red eyes. Simon had no patience with drunkenness and was frequently
heard to say that any wine at all was far too much wine. It had been a
long time since he had tasted a fermented drink.

Pausing at his own wharf, he drew in the floating live-box and filled a
basket with perch. The palace would not be needing so many now that the
number of residents had been greatly reduced, but the few who remained
would see to it that they had enough to eat. Lysias, the steward who,
during the family's absence, was always left behind in charge of the
establishment, made no effort to economize and apparently gave but
little attention to such trivial expenditures as the daily order of
fish. Simon rarely saw the shrewd, stocky, swarthy Greek steward
while the Tetrarch was in residence, but was always grimly amused at
the swagger Lysias affected once his master had departed. Evidently
the fellow had a high opinion of his charms. Simon gathered that the
servant-girls were more than a bit afraid of him.

Slipping his hairy arm under the handle of the dripping basket, the
Big Fisherman trudged up the winding driveway to the rear courtyard,
noting that all operations on the new stables had been suspended.
That would be because of the religious holiday. Not that the Day of
Atonement would mean anything to the stone-masons and sculptors, who
were all Greeks, but the hod-carriers and other unskilled workmen
were Galileans. Their religion forbade them to do carving, but it was
quite permissible for them to carry the hewn stones. Simon snorted,
contemptuous of this hypocrisy. Nearing the kitchen entrance he heard
gay, bantering conversation. The servants were celebrating the family's
departure.

At sight of him, the girls poured through the doorway, all talking at
once, and fluttered about him with hilarious greetings. Murza, the
tall, dark Arimathean, who had never before accorded him better regard
than a nod and a sniff, relieved him of the basket and patted him on
his arm. She was pungent with wine. The Roman, Claudia, seemed a little
drunk. Simon tried to be jovial, but the pretence was not easy.

'Doesn't the Big Fisherman feel well today?' Murza contrived a
condescending smile.

'Well enough,' retorted Simon unpleasantly. 'Do I look frail?'

'You look sour,' said Leah--'as if you'd eaten something.'

'His own fish, maybe! No?' Claudia gave a shrill giggle.

Helen stood by, demurely studying Simon's glum indifference to the
raillery which she couldn't understand very well. He gave her a brief
smile.

'The Big Fisherman is in love!' shrieked Murza. 'It has taken his
appetite.' She tossed a teasing glance toward the Greek girl, who
smiled childishly and shook her black curls, though whether she did not
comprehend or, comprehending, was showing a maidenly embarrassment,
Simon could not tell. But it was an attractive little smile--whatever
it meant--and his heavy frown cleared as he gave her a friendly look.

'See what I told you!' taunted Murza. 'That's his ailment: he is
lovesick!'

'I think you're right--for once,' drawled Leah. 'And he's always
pretending to be so tough--and strong--and manly: no use for women;
just a big man's man! And now he cannot eat--for love!'

'He should be put in the dungeon along with the other solemn owl who
does not eat! No?' Claudia laughed gaily at her own drollery.

'She's talking about our new prisoner,' explained Anna, with unexpected
seriousness. 'The legionaries brought him in the day before yesterday.
They said he had been living on grasshoppers and other roasted bugs--in
the desert.'

'Well, you should be able to find some bugs for him,' remarked Simon,
relieved at this turn in the conversation. 'It is late in the season
for the larger bugs,' he added, 'but there should be plenty of the
smaller ones in his bedding.'

'Not at all!' protested Anna. 'His cell is clean and comfortable. His
Highness gave orders about that. He wants the man treated kindly: he
thinks the poor fellow is crazy--but innocent of any crime.'

'What is he charged with?' inquired Simon unconcernedly.

'He is some sort of wandering prophet,' said Anna. 'Would you like to
see him? He is a Galilean. And he is permitted to have visitors, though
no one has come--so far.'

'Perhaps his friends are afraid to venture that close to a prison,'
observed Leah. 'I'm sure I would be.'

Simon had straightened to his full height. He hitched manfully at his
belt and spat vehemently on the ground.

'I don't visit prophets!' he growled. 'I hadn't supposed I looked that
foolish.'

'Well, as for me'--Anna enigmatically arched her eyebrows to signify
that she knew more than she intended to divulge--'I don't believe the
man is crazy. Maybe he really is a prophet!'

'And how do you happen to know so much about this--this bug-eater?'
grinned Simon. 'Are you his keeper?'

'I'm supposed to feed him. He will not eat--but he will talk. He talks
all the time! You should hear him! Brrr! It frightens me! He says that
a Great One has been sent--from Heaven--to free the slaves and throw
the mighty from their high seats!' Anna's frown showed genuine anxiety.
'The whole world is to be shaken!' she added soberly.

'As I live--it is true--what Anna's saying,' confirmed Claudia
excitedly. 'I was with her when he said it! The whole world is to be
shaken!...Until its ears rattle!' she added, for good measure.

'You made that up,' sneered Leah. 'A prophet wouldn't say anything that
funny.'

'But it isn't funny!' declared Claudia, grinning. 'Not if it's true!
And Anna thinks it is; don't you, Anna?' She gave the sober-faced
Jewess a thumb-jab in the ribs.' You do, too!' she went on, when Anna
impatiently flinched and shook her head.' You were scared and you made
off at once to your--what you call--Synagogue! No? Your tiresome old
god is much too hard on you poor Jews. We Romans now--we have many,
many gods. All kinds of gods. One takes one's pick of them, and if he
does not please--pouf!' She airily kissed a rosette of fingertips and
blew a negligent farewell to the incompetent deity.

If the half-drunken Claudia had expected a laugh, she was disappointed.
Anna and Leah gave her a withering look. Murza scowled; she was not
very religious, but she was superstitious and disapproved of sacrilege.
Helen, who didn't know what it was all about and probably wouldn't have
cared if she had known, turned to gaze complacently at the faraway
blue mountains. Simon, who through Claudia's silly speech had remained
staring at Anna's apprehensive face, took a step toward her.

'You say--this fellow said that a Great One is coming?' he demanded, so
sternly that Anna blinked.

'He said the Great One has come,' replied Anna. 'He is here--now!'

'That's what he said!' put in Claudia, helpfully. 'I heard him!'

'Shut up!' rasped Leah, as if to a noisy terrier.

'Where?' demanded Simon, searching Anna's eyes.

'I know what you're thinking,' replied Anna, after some hesitation.
'There has been all this talk--about a Carpenter--who does strange
things.' She had lowered her voice to the tone of a confidence.
'But--apparently the Carpenter is not our man. The Carpenter is said to
heal diseases. This Great One isn't here to heal anybody: he's here to
punish the rulers--and the rich!'

'I wonder if His Highness knows what sort of blabbing our prisoner
can do,' remarked Murza. 'Perhaps he wouldn't have wanted the fellow
handled so gently if he had heard some of his talk.'

'But'--argued Simon, undiverted by Murza's comment--'if this Great One
is down on the rich, maybe he will aid the poor: why don't you ask the
bug-eater about that, Anna?'

'Ask him yourself if you're so interested,' snapped Anna, tiring of the
Big Fisherman's queries.

'Interested!' he retorted angrily. 'And why should I be interested?
Your prophet is a crazy dunce who deserves to be locked up! And as
for the Carpenter, he will soon turn out to be a fraud! They're both
lunatics! Anybody who wants to believe in such nonsense is welcome
to it!' Simon's voice was vibrant with indignation as he went on, 'I
don't believe in any of this rubbish! All religion is rubbish! I don't
believe in any of it!...Not in any of it, I tell you!'

His puzzled audience gaped at him for a long moment as he stood
glowering. At length Leah broke the silence by remarking in a disgusted
drawl: 'Well--who said you did?'

'I'll wager you do,' yelled Claudia, 'or you wouldn't be so hot and
cross about it!'

The taunt rekindled Simon's anger and he muttered that all religious
prattle should be prohibited--by law!--a suggestion that inspired Leah
to remark, with a bitter, private smile, that he would probably go to
hell when he died.

'And he will not like that!' laughed Claudia. 'He detests big crowds: I
heard him say so! No?'

'You're a fool, Claudia,' said Anna, stifling a yawn.

'Perhaps--but I am a happy fool! You Jewish fools are much too sober
and sad. No? What you need, on your holiday, is good cheer! Laughter!
Singing! You should have a cup of wine to warm your cold bellies!'
Claudia was whirling into a reckless dance. 'I myself shall bring you
wine!' she trilled, as she made off, pleased to have had such a happy
thought.

'You needn't bring any to me,' called Leah.

'Nor me,' said Anna.

'Then--I shall bring some to the Big Fisherman!' shouted Claudia, gaily.

'Go--and stop her, Murza,' said Leah. 'She will listen to you. And see
that she doesn't take any more herself. She's had too much already. If
she gets any worse, Lysias will whip her.'

'No fear of that,' sniffed Murza, without moving. 'Lysias has been
warming his cold belly, too.'

'I must go,' mumbled Simon. 'I have work to do. If you'll empty my
basket--'

Claudia was returning now, staggering under the weight of a massive
tray laden with a huge pitcher and wine-cups. She breathlessly put her
burden down on the ledge of the sun-dial and gave the company a bright
smile.

'If Lysias catches you out here with that silver service--' warned Leah.

'Never mind my basket,' muttered Simon, moving off. 'I'll pick it up
later.'

'But--how rude!' protested Claudia. 'Here I have gone to the trouble to
bring you wine--in His Highness's beautiful silver--and you run away!
and the Big Fisherman is said to be so strong and brave! Pouf!' She
faced him with cool contempt. 'Very well--hurry off to your Synagogue,
Big Fisherman! And say your prayers!'

Simon flushed with anger. Claudia, noting that her insult had bitten
him in a sensitive spot, poured a cup full of wine and held it out to
him, with a wheedling smile.

'I shouldn't have teased you: it wasn't fair. We all know you are so
very big--and brave--and manly!'

'I wonder whether he is,' sniffed Leah negligently.

Stung by the indignities, Simon impetuously grabbed the cup and drained
it. The heady wine warmed his throat and spread a pleasant glow through
his vitals. Now that he had vindicated himself, he would furnish
additional proof that he was no pious weakling. He handed back the cup
and Claudia, giggling happily, refilled it.

'Better not lay it on too fast, Big Fellow,' advised Anna, as Simon
tipped back his head.

'That's enough now, Claudia,' growled Murza. 'You don't want to get him
into trouble. You can see he doesn't know how to drink wine. He'll be
tight as a drum presently.'

Simon wiped his bearded lips with the back of his big hand, sighed
contentedly, grinned foolishly, and made a deep bow which amused them
all except Helen, whose tremulous smile showed anxiety.

They were relieved to see him go. With long, springing, military
strides, the Big Fisherman made off toward the driveway--dizzy but
exultant. He had never felt better in his life. He triumphantly swung
his shaggy head from side to side, accenting his confident swagger with
swinging arms and squared shoulders.

What the Italian trollop had said was true: the Jews did take
themselves too seriously; they made the business of living a sad and
sorry undertaking. As for himself, Simon was now resolved to be more
light-hearted in the future. Any Jew so concerned over the world's
wickedness that he would withdraw alone to the desert--and eat
bugs--was entitled to all the pleasure he could find in it: Simon would
have no part in such foolishness. Nor would he give another thought to
the penniless Carpenter.

The well-kept driveway was rougher than usual--doubtless cut up by the
hooves of the Tetrarch's pack-train--and Simon found himself slipping
and stumbling over the loose gravel. He laughed aloud as he tried to
mend his lurching gait and hummed a little tune. He wanted to sing.
It had been a long time since he had loosed his big, deep, roaring
voice. An old chant came back to him out of his early childhood. In the
well-remembered, low-pitched monotone of the Synagogue cantor, he began
the plaintive recitative:


Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving-kindness: according
unto the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions.
Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For
I acknowledge--


He broke off abruptly and muttered a savage imprecation as he realized
the meaning of the ancient Atonement Day hymn that, as a little boy,
he had learned by rote; learned so thoroughly that the words had no
significance at all; just an august procession of sonorous words
intricately woven into a haunting tune. Simon cursed himself bitterly.
Was he never to be delivered, then, from these dour broodings that
flowed in the milk and the blood of the Jew? Was he--by nature--beyond
the reach of any happiness? In a mood to sing and to sing gaily, the
only song he knew was a whimpering cry of guilt!

But now it occurred to Simon that he did know another song, a ribald
sailor's ditty. Sometimes his men guardedly hummed it deep in their
throats, knowing better than to articulate the dirty words; for the
Big Fisherman, eloquently profane as he was, hated obscenities.
Scornful now of all the self-flogging hymns wailed into his childhood
by sanctimonious old Jonas, he sang the sailors' song as loudly as he
could yell, defiantly bellowing the filthiest words as if he wanted God
Himself to hear--and be hurt!

At the end of it, he laughed hysterically, laughed until his eyes were
so wet he couldn't see the road, and found his sleeve caught in the
shrubbery. It sobered him a little. The sound of his idiotic laughter
resounded in his whirling head. He shambled back on to the road,
hoarsely muttering that he was a fool: a damned, drunken fool!

He was nearing the highway now and its quietness warned him to cease
his racket. There was a complete absence of the customary clank and
clatter of vehicular traffic. Any man who pushed a barrow or drove a
donkey-cart today would do so at the expense of his reputation for
decency. The few pedestrians moved slowly, out of respect for the day.
Meeting them, Simon bowed gravely, as if he too were mindful of the
occasion. His recent sensation of reckless joy was completely dimmed
out now.

At the wharf he stumbled awkwardly into a dory, sat down heavily, and
began pulling toward the fleet. The vigorous exercise immediately
fatigued him. His arms were heavy and the oars sliced splashes of water
into the boat. Had he caught one of his boys pounding the lake as if
flailing a threshing-floor, the Big Fisherman would have paid him off
and kicked him out. He was weak with nausea and dripping with sweat
when, at length, he pulled up under the prow of The Abigail.

Thad appeared at the rail and tossed the master a rope, calling out
cheerily that it was a fine day. Apparently the boy had not yet noticed
that anything was wrong with his hero. Simon wished the youngster was
less attentive and thought of contriving an immediate errand for him in
some other part of the ship, but decided to brazen it out the best he
could. With a great effort he heaved himself aboard, produced a weak
imitation of a smile, and said, with laboured precision:

'I'll relieve you now, my boy. Perhaps you would like to go to the
Synagogue.'

'Hell, no!' scoffed Thad, expectant of an approving grin.

But Simon's face was sober and he made no comment. Walking slowly aft,
he sat down on the sun-warmed tiller-seat and dully occupied himself
with a pretence of mending some frayed odds and ends of old ratlines.
After a while Thad strolled back and volunteered to help, but Simon
shook his head absently. When an hour had passed, the loyal young
fellow--showing some concern now--returned with a plate of smoked fish
and a couple of hard biscuits in one hand and a mug of sweet cider in
the other.

The skipper nodded his appreciation, gestured to Thad to put the plate
down on the seat beside him, and reached out a hand for the mug.
He raised it almost to his lips, sniffed it, blinked rapidly a few
times--and shuddered.

'Not feeling very well today, my boy,' mumbled Simon truthfully.

Thad murmured something that sounded like sympathy and moved quietly
away. It was evident that the master did not want to be disturbed.
Doubtless, reflected Simon, as he gazed at the retreating figure, the
boy had guessed why. And that was too bad; but at least Thad would know
now what the trouble was, and not be fretting for fear he had somehow
got himself into the boss's disfavour.

Simon continued thinking about young Thad. He was a good boy, a good
sailor, a good fisherman; but a sore trial to his parents. It was said
that they felt they had lost their son and that it was Simon's fault.
Well--maybe it was true, viewed from the angle of their fanatical
piety. The youngster was completely devoted to him, even to the length
of imitating the master's little tricks of speech and manner until the
crew joked about it.

Bending forward, with his aching head in his hands, Simon retched
disgustedly. Thad's parents were right: he was a bad influence. He
wondered what Thad would say if he called to him and said, 'See here,
boy; why don't you wash your dirty face and comb your hair and go to
the Synagogue today? It would please your mother. Even if it didn't
do you any good, it would be worth something to make your parents
happy...' But no--he couldn't do that: he had already bewildered young
Thad with his extraordinary behaviour. It was enough disillusionment
for one day.

Glancing up dully, he saw Thad vaulting over the starboard rail on to
the deck of The Sara. Something had attracted his attention. He was
leaning far forward now at the taffrail, shading his eyes with both
hands. Presently he turned about with a broad grin and called to Simon
excitedly: 'Damned if they haven't got her moving!'

Simon's curiosity brought him lumbering to his feet. He sluggishly
climbed aboard The Sara and followed Thad's pointing finger. A full
half-mile away, the discarded little fishing-smack that had been
beached, at least three years ago, by poor old Japheth when he was no
longer able to work, was making sail, a few hundred yards off shore.

'Somebody's going to get wet,' rumbled Simon. 'That old bucket must
leak at every seam.' He chuckled disdainfully, remembering the sign
that Japheth had nailed on her prow when abandoning her: 'To Sell or
Rent,' under which announcement some clown had scrawled, 'Or Rot.' He
turned to Thad. 'Who--do you suppose--has been fool enough to float
her?'

'Why--don't you know, sir? I thought you must have heard. The Zebedee
boys have leased her.' Thad's bright enthusiasm over the amazing
project was quickly dimmed by the Big Fisherman's surly scowl.

'They're fools!' growled Simon. 'That old vessel is not seaworthy.
Even if she stays afloat, she's unmanageable. First little puff of
wind--over she goes.'

'Yes, sir,' agreed Thad obediently. 'But Johnny is pretty good with the
sticks. He'll ride out a gale if anyone can!'

'How much of a crew have they--or do you know?' queried Simon. 'I
suppose they have their old man with them.'

'No, sir; they picked up three or four boys in Capernaum, but
they didn't want to take Zebedee away from us.' Thad risked a
tongue-in-cheek grin, but Simon, not being in a jocular mood, only
frowned bitterly and spat in the water as he swung about and returned
to his seat on The Abigail. Thad, bored and unhappy, tagged along.

'You may go now, my boy,' said Simon. 'I'll stand watch.'

'But how about tonight, sir?'

'I expect to remain here.'

'I don't like to leave you alone, sir.'

Simon made no reply to that, and Thad lingered until the master called
out impatiently, 'Go! Do as I tell you! I prefer to be alone!'

Crestfallen, the dismayed youngster slipped quietly away under this
unearned rebuff and dropped into one of the rocking dories. When he
was safely gone, Simon--sick and wretched in body and spirit--plodded
feebly forward to the little cabin, eased himself down on the bare bunk
that nobody before had ever had occasion to use, and reeled dizzily off
into a troubled sleep.



Chapter VII


Once out of Hannah's sight, Esther abruptly slowed her scamper to
match the aimless amble of the dissolving holiday crowd, and sauntered
casually alongside the northbound groups of chattering women.

It was a relief to find herself unnoticed by her fellow pedestrians,
whose low-pitched voices seemed completely preoccupied with a review
of the Tetrarch's cavalcade; or, at least, Esther surmised that this
was the subject under discussion, though it was difficult to make out
exactly what they were saying. The Galilean inflection of Aramaic had a
tendency to slur a half dozen words into one, and when spoken rapidly
took on a singular cadence that tipped every sentence up on end, making
it sound like a query.

Inconspicuous in Abigail's simple country dress, Esther strolled
along at the verge of the highway, busy with her own accumulation of
problems. She had had no intention of trying to overtake Simon and
make-believe she was searching for her fictitious Uncle Joseph. She
was simply killing time until the eminent David, having concluded his
conversation with Hannah, should have returned home. Then she would
feel safe to retrace her steps to Bethsaida.

This deeply learned and widely travelled lawyer's almost reverential
respect for her had been most disturbing. It was obvious that the
shrewd old man had done some expert guessing about her identity. Her
identity!--the thought produced a pensive, momentary smile. David
wondered who she was. Well--who was she? Of late she had been required
to change her identity so often that she was a bit bewildered about it
herself.

It was amazing, reflected Esther, what one could do to one's own mind
if some emergency demanded the practice of a deceit that involved
self-deception also. To masquerade successfully as a boy was a serious
and hazardous business. It wasn't enough to pretend she was a boy. To
cut off her long hair and put on a man's clothing was the smallest
part of it. The deception had required diligent, earnest, relentless
concentration. Even when alone and unobserved, she had hardened her
face, lengthened her stride, swaggered, scowled, growled and spat.
Every little feminine trick of posture or gesture was critically
examined and corrected. She practised walking with her feet wide apart;
was mindful to keep her fingers away from her throat and make them into
fists; kept her elbows away from her ribs, and swung her arms like a
soldier.

John, the baptizer, had discovered her secret; that had been her own
fault. The strong breeze on the hill-top that morning had moulded her
clothing tightly to her form. But for this carelessness of hers, the
hermit might never have suspected. She had been lucky throughout the
whole adventure.

When, however, it had become quite impossible to deceive Hannah, she
had accomplished her reconversion to her own sex with a minimum of
effort. She had dressed in Abigail's clothes from the skin out, tucking
her own underclothing deep in the bottom of the old chest. Now she was
Esther. But, curiously enough, the abandonment of her studied role as a
boy had suddenly affected her memory of all the experiences she had had
while playing that part. No--she hadn't forgotten them completely; but
they were faded, distorted, as if viewed dimly through a clouded glass.
It was a queer sensation, being Esther.

Nor was that all that had happened to her mind now that she had taken
on a new personality. This Esther had to account for herself. It
wasn't sufficient to stop being a camel-boy, fugitive from a caravan.
It was imperative that Esther should contrive--and at very short
notice, too--a new explanation for her presence in Galilee. So she had
invented an uncle for whom she was searching. Aware that she mustn't
take the risk of impromptu replies to the inevitable queries about
this relative, she had elaborately created an Uncle Joseph whom almost
anyone should be able to recognize from her detailed description. Uncle
Joseph became as real to her as rain! He had a short, grizzled beard;
his near-sightedness gave him the appearance of peering impudently into
your face, though he really wasn't that sort of person, at all; rather
shy and reticent, indeed. Uncle Joseph was bald and slightly stooped
and walked with a limp. Yes--he had broken his leg when a boy and it
had lamed him; not badly enough to interfere with his work. He had a
friendly smile, though he never had much to say. All that--and plenty
more--had Esther contrived about Uncle Joseph.

At the outskirts of unkempt little Magdala, she paused to take a
leisurely look at the lake, shimmering in the summerish noon, turned
slowly about, and began to saunter back toward Bethsaida.

No: it hadn't been difficult to become Esther, the orphaned niece of
Joseph, the lame, near-sighted stone-cutter of Idumea; but the trouble
was that in becoming Esther you were losing your hold on Fara. To be
Esther you had to leave Fara far behind you; Fara--and everything that
pertained to Fara!

She half-closed her eyes and a little shudder swept over her. Fara
and all that belonged to the Fara-personality had dimmed to the
vagueness of a dream. Arabia! Her mother! Ione! And Voldi! Voldi!
She tried to recover the sensation of galloping alongside him on a
narrow mountain-trail; tried to feel the tight grip of her knees
hugging Saidi's hot, rippling withers; tried to smile up into Voldi's
laughing eyes; and, failing of it, found herself blinded by sudden
tears; tried--with a whimpering little sob--to feel again the caress of
Ione's gentle fingers combing her hair. But it was all unreal now, as
unreal as if it had happened to someone else and she was reading about
it--or making it up. Esther was very lonely and lost and homesick for
Fara--and frightened! She quickened her steps: she must get back to
Hannah. Hannah was real!

It was the first time in her life that she had given any serious
thought to the permanent effects of self-deception. Apparently you
could deceive other people without suffering much damage, but once
you entered upon a determined effort to lie to yourself--about
yourself--you were in danger of losing your own personality!

A strict adherence to the truth had never seemed important. Lies were
of no significance; unless, of course, they injured someone else.
Certainly Arabia had never been scrupulous about truth-telling; nor
had the Jews distinguished themselves for any sensitiveness on this
subject. How indeed could one do any business at all if required
to stick to the truth? Esther recalled that there was a Jewish
commandment, written in their ancient law, making it a punishable crime
to 'bear false testimony against a neighbour,' but that felony had very
little relation, if any, to the casual untruth invented to implement a
sale or save one from an embarrassing predicament. Today it had begun
to appear that not only was the truth a form of property; but--what
was still more important--it was possible to commit suicide by a
long-continued course of self-deception.

Hannah was overjoyed at Esther's return and deeply touched when the
girl impulsively put her arm around her in a surprising display of
sincere affection.

'I have good news for you, dear,' she exclaimed. 'Master David has
invited us to come and see his garden; this afternoon, if we will.'

To her relief and satisfaction, for Hannah had expected some
reluctance, Esther promptly consented to go: indeed, she seemed pleased
to go. An hour earlier she might have invented excuses.

 * * * * * *

Upon their arrival in David's extensive grounds and after greetings
had been exchanged, Deborah--a tall, gaunt spinster of fifty or
more--abruptly suggested to Hannah that they stroll in the garden and
see what was left of the autumn flowers, though her crisp tone hinted
that it was much too late in the season and that the idea had certainly
not originated with herself.

This laconic invitation, so pointedly addressed to Hannah, confirmed
Esther's surmise that David had planned a private interview. His
uneasy frown indicated that his forthright sister might have displayed
a little more tact in this connivance; and Esther, unwilling to be
thought too dumb to understand his annoyance, flashed a mischievous
smile into his eyes. He accepted it with pursed lips and a shrug--and a
slow, begrudged grin.

'My sister Deborah,' he drawled, 'has always believed--with
Aristotle--that a straight line is the shortest journey between two
points.'

'And the safest,' added Esther, suddenly sober, as if renouncing all
devious ways.

He searched her eyes to make sure of her sincerity, and smiled his
appreciation of her evident decision to disarm. They had been slowly
following the women at a widening distance. Now David cupped his hand
lightly under her elbow and they angled off into the well-kept grove
containing a wide variety of trees, most of which Esther had never
seen. For something to say, she remarked that it seemed strange to find
them growing here.

'My father,' replied David, 'often travelled in foreign lands. He was
greatly interested in trees. Not many of these are native to Galilee.'
He halted to give her time to look about, and asked, in a tone too
craftily casual, 'Do you recognize any of them--as of Idumea?'

She frowned impatiently.

'I know nothing whatsoever about Idumea, sir!' The unbridled asperity
in her low-pitched voice reproached him for trying to trap her. Wasn't
he going to play the game fairly?

Somewhat taken aback by the girl's irritation, David made the
additional mistake of murmuring apologetically that he had been
misinformed.

'I thought you were an Idumean,' he said.

'You did not!' exclaimed Esther hotly. Then, in a husky tone of
entreaty, she asked, 'Why can't we be honest with each other? That's
why you asked me to come here, Master David. You hoped I might confide
in you. You are making it difficult. I am much in need of your
counsel--and your friendship...I am lonely--and lost.'

He pointed to a rustic seat beside the winding path and they sat down.

'Forgive me, my child,' he said softly. 'Now--you tell me as much, or
as little, as you want me to know. I shall respect your confidence.'

'It may shorten my story, sir, if you tell me how much you already know
of it.'

David complied. Some eighteen years ago, while a student in Athens,
chiefly concerned with contemporary political movements, he had been
obliged to inform himself about the unprecedented alliance of the Jews
and Arabians, who hoped their united strength might discourage a Roman
invasion. A royal wedding had been arranged to confirm this pact.
Antipas had married the Arabian Princess--and shamefully mistreated
her. There was a child, a little girl.

'I never learned her name,' David was saying.

'It wouldn't be Esther?' she ventured, without looking up.

'Not likely.' He pretended to be debating the matter. 'Esther is
definitely Jewish, and by the time this baby was born her Arabian
mother would hardly have wanted any more reminders of her unhappy life
in Jewry.'

'That is true, sir. My name is Fara.' After a lengthy pause she added,
'But perhaps you had better continue to call me Esther.'

David nodded his approval of that decision. She was much safer in
Galilee with a Jewish name, he said.

'By the way,' he continued, 'do you want to tell me what brings you
here? Surely you have no thought of restoring relations with your
father.'

She shook her head slowly; and, after some deliberation, said, 'I shall
tell you--everything, Master David.'

And she did. It was a long story, but David did not often break into it
with queries or comments. When she had told him about Ione's insistence
that she learn Greek, his eyes lighted and he interrupted her to say:
'Excellent! It has been a long time since I have conversed in that
beautiful language.'

'It will please me, too,' she replied; and David smiled happily at
her evident relief in abandoning her imperfect Aramaic for the more
musical tongue in which she felt at home. From there on, she proceeded
with more self-confidence, David watching her lips with delight. The
effortless shift to Greek had given the girl a new freedom that added
much to her charm.

As she came to the end of her story, however, the old lawyer made a
long face and shook his head.

'No, no, my child!' he protested. 'What you have set out to do is
utterly impossible! You are very brave, but this is something that no
amount of courage can accomplish!'

'Would you counsel me then to break my vow?' There was disappointment
and reproach in her query.

'I hope you will not ask me to assist in sending you to certain death!'
he muttered.

Esther's eyes widened. David didn't want to be asked to assist. Perhaps
that meant that he could--if he wished.

'Please remember, Master David,' she said entreatingly, 'I have burned
all my bridges to Arabia; I have no home in Jewry; I have sworn to
avenge my mother; and that I intend to do. If I should lose my life,
well, is it not better for me to die with honour than to live to no
purpose at all--unwanted anywhere, an embarrassment to those I love?'

The old man sat for a long time with half-closed eyes, stroking his
grey beard. After a while he surprised her by what seemed an abrupt
change in their conversation.

'My long-time friend and client, Jairus, informs me that the Tetrarch
has recently acquired the entire private library of a bankrupt
Corinthian. The scrolls--Greek classics, for the most part--have been
long neglected, their owner having spent his recent years in a Roman
prison.'

Esther had come to attention and was listening with wide eyes and
parted lips.

'Perhaps the Tetrarch will want someone to mend the broken scrolls,'
she said, 'and put his library in order.'

'Perhaps. We shall see,' said David. 'I shall inquire of Lysias, the
steward.'

Deborah and Hannah were approaching.

'Let me see you again,' said David--'the day after tomorrow.'

 * * * * * *

Simon had not been home for two whole days now and Hannah was beside
herself with anxiety.

At breakfast on the first morning of his absence she had given his
taciturn brother an opportunity to explain; but Andrew, whose only
distinction was a talent for minding his own business, had not gone
farther than to say that Simon had slept on shipboard.

But on the morning of the third day the desperate woman decided to
learn the meaning of it even at the risk of a rebuff. Having brought in
their breakfast, she seated herself opposite Andrew and stared at him
until he reluctantly and briefly lifted his eyes.

'I cannot bear this any longer!' she exclaimed. 'Andrew, you must tell
me now what has happened to him!'

Andrew, finishing his cakes and honey, waited until he had swallowed
the last mouthful. Glancing in her general direction, he made what
was--for him--quite an elaborate reply.

'I wish I knew,' he said.

'Have I offended him, Andrew?'

'You would know if you had.'

'Did Esther have anything to do with it?'

'Better ask her.'

'I did.'

Andrew grinned a little, but exhibited no curiosity about the result of
this inquiry, his silence proclaiming that it was none of his business.
Hannah broke down now and cried. It distressed Andrew. He had never
seen her in tears since the day Abigail died. Pushing back his chair,
he faced her directly with sympathy in his eyes.

'I do not know what troubles him. The fleet goes out every day, same as
always. The fishing has been good, and the weather. There has been no
trouble among the men. My brother attends to his duties. He has little
to say to anyone. His mind is not in his work. He is worried about
something.'

'And you don't know what?' persisted Hannah, when Andrew seemed to have
ended his surprisingly long speech.

'No; he has not said and I have not asked him.'

'Why don't you?'

'It is not my habit to ask people what they are thinking about.'

'But Simon is your brother!'

Simon's brother acknowledged this relationship with a slow nod, and
rose to go. At this, Hannah began weeping again piteously, and Andrew
resumed his seat, fumbling awkwardly with his knitted cap. At length he
spoke.

'As you know, he has been very fond of old Zebedee's boy John, almost
as if the youngster was his son. A few days ago Johnny went out into
the country to hear this Carpenter who, they say, has been performing
miraculous deeds. You have probably heard strange tales about this man.
He is said to have been healing the sick.'

'Pish!' commented Hannah, drying her eyes.

'Of course,' agreed Andrew. 'Well--Johnny came back and said, in the
presence of all of us, that he had seen the Carpenter heal a paralysed
arm.'

'But you didn't believe it, I hope!' protested Hannah.

'Me? No--I did not believe it; but Simon has not been himself since
Johnny told the story.'

'But--surely--Simon wouldn't take any interest in a thing like that!'
Hannah's swollen eyes were wide with astonishment. 'Simon--of all
people!'

'Maybe not,' said Andrew. 'Perhaps he has been fretting about Johnny.
The boy has quit the fleet. He and his brother James have rented an old
boat and are fishing for themselves.'

'And Simon hasn't talked about it?'

'Not to me.'

'But--what are we going to do, Andrew?'

'We? We aren't going to do anything. You may do whatever you like. I
intend to keep out of it. My brother is an adult and of sound mind--far
as I know. If he wants any advice from me, he will ask for it.' Andrew
got up to go, resolutely this time, and pulled on his fisherman's cap.
Hannah pursued him through the open door and out on to the stoop.

'He can't sleep comfortably on that ship,' she said.

'In his present state,' rejoined Andrew, 'he might not sleep
comfortably anywhere.' He started down the path. 'Don't fret about it,'
he flung back. 'Simon is big enough to look out for himself--without
anyone's help.'

Hannah kept tagging along as far as the gate.

'Easy enough to say, "Don't fret." But that's all I have to do now that
Esther's gone. She left yesterday--to work at the palace.'

Andrew absently rattled the gate-latch and frowned.

'I thought she was decent,' he muttered.

'Couldn't she work at the palace and be decent?'

'Perhaps--for the present,' conceded Andrew, 'now that the Tetrarch and
his family are gone. They took most of the servants with them.'

'Maybe that's why Esther got a job,' surmised Hannah. 'I hope she
doesn't fall into trouble there. I didn't know it was such a wicked
place, Andrew. Simon delivers fish at the palace every day. Surely he
wouldn't go there if--'

'My brother is not a rabbi or a policeman. He is a fisherman. Why
should he concern himself with the Tetrarch's behaviour--so long as
he likes fish?' Andrew grinned with knowledge he would not be sharing
with Hannah, and went on, 'If Simon had to look into the private lives
of his customers before selling them fish, he might soon be out of the
fish business.'

'Rather than have anything to do with such nasty people,' snapped
Hannah, 'I should do just that; go out of the fish business!'

Chuckling a little at this impractical remark, Andrew inquired dryly,
as he closed the gate behind him, 'What other business would you go
into?' And without waiting for a reply, he set off at a brisk walk, for
he was starting later than usual and did not want to add the annoyance
of his tardiness to his moody brother's frets.

 * * * * * *

Having given some last-minute instructions to young Samuel, who had
been doing his turn as night watchman, Simon prepared to leave, though
dawn was barely breaking.

'I expect to be gone all day,' he said. 'You will tell Andrew, when
he comes, to take over until I return. Tell him to see to it that the
palace delivery is made this afternoon; half the usual order, now that
the family is gone.'

As he climbed into a dory, he had called back to Samuel, 'And tell
Thad--or somebody--to go to my house and fetch another blanket for my
bunk.'

He had the Cana highway almost to himself for a couple of hours. Nobody
was awake in Bethsaida when he passed through. The long, winding hill
beyond was deserted. At the broad summit he paused to survey the
landscape gaily dressed in autumn colours. In the area of the great
white rock, which dominated the high plateau, the frost-touched grass
had been trampled flat by innumerable feet.

The descending road began to veer toward the west. It had been many
years since Simon had traversed this neighbourhood of small farms and
vineyards. He had never been lured by the soil. It was a common jest
that men who followed the sea were always chattering about the ease
and security of life in the country, declaring that they would some
day rent a couple of acres and raise their own food. And often they
seemed to be quite in earnest about it. This had always amused Simon,
who couldn't imagine a less interesting tool than a hoe. But today the
serenity of the countryside made a bid for his turbulent spirit.

Harvest was past, but the farmers were busy with the less urgent
affairs of autumn, snugging themselves in for the winter, carrying
well-laden baskets of root vegetables from the kitchen-garden to the
sod-roofed cellar, the old women gathering herbs and tying them into
bunches to be hung up and dried.

On the other side of the highway, a little farther on, three half-grown
youngsters were lazily roping wheat-sheaves to the backs of as many
shaggy pack-asses. Simon waved a hand to them, but they only stared
back. That's the way it was in the country. Their ideas came slowly.
Doubtless, if he stood there and waved at these boys for half an hour,
reflected Simon, they might respond to his salute. It was a dull life;
no mistake about that. He wondered how the country people took to the
Carpenter's belief that food was less important than flowers.

At the far corner of the next farm, a larger one, father and the
boys were on their threshing-floor, beating a knee-deep carpet of
barley-sheaves. The mother of the family wielded a much-mended
winnowing-fan. The two girls were sweeping the cleaned grain on to a
hempen mat.

Simon paused here, turned off the highway, and approached them with
a friendly greeting. They were early to work, he said. The women
rested, sitting on the ground, and the boys--one of them as tall as his
father--leaned on the long handles of their flails.

'We wanted to get as much done as we could,' said the grey-thatched
farmer, strolling toward Simon. 'Not much work being done in these
parts just now--everybody scurrying off to listen to this fellow from
Nazareth.'

'Where is he today?' inquired Simon. 'I should like to see him.'

'There's no telling, exactly,' said the farmer. 'He moves around.'

'Yesterday he was about six miles from here,' said the oldest boy,
'over beyond Hammath.'

'Were you there?' asked Simon.

'The family went over in the afternoon,' said the farmer. 'I heard him
talk, about a week ago, over here on the hill. Didn't think much of it.
He was saying we should love our enemies. I don't hold with that kind
of talk. Though I'm not saying he isn't a good speaker. You can hardly
take your eyes off him.'

'Big crowd yesterday?' Simon asked the young man.

'Bigger every day!' bragged the youth, as if he were part of the show.
'Nothing ever like it in this country!'

'Tell me about it, won't you?' said Simon, squatting on his heels.

At this they gathered about him, and sat, apparently eager to talk. It
was plain on their faces that the subject was already well-worn--but
by no means worn out. They all contributed to the conversation. Very
strange doings. Very strange talk. They were agreed on that. As for the
particulars, the testimony failed, in some respects, to add up.

'The trouble is,' explained the woman, 'the crowd is so big you can't
get close enough to see rightly what's going on.'

'I saw him cure an old man who couldn't hear,' put in the youngest boy.
'He danced up and down, he was so glad.'

'But you didn't know whether the old man was deaf or not,' cautioned
his father. 'He might have been putting it on.'

'He claimed he was deaf--and now he could hear,' declared the lad
doggedly.

'All old people have more or less trouble with their hearing,'
commented his mother.

'And sometimes they can hear better than other times,' added his little
sister. 'Father's like that.'

'Never mind,' mumbled her mother.

'But the sick woman on the cot,' said the tall boy. 'She really was
sick. She wasn't putting it on: I'm sure of that!'

'Yes,' confirmed his brother, 'she got up and walked away after Jesus
spoke to her.'

'But not very lively,' demurred their mother. 'She leaned on her son's
arm; pretty heavily too.'

That's the way it would be, thought the older girl--if she hadn't
walked for a long time.

'Where do all these people come from?' Simon wanted to know.
'Everywhere; seems like,' said the farmer. 'A wool-buyer was telling
me, last week, that he saw whole families he knew from as far away as
Ramah and Shunem and Nain. Brought their tents along, and a couple of
milch-goats.'

'Plenty of people from Nazareth too, I suppose,' said Simon, 'if that's
where he lives.'

'No; funny thing about that,' replied the farmer. 'Very few from
Nazareth, they say. If he's such a great one, you'd think--'

'Maybe his own folks got used to seeing him do strange things,'
suggested the youngest boy.

'Home folks never give much heed when their neighbours do something
extra good, like fine wood-carving, or rug-weaving, or beautiful
singing,' said the mother. 'They think that because they know a person
and grew up with him, he can't be very much.'

'That's a fact,' declared her husband. 'Lots of country folks sneer at
what's going on around them and praise what's going on in Bethsaida;
and the people in Bethsaida laugh at their own town, and envy the
people in Cana, and--'

Simon laughed a little and said he supposed the people in Cana thought
everything was livelier in Jericho--and that Jericho wanted to see the
more interesting sights in Jerusalem.

'I'd like to see Jerusalem myself,' murmured the tall boy.

'Now you take our girl Judith here.' Her mother laid a brown hand on
her elder daughter's arm.

Judith, apparently suspecting what was coming, lowered her eyes, smiled
shyly, and shook her head a little, as her mother went on:

'She plays the harp better than you'll hear it anywhere! And a poor old
harp it is, too, that's been in my family for three generations. But do
you suppose the people around here think anything of her playing? Not
at all; you have to go to the city to hear a harp played.'

'I should like to hear you play, Judith,' said Simon, at which the
girl's cheeks flushed prettily.

'No time for that today,' said her father, turning about toward the
threshing-floor.

'I told her to take her old harp along--and play for the people when
the Carpenter isn't speaking,' said her mother.

Simon politely approved of this as a good idea. They reluctantly ambled
back to their tasks. He waved a farewell and resumed his westward
journey. So--the people of Nazareth hadn't been very much impressed.
This wasn't a good sign. There must be something shaky about this
business, reflected Simon. The family he had just met was not of one
mind in respect to these strange occurrences. It was still a matter
of debate with them whether the Carpenter of Nazareth was a healer or
a fraud. Maybe some light would be shed on that problem today. Simon
hoped so. He hoped the Nazarene would turn out to be merely a glib
talker with a talent for making sick people feel encouraged; for surely
the world was a much more reliable institution if nobody was playing
tricks with it, not even for the benefit of a few. And--as he trudged
along, moodily intent on the road--Simon wondered whether the girl
Judith, with the big, solemn eyes and the wistful smile, was really a
harpist. Not very likely, he thought.

 * * * * * *

For the past hour the highway had been receiving more and more traffic
from the tributary roads and lanes, all manner of traffic: high-wheeled
market-wagons filled with people of all ages, elderly couples in
donkey-carts, here and there a garden-barrow occupied by a frail and
feeble old woman or a pale and wizened lad, pushed by an earnest-faced
young farmer. Occasionally a cot joined the procession bearing the
prone figure of an emaciated, half-grown girl or a crippled old man
with pain in his eyes. Clumps of people on foot, by the dozen, by the
score, overtook and passed the sick ones. Every path, every open gate,
every cross-road fed them into the highway.

Simon had found himself wishing that the Carpenter would be soon
exposed as an ordinary man who had nothing much to work with but a
winning voice, a confident manner, and the ability to make people
listen to him--and trust him. But as he surveyed these sorry crews of
hopeful burden-bearers, he began to wish, with all his heart, that
something could be done for them. If the Carpenter was a fraud, this
conglomeration of misery was indeed a tragic spectacle. Maybe the
Carpenter didn't realize what a responsibility he had taken on. If he
didn't, it was high time he found out!

It was a pitiful sight. Why couldn't this Nazarene have stayed in his
carpenter-shop? What was the good of stirring up hope that couldn't
have any outcome but a cruel disappointment? These wretched ones had
learned to bear their galling loads. Most of them had done all their
crying and calluses had formed to ease the pain of their yokes. Now
they would lay their burdens down at this Carpenter's feet! What
monstrous cruelty if--after so great hope--they must strap on their
heavy packs again and plod wearily home, broken-hearted!

A half-mile east of Hammath the highway divided, the road to the right
proceeding to the village and on toward Cana, the left fork bearing
southward through the Province of Samaria and onward to Jerusalem. In
the triangle at the parting of the ways a small encampment was breaking
up. The service tents were already down and being loaded on to the
pack-train. The master tent, a beautiful thing of white and blue,
was in process of dismantling. Half a dozen fine horses, expensively
caparisoned, were restlessly waiting their riders, who now emerged from
the sagging tent.

Full of curiosity, Simon slowed his pace and candidly stared. The
leader of the party was a mere youngster, certainly not more than
eighteen, and his companions were youthful, too, though not so young as
he. They were extravagantly dressed. Simon drew off to the side of the
highway, sat on the ledge of the stone-walled well, and studied this
pageantry at his leisure. That it was a company of nobles he had no
doubt. Presently, to his surprise, he saw the young master of the group
point toward him: and give an order to a servant, who made off at once
to the well. Simon's brow furrowed as he saw the man coming. He was
quite sure he was within his rights to rest at the well.

'Do you live in this neighbourhood, sir?'

The servant, a tall bearded man of Simon's age, had bowed respectfully,
before asking the question in a quality of Aramaic that was spoken in
Judaea.

Simon shook his head and replied, 'Bethsaida.'

'But that is not far away,' continued the servant. 'Would you perhaps
know anything of this Carpenter who has stirred up so much excitement?'
His arm swept the congested highway.

'Not much,' said Simon. 'I saw and heard him a few days ago, and I am
hoping to see him again today.'

'Would you object to having a word with my master, sir?'

'Who is your master?'

'Joseph--the Prince of Arimathaea,' said the servant proudly.

Simon rose now and followed. It was little enough he knew about the
small but fertile Principality of Arimathaea, up north beyond Ramah,
which had been ceded to the fabulous Hyrcanus and his descendants many
generations ago, in consideration of some long-forgotten favour to
northern Jews. Whenever Arimathaea was mentioned the word suggested
wealth. 'Rich as an Arimathaean' was a trite phrase which the Galileans
used without examining it more closely than many another simile, such
as 'Tricky as an Arab' or 'Wise as a serpent.'

The beautiful tent was down now and the swarming servants were folding
it with care. The vanguard of the pack-train was moving off down the
Jerusalem road. The young Prince was standing by his white horse in
evidently playful conversation with his friends. He was a handsome
youth with a ready smile and a gracious manner. Simon was favourably
impressed and doffed his forebodings about the interview.

Courteously requesting him to wait a moment, the servant approached his
master and made a brief report in low tones, after which he beckoned to
Simon, who advanced rather diffidently and removed his cap.

'My friend,' said the Prince, looking up at the big Galilean who
towered over the lot of them, 'we are curious about this great
multitude and the man they are said to be seeking. They tell us that
he speaks to great crowds and heals many sick ones. Noting your
extraordinary height, it occurred to us that you might have been able
to hear and see what has been going on.'

'I would that I had more to tell you, sire,' said Simon. 'I heard the
man speak. He has a strange voice. The people hang on his words as a
sailor overboard in a storm clings to a rope.'

'Good!' approved the Prince to his companions. 'The fellow has some
imagination.' Turning to Simon, he said, 'Perhaps you are a sailor
yourself.'

'A fisherman, sire.' Simon smiled briefly, and went on, 'No matter what
he is saying, the people hardly breathe for fear of missing something;
yet they are simple words.'

'Such as what?' asked the Prince, interested now.

'He wants people to be kind to one another: that's about all,' said
Simon. 'Everyone is to be kind and helpful, all the way up and down
from the pauper to the...' He hesitated, and the Prince, frowning a
little, crisply provided the obvious word. It was evident that he was
annoyed. His voice was challenging as he went on.

'So--this fellow is trying to make the people restless! Everybody is to
be generous, eh? The pauper is as good as the Prince, eh? Is that it?'

'Not if I heard rightly, sire.' There was a stiffening dignity in
Simon's voice now. His frown deepened. He didn't like the arrogant
tone of this spoiled youngster. After all, he hadn't arranged this
interview; nor was he on trial. 'Quite the contrary,' he continued
courageously; 'the Carpenter wants peace among the people. If a man
is badly used by his oppressors, let him find his happiness inside
himself.'

'A good thought.' There was a touch of mockery in the Prince's voice,
though he had mended his temper somewhat. 'And how does a man go about
it--to find happiness inside himself?'

'He leaves off fretting about the things he does not have,' explained
Simon, 'and he gives less heed to caring for the few things he does
have. Thus he is freed from worry lest thieves should make off with his
small possessions.'

'And after the fellow says that,' sneered the Prince, 'he probably
passes his cap through the crowd, inviting them to pay him for advising
them to have nothing.' They all chuckled a little at this cynical
gibe--all but Simon who remarked quietly, 'He has no cap, sire.' There
was a moment of silent embarrassment here, Simon having inadvertently
flavoured the talk with a bit of disconcerting sincerity.

'How about these strange deeds?' demanded the Prince.

'One hears differing opinions, sire,' said Simon. 'Some claim to have
seen miracles performed, others try to explain them, still others doubt
them.'

'Our servant says you are now on your way to hear him again. Does that
mean that you yourself believe him honest? Surely you would not make
the journey if you considered him an out-and-out mountebank!'

'I am hoping to find out, sire,' murmured Simon. Observing that the
Prince's friends were growing restless, he added respectfully, 'May I
go now?'

The Prince shrugged and made a negligent gesture as if to say it was of
no concern to him whether the big, burly fisherman ambled off at once
or remained here for the rest of his life. He laid a jewelled hand on
the pommel of his saddle.

'Just a moment!' he said. 'One thing more! We are advised that a
homemade, self-appointed prophet has recently been gathered in by our
good friend, your Tetrarch, for predicting the advent of an avenger who
is to upset thrones, strip the wealthy, free the slaves, and put all
the riffraff on horseback. Do the people hereabouts think that this
wonder-worker is out on such an errand?'

'It is quite impossible, sire!' declared Simon. 'Surely no one who had
heard him speak could have that opinion. So far as I have learned, the
Carpenter has no quarrel with the rich; though I think he pities them.'

'Pities them!' exclaimed the Prince, while the others grinned
incredulously. 'What impertinence! Who does this wandering beggar think
he is--to be pitying his betters?'

Simon ventured no immediate comment on this smug remark, but his lip
curled to match a frown that had a good deal of scorn in it. The Prince
was quick to notice this irritation, and prodded it.

'If you do not object to the question, my massive friend, how do you
yourself feel toward the rich? You are obviously not a man of property.
Tell me truly: do you too pity the rich?' The raw taunt was stirring
Simon to anger.

'No, sire,' he answered, staring fearlessly into the young man's eyes,
'I do not pity the rich. I envy them, as they expect me to do. I peer
through their high fences and lament that I do not have their great
possessions, for this pleases them.' Simon's voice rose and rasped as
he continued recklessly, 'Whenever we poor cease envying the rich, we
will be punished for robbing them of their highest satisfaction!'

The Prince had mounted now. He rose in his stirrups to shout: 'That is
the most impudent thing that was ever said in our presence!'

'Well,' growled Simon sullenly, 'you asked for it.'

'In our country, fisherman, you would get thirty-nine lashes for that!'

'Aye, sire--and in my country too,' retorted Simon; and because he now
had nothing to lose by further frankness he added, 'The great ones are
the same everywhere, I am told. They face the truth with a bull-whip.'

'Be off with you!' shouted the Prince, raising his riding-crop.

'No--no--Joseph!' muttered the mounted friend at his side.

The Prince lashed his horse. They bounded away. Flushed with rage,
Simon watched them galloping down the road. Never had he felt such
bitter contempt for a fellow creature. Quite a courageous youngster,
this Prince, when surrounded by his fine friends and a score of armed
guards. Had he been alone, he would have been meek as a lamb. Simon
wished he could have had the Prince all to himself for a few minutes.
No, he would not have hurt the boy badly. He would have been satisfied
to take the insolent brat by his beautifully curled hair--and fold him
over the ledge of the old well--and spank him: a thorough spanking; a
spanking he should have had earlier. Simon was sore. It had never been
his habit to covet other men's property or privileges. He had nothing
against the rich. Until now. Now he despised them! All of them! They
were all alike! To hell with them! All of them!

He had trudged toward the Hammath highway now and had joined the
pilgrimage. Looking across the field to the Jerusalem road, he observed
that the Prince's party had halted for a parley. After a rather lengthy
colloquy, they wheeled about, galloped back to the junction, and came
bearing down upon the crowded highway. The people screamed and rushed
to the sides of the road for safety as the gay riders ploughed a wide
furrow through them. Everybody was for saving his own skin in this
frantic rout. Old people were trampled. Carts were upset. Children were
crying. Shouting with laughter, the princely cavalcade swept on.

Simon stood still and watched the shameless scene, his every muscle
taut with impotent rage, his big fists clenched.

'Men on horses!' he shouted aloud. 'Brave men on horses!'

 * * * * * *

The somnolent village of Hammath had swollen to a city of five thousand
and was adding to its population. Every grass-grown path was as a
sleepy stream that had suddenly become a river at flood.

The huge crowd had congregated on a harvested field some distance north
of the main highway. On the outskirts of the densely packed multitude,
vendors pursued a busy trade with huge baskets of smoked fish, wheaten
and barley rolls, sweetmeats and sun-cured figs swarming with flies,
for which they found ready customers among the stragglers who were too
far away from the point of interest to see what was happening.

The Prince and his party had ridden up close against the rear of the
throng, apparently impatient at having been detained from proceeding
through to the front where the Carpenter stood. The whole affair was a
lark, a country circus, and the management should have been pleased to
announce, 'We are honoured to have with us today His Highness Joseph,
the Prince of Arimathaea. Clear the way for His Highness and his
retinue! We welcome you, sire!'

The Carpenter continued speaking in a quiet voice, inaudible at this
distance. Laughing loudly, the princely party urged their horses
forward until the foam from their champed bits flecked the shoulders of
men and women who were cupping their ears to listen.

'Make way!' shouted the mounted guards. 'Way--for the Prince of
Arimathaea.'

The people turned their heads and scowled angrily, but did not budge.

'Hi! You! Fisherman!' yelled one of the Prince's friends, as Simon
moved into the pack. 'Clear a road for the Prince!' But Simon did not
reply, nor did he turn about to face them. Finding it impossible to
hear anything, he circled the throng and discovered a spot nearer to
the front where an amazingly large colony of cots and carts bearing the
sick awaited the end of the Carpenter's address. A shaggy young farmer,
standing by a bed on which an emaciated old woman lay shielding her
sunken eyes against the sun with a bony hand, glanced up at Simon and
grinned a rustic greeting.

'Your mother, maybe?' whispered Simon.

'Grandmother,' replied the young farmer.

'Came to be healed?'

'She hopes so.'

'Do you think there's anything in it?'

'There'd better be!' muttered the farmer truculently, pointing to the
quarter-acre of sick and crippled. 'If he's a fake, he'll be stoned!'

'Has he been speaking long?' asked Simon.

'Long enough. Granny is tired waiting.'

'What's her trouble?'

The farmer guarded his voice as he replied, 'Old age.'

'Think the Carpenter can cure old age?'

'No; but Granny does. She's a little weak in the head.'

Simon edged gradually into the rim of the crowd. By listening intently
he could hear snatches of the Carpenter's talk. But it was difficult.
What with the confusion of the people pushing in from the rear, the
moans of the sick, and the crying of the babies, Simon had to be
content with broken phrases. But it was a haunting voice, a magic voice
that stilled and soothed and comforted you even though you couldn't
hear all the words.

From what Simon could make of it, a man could have a secret life with
God. Once he determined to find happiness within himself, he reached
out for a strength greater than his own...Like a babe, creeping, he
longed to rise and walk...lifts his small hand... is gripped by a
stronger hand...having learned to walk with God...he wants to talk with
God. Too often, men try to talk with God...only in the temple...Talk
with Him alone...His voice more clear when you are alone with Him...a
private league with God...a secret life with God...an understanding
with Him...you and God alone...in your closet...closed door...He will
listen...He will bless you.

Some short-statured person was digging a sharp elbow into Simon's back.
He turned about and looked down into the contorted face of a woman with
a little girl of five in her arms. The child was blind.

'Please!' entreated the woman in a whisper. 'Help me to get closer! You
are big and strong. You must help me!'

'Stay where you are--behind me,' said Simon. 'When the time comes, I'll
do what I can.'

The Carpenter was talking about doing things for others. That, too,
was better done in secret...When you make gifts...no trumpet...A
secret...so secret your own left hand does not know. Only God will
see...only God will know...but He will bless you.

There was a general stirring in the great congregation when the
Carpenter had stopped speaking. Now, according to his custom, he would
receive the sick ones. The crowd pushed and shoved for a better view.
The people were not very considerate of one another. The weak and timid
were elbowed out of the way. Even among the very ill ones on their
beds, the rivalry of the bearers was rude beyond belief. Simon wished
he was up there in front to improve their manners. He expected and
hoped that Jesus would rebuke the importunate. But, after all, they
couldn't be much blamed, he thought. People couldn't be polite when it
was a matter of life or death for a loved one.

The little woman behind him was growing desperate. She was crying
hysterically. Bidding her follow him closely, Simon began edging his
way forward, but it was quite impossible for her to make any use of his
intervention. Other people crowded in behind the big man and pushed her
roughly aside. There seemed only one practical thing to do now. Simon
would have to carry the child himself. Turning, he held out his long
arms, and the woman, tearfully grateful, relinquished her burden.

It was an arduous journey forward through the solid mass of seemingly
immovable people. Simon entreated, pushed, scolded, shouldered, begged,
shouted, as he pressed on.

'This child is blind!' he announced, in his big, booming voice. 'Let me
through! Please let me pass!'

And now--now--at last--he stood face to face with the strange man
of Nazareth, close enough to have touched him. By comparison with
Simon's height and bulk, the Carpenter was of slight physique; but
something about him, emanating from him, made him a commanding figure.
Simon sensed it, and felt inferior. In point of years, the man was
his junior. Every other way considered, Simon felt himself a mere
awkward, overgrown boy. He looked down into a pair of tranquil, steady,
earnestly inquiring eyes. They held him fast; they brightened with a
friendly smile, almost as if two long-time companions were meeting
after a separation. The Carpenter's face was pale. Tiny beads of
perspiration showed on his forehead, for he was tired and the day was
hot.

It was such a gentle gesture that it seemed like a caress when Jesus
laid his hand lightly upon the little girl's eyes. The child had been
frightened by all the confusion and had been holding herself rigidly,
hugging her arms to her breast as if to ward off a blow. At the touch
of Jesus' hand, she relaxed and drew a babyish sigh of relief and
reassurance. Simon's eyes suddenly swam blindingly as Jesus' forearm
rested on his own. It was a strange sensation. He knew now what it was
that had suddenly soothed the child and freed her of her fears.

Jesus was praying. He had closed his eyes and was praying in a soft
voice barely above a whisper. His prayer was made to his 'Father,' and
it was as if they two were closeted together in some secret place. In
a tone of intimate companionship and confidence he asked his Father to
give this little one her sight, for it was through no fault of hers
that she could not see. Then--and there was a note of sadness and
longing in his voice--he prayed that all men everywhere, groping in the
shadows, might be led into the bright sunshine of his Father's love.
Then--and this stirred Simon deeply--he prayed for all those who, now
and in days to come, would lead the blind into the presence of the
Eternal Light.

Simon thought he couldn't bear it--when it happened. He gasped
involuntarily and stifled a sob. The incredible thing had happened!
It was impossible--but it had actually happened! Jesus had gently
moved his hand from the child's eyes and his finger-tips touched the
damp little ringlets on her forehead. Now she had slowly raised her
wondering eyes to his--and smiled. Then, turning her head, she gazed
bewilderedly into Simon's face; and, seeing his tears, her own little
eyes overflowed.

Jesus was turning aside now to speak to a man on crutches. Simon
tarried, trying hard to speak some word of gratitude. Glancing toward
him, Jesus nodded his head and smiled companionably, as if to say he
understood.

A low murmur of astonishment swept the crowd as Simon turned about
with the child hugged tightly in his arms. She was crying softly now,
for she was frightened. Her mother, shrilly calling, 'She is my child!
Oh, let me go to my baby!' finally made herself heard, and was pulled,
pushed, half-carried by the excited people around her. She was much too
overwrought to thank Simon--even with a smile--when he gently placed
the little girl in her hungry arms.

Suffocated by his emotion and still half-blinded by his tears, Simon
was forcing his way through the throng--now standing transfixed,
breathless, and on tiptoe--in anticipation of another marvel, when a
hand clutched his sleeve. He looked down into the sober, white face of
the Prince of Arimathaea.

'Tell me, Fisherman,' demanded the Prince huskily, 'was that child
really blind?'

'Aye, sire,' said Simon; 'and now she can see!'

The Prince held tightly to the Big Fisherman's sleeve, his wide,
baffled eyes questing more information, but Simon tugged away and
pressed on toward the outer air. Circling the preoccupied multitude, he
made for the rear--and the highway. He walked as a man in a dream, as
one suddenly transported into a different world. A strange assurance
of security possessed him--and a curious sense of peace that was quite
beyond his understanding.



Chapter VIII


Lysias was flattered and bewildered to have so gracious a note from
that haughty old Sadducee, David Ben-Zadok.

A bright young Jewess, well versed in the classics, orphaned and in
need of employment (wrote David), might be available to make repairs on
the dilapidated Corinthian library recently acquired by His Highness
the Tetrarch. The letter was written in Greek, which still further
pleased the steward with implications that he was a person of some
culture.

But just why this crusty old lawyer, who had made no bones about
his contempt for the Tetrarch, should show any concern about the
reconditioning of these valuable but unsightly scrolls was not clear.
One thing was sure: the old man hadn't bothered to offer the suggestion
from any love of Antipas. Maybe he wanted an excuse to have a peek at
that library himself: he was known to be something of an antiquarian.
Lysias gently fingered the old scar on his ear, an involuntary aid
to deep meditation, and reflected that there must be more in this
situation than met the eye.

But--no matter what might be the crafty Sadducee's motive in proposing
a remedy for these dreadful scrolls, it would be a great relief to
the steward if, upon his master's return from Rome in the spring, he
might be shown this costly collection in better dress; for it had been
Lysias himself who had recommended and negotiated the purchase, and the
Tetrarch had been noisily dissatisfied.

Much embarrassed by the shabbiness of the old books, Lysias had tried
to impress His Highness with the importance of their great antiquity.
Digging deep into the most ill-conditioned of the wicker hampers,
he had brought up a mildewed scroll and held it toward Antipas, who
wrinkled his nose and put his hands behind him.

'This scroll, sire,' Lysias had announced in a tone of reverence,
'was written by Aristotle. It is titled, The Directions and Names of
the Winds. I do not mean, sire,' continued Lysias, 'that this is a
scrivener's reproduction of the book. This is the original--done by the
hand of the master himself!'

'Well--whoever did it,' grumbled Antipas, 'it stinks. And I don't want
it put anywhere where I have to look at it.' Then, noting the steward's
chagrin, the Tetrarch had added, 'I dare say some people would be proud
to have a mummified cat of Aristotle's--with a gold collar set with
emeralds--perched on the mantel.' Turning away, he had sauntered toward
the balcony window, where, pausing, he had laughed aloud.

'And after they'd had Aristotle's cat on their mantel for a score of
years,' he called back to Lysias, 'some learned expert, with great
knowledge of dead cats, would come along and say, "Hell!--that cat
never belonged to Aristotle! Much more recent! Besides--Aristotle hated
cats! But he never so much as kicked this cat: it isn't half a century
old!"'

'What is my lord's pleasure, then, in regard to the scrolls?' Lysias
had inquired, meekly.

'Box them up again. Keep them in a dry place where they will suffer no
further decay. Some day, perhaps, we will have them repaired.'

Lysias was going to feel more comfortable when the Corinthian
scrolls were restored. Quite apart from his responsibility for their
extravagant purchase, he had a sentimental interest in them, for he
too was a Corinthian; and the same Roman raid that had despoiled his
home and enslaved him at twenty had likewise brought disaster to their
neighbours of the House of Timotheus, a wealthy shipowner and generous
patron of the arts.

The Timotheus family and their rich possessions had been ruthlessly
disposed of. Timotheus himself had been put to death; his uncommonly
beautiful wife had committed suicide; their two elder sons, Leander and
Philetus, school-mates of Lysias, had been taken to serve as scribes
and accountants in the office of the Prefect of Achaea. A younger son,
Demetrius, who had already won some local renown as an athlete, was
carried off to Rome in chains, too savagely rebellious to be of much
use to anybody looking for a servant. Lysias had often wondered what
became of the handsome, reckless Demetrius--beaten to death, perhaps,
for insubordination.

The Roman looters hadn't known what to do with the books. There was an
enormous quantity of these scrolls, and not a man among the invaders
knew enough about literature to identify the extremely valuable
writings and give them special care. The books had been stored in a
damp cellar and much of the writing on the rotted papyrus was presently
indecipherable; but, regardless of their physical condition, many of
these scrolls were historic treasures. Think of it!--to own a book
written by Aristotle! In his own handwriting!

Of course, reflected Lysias, you couldn't expect Antipas to have much
reverence for the old scrolls. Antipas was a Roman, and Rome had no
veneration for the past. Let the dreamy Greeks attend to the rotted
scrolls--and the tombs and the epitaphs.

The old Sadducee's note was answered forthwith, Lysias obsequiously
thanking the eminent David Ben-Zadok for the great kindness tendered
his master, the Tetrarch. And he would be glad to see the young person
about the scrolls at her early convenience.

Lysias had spoken the truth. He was glad at the prospect of having
some more attractive company than the kitchen afforded. The Tetrarch's
palace could be a very lonely institution when the family was abroad.
By experience the steward had learned that the less he mingled with
the servants the better account he could give of his stewardship upon
his lord's return. On occasions he had shown himself friendly with
the gardeners and vine-growers, only to encourage their laziness and
disobedience. As for the kitchen crew, he had discovered that any
playfulness in that department would certainly be paid off in impudence
and disrespect.

The new employee would rate a higher classification on account of her
learning. The servants themselves would understand that without being
told. Lysias would invite this girl to have her meals with him. He
hoped she would be comely, though that was almost too much to expect
if she was--as old David said--well versed in the classics. Pretty
girls didn't know anything. Indeed, the really beautiful ones were
forthright fools--all but Salome, of course. Salome was a deep one.
Lysias worshipped her. And he was afraid of her, too. Once, when Salome
had had too much wine, she had encouraged Lysias to kiss her. She had
managed the kiss and it had left Lysias dizzy and weak in the knees.
Then she had savagely slapped him on the mouth with the back of her
hand. The huge jewels in her rings had bloodied his lips. Salome had
laughed. She enjoyed rough play. She wasn't punishing him for offending
her. Quite to the contrary, she had been delighted with his caresses.
But the sight of pain and the scent of warm blood gave her a queer
little thrill, she said, while repairing his wounds.

Sometimes the Tetrarch too was confined to his rooms for a few days
while the cuts on his face were healing. On these occasions, only old
Glaucus, the ex-butler, was permitted to minister to His Highness.
Lysias surmised that Glaucus was the repository for many a secret, his
suspicion being based mostly on the animal-like ferocity of Herodias'
hatred for him.

Also, there was a tell-tale quality to the old fellow's impudence.
Herodias couldn't be blamed for despising him. Shamelessly trading on
the stranglehold he apparently had on the Tetrarch, Glaucus could be
found on warm autumn afternoons in the most comfortable chair in the
sunniest corner of the patio, with a tankard of wine at his elbow and
a fat, elderly terrier asleep at his feet--as if he had every right
to all the luxuries that the establishment afforded. This type of
impertinence could mean only one thing, according to Lysias: Glaucus
knew something about Antipas and Herodias guessed what it was. And it
was making a haggard, sharp-tongued, short-tempered old shrew of her.
Sometimes a whole week would pass in which Herodias and Salome frankly
avoided one another, though they both took pains to be polite in the
presence of the servants.

Some day, reflected Lysias, as he sanded and sealed his letter to
David, some day there was going to be quite a lot of trouble here at
the palace; plenty--and plenty more--of trouble...There would be an
eruption of the Volcano Herodias--and somebody would get hurt.

 * * * * * *

Life at the palace was not only endurable; it was pleasant and
interesting. Esther's relationships were quickly and comfortably
defined. Lysias was disappointed but not disgruntled when she declined
his special hospitality by explaining that it would make her unhappy
if favours were extended to her which made the others envious. She
also imputed to him a wealth of high-minded gallantry that was quite
too nebulous for assessment; but made such a favourable impression
that Lysias spent a whole afternoon conducting her through the palace;
ordered the furniture unshrouded in the great banquet-hall, and invited
her to sit in His Highness's tall, gold-plated, throne-like chair,
where she projected a brief, unspoken query to the King of Arabia: 'Do
you still think it's impossible?'

Her appearance in the kitchen, ready to make friends but not over-eager
to the point of condescension, instantly gave her top rating. Claudia
stated the situation neatly when she declared, after Esther--having
carried her own dishes--had returned to her work, 'I like her! If she
was only a little better than me, we would probably hate each other,
no?...But she is so very much better than me that we don't need to hate
each other.'

Work on the Corinthian scrolls was fascinating; like a game to play.
Esther was not wholly unfamiliar with the task. The old books that
Zendi had picked up in Petra had required repairs. You carefully
unrolled the long, narrow strip of papyrus, detached it--whole or
in pieces--from the spools, weighted it down on the library floor;
and, wherever it was broken, pasted it together. If the text had been
damaged badly, you copied as much as was legible and inserted the
patch, with an editor's note explaining how much was missing. Then you
sanded and scraped the mouldy old spools down to the bare wood and
redecorated them in black and gold.

Sometimes the girls came up from the kitchen and helped hold the strips
of papyrus in place for splicing. Lysias frequently drifted in to
express approval.

On the morning of Esther's third day at the palace, Claudia remarked,
after the breakfast things had been cleared away, that she must now go
out to the prison--'and feed my wild man.'

'Wild man!' echoed Esther. 'Are you not afraid?'

'No--no--no! That was what you call a joke! He is not wild: he just
looks wild--with shaggy hair--and bony, like a starved cat. It is
because he does not eat. And he is very sad. I fear he will die if he
does not eat.'

'Why is he in prison?' inquired Esther.

'Ah--I don't know.' Claudia waved a shapely armed salute to her own
disinterest in the matter. 'He talked too much, maybe--no?'

'He is a prophet,' assisted Anna, without conviction. 'He says the
world is coming to an end.'

'And for that he is locked up?' asked Esther, apparently unconcerned.

'There was more to it than that,' explained Murza. 'He sees the rulers
overthrown, and the Empire smashed, and the poor made rich, and--'

'That's right,' put in Claudia. 'That's what he says. I've heard him!
All hell's going to break loose!...How would you like to take him his
breakfast, Esther? Then you could hear him for yourself. And perhaps
he will eat for you: you are so very pretty. You need not be afraid of
him. He will not harm you.'

Esther pretended reluctance; hoped he was well guarded.

'Guarded?' laughed Claudia. 'A tough legionary from the fort was in
charge of him for a day, but he hasn't been seen since. He is on a big
spree, no doubt. But the prisoner is well locked in and there are no
others in the jail to help him escape.'

Assuming Esther's consent to feed the prisoner, Claudia had been
preparing the breakfast-tray, making an appetizing arrangement of a
plate of red apples, a dish of berries, a smoked perch and several
small barley-loaves.

'Here you are,' she said; 'and here is the key to the prison door. You
open the front door and there is a small corridor. The cell is the
first one. There is a barred window in the door. You pass the food
through the bars. Don't try to make love to him. It's no good. He is
cold.'

'For once,' called Murza, from the pantry, 'Claudia speaks the truth.
It's no use to make love to the man. It has been tried--by experts.'

A startling 'Hush!' broke in on Murza's malicious comment, presumably
offered by the sober Jewess, Anna.

'Her Highness,' explained Claudia naively, 'is restless and lonely. You
never saw her--no?...' And when Esther had shaken her head, Claudia
sighed and remarked in a confidential half-whisper, 'Her Highness does
not like to grow old. But--who does?...Come--let me show you the way.'

Beyond the circular carriage-court a narrow path led through a
trellised arbour toward a sturdy stone structure some two hundred yards
distant. Having given minute directions, Claudia returned to the house
and Esther proceeded on her errand. Her heart quickened as she reached
the low wall that bounded the prison area. She wondered whether John,
the baptizer, would recognize her. There were broad stone seats inset
in the wall, doubtless for the convenience of sentries. Depositing the
tray on one of the seats nearest the entrance, Esther inserted the huge
key and was trying unsuccessfully to turn it in the obstinate lock when
a resonant voice deep in the prison startled her with the suggestion,
'The key is crooked. Bear down on it--and a little to the left.'

There was no mistaking the identity of that haunting voice. Labouring
with the protesting key, she pressed her weight hard against the
massive door and it grudgingly opened.

'Over here, my daughter,' called the voice. 'You are a stranger here.'

They faced each other at the barred window and peered through the gloom.

'It's you!' she murmured.

'Did we not have an appointment to meet here?'

'It's so dark! You will be ill.'

'I do miss the sunshine; that is true.'

'You wouldn't try to run away if I gave you your breakfast outside?'

'That might get you into trouble.'

'But--there's no one at the palace who would know or care--provided
you made no attempt to escape.' Recovering the rusty key from the main
door, Esther opened the cell and John came out shielding his cavernous
eyes against the unaccustomed light. They sat down on the broad stone
seat, with the tray between them.

'Tell me: where have you been?' He ate hungrily, but listened intently
while she talked of her experiences as a solitary tramp on the way to
Tiberias.

'And have you seen him of whom I told you?' asked John eagerly.

'No--but I have heard of him. On the day I arrived, a young fisherman
who befriended me told his shipmates about a strange Carpenter who
healed diseases and spoke words of comfort to the people, gently
admonishing them to bear their own and others' burdens.'

'Gently?'

'I could hardly believe, sir, that this Carpenter was the one of whom
you spoke.' She hesitated here, wishing she had not ventured so far
upon a subject of which she knew so little. 'Perhaps I misunderstood
the young fisherman--or perhaps I had misunderstood you. I had thought
of him as a frowning man with a stern voice--on an errand of vengeance.
Apparently that is a mistake.'

'Tell me more, daughter!' he demanded earnestly.

With that, Esther reviewed all she could remember of the report made by
the dreamy young fisherman. The Carpenter had spoken with a strangely
soothing voice, seemingly not of this world. No--there had been no talk
of divine retribution, no threats of doom; indeed, no scolding at all.
The man had urged the people to find their happiness within themselves,
seeing they would never be free of their enslavement to foreign masters.

'And--no talk at all about the mighty being thrown from their seats and
the exaltation of the poor?'

Esther shook her head. After an uncertain moment, she said, 'I shall go
and hear him for myself. I am sure I can get permission to leave the
palace for a day or two. If the man is not too far away--'

'Do that!' entreated John. 'Find out what manner of man he is!
Then--come and tell me.' He rose and marched toward his cell. Esther
turned the big key.

'It hurts me to do this,' she said softly.

 * * * * * *

It was noon when she reached the cottage in Bethsaida. With a cry of
happy surprise, Hannah ran to meet her at the gate. They embraced each
other with tenderness.

'You came home!' exulted Hannah. 'I hope they have not mistreated you.'

No--they had not mistreated her, and she would be going back to her
work tomorrow. But now--she was on a special errand, the strangest of
errands.

Over the dining-table--for Hannah had insisted on preparing their
luncheon--Esther told the story of the hermit and his gruesome
predictions; and his queries about the Carpenter.

'Everyone seems to be excited about him,' said Hannah. 'Last night the
neighbours were saying that he was leaving Hammath and heading this
way.'

'I wonder you have not gone out to hear him yourself, Hannah,' said
Esther.

Hannah seemed confused and did not at once reply.

'I might have done so, dear. But--poor Simon, who for some reason has
been living on his ship, might decide to come home, and I ought to
be here. I should be much embarrassed--and I fear he would be very
angry--if he came home to find that I had been away listening to this
Carpenter. That would be very offensive to Simon.'

'Let us go, this afternoon, Hannah,' begged Esther. 'We would be home
before supper-time. Simon is not likely to return earlier.'

Presently they were in the stream of pedestrian traffic on the highway.
All Bethsaida, it seemed, was on the march southward, the elderly
stabbing their canes into the dusty road as they pegged along intent
upon their singular quest, the younger men and women overtaking and
passing them, sick people of all ages borne on litters, sightless
people being led much too fast for their comfort.

There was very little talk. Apparently no words were suitable to this
strange pilgrimage. The urge to hurry was contagious. Esther and Hannah
immediately caught it and lengthened their steps. Hurry! The voiceless
crowd said, 'Hurry! Something is happening that never happened before
and may never happen again! We must not miss this marvel! Hurry!'
Esther and Hannah glanced into the strained faces of their companions,
and then briefly sought each other's sober eyes, but exchanged no
comments. Their throats were dry with the fast travel, the choking
dust, the half-frightened anticipation...Yes, this Carpenter--whether
he was John's Carpenter or not--was bringing sleepy little Galilee
to life, was turning stolid little Galilee upside down, was driving
conservative little Galilee stark, staring mad!

No need to inquire the way! A mile south of Bethsaida a freshly made
highway veered off sharply toward the west: traversed a grove, riddled
a vineyard, toppled a stone fence, muddied a creek, and fanned out into
an open pasture swarming with thousands of people.

On a knoll, surrounded by a pressing throng, stood the man they had
come to see. Apparently he had but now arrived, for he was not yet
speaking. He was waiting, with folded hands and a faraway look in his
eyes as if in calm contemplation of the distant mountains. There was
no expression of surprise or gratification that so great a multitude
had done him honour. Now he had slowly raised his arms. The people grew
more quiet. He lowered his arms in a gesture that requested them to
sit down. Nobody was willing to obey, for all wanted to see everything
that might happen. The gesture was calmly repeated, and the people
closest to the front sat down. Then, like a long, incoming tidal wave,
the impulse swept the throng until all were seated. The Carpenter held
up an outspread hand and there was silence: a peculiar silence--not a
mere cessation of sound and confusion, but a vital, unifying silence
that made them kin. They did not shrink from the accidental touch of a
neighbour's elbow, though the stranger had a ragged sleeve.

When he began to speak, Esther instantly remembered what young Johnny
had said about this man's voice. He spoke effortlessly, but his words
were clearly reaching to the outskirts of the great assembly. The
uncanny thing about the voice was that it was speaking to you! To you
alone! There was a tone of quiet entreaty in it. Come--let us talk it
over together.

He was speaking about the blessed life, the abundant life. How few had
been far-visioned enough to claim that perfect life for their own.
A life freed of fear and foreboding, freed of frets and suspicions,
freed of the sweating greed for perishable things. This was the life he
offered, a life of enduring peace in the midst of the world's clamours
and confusions.

Esther's senses yielded to it. All about her she could see and feel the
people relax as she herself was relaxing in obedience to the voice. She
had never realized before that her body and mind had been continually
at tension. The Carpenter's peace invited her spirit. He was defining
the terms of it now. Anyone could possess it. It was to be had for
the asking, but one must seek for it, work for it; and, if need be,
suffer for it. It was like living water, drawn from an ever-flowing
spring. Once you had tasted of it, you would never again be satisfied
without it. It might cost you many a sacrifice, but it would be worth
the price. Esther, dreamily content, felt that any price would be
reasonable. Maybe she wouldn't feel this way tomorrow, but it seemed
reasonable and attainable now--here--today--under the spell of the
quiet voice.

Personal peace, the Carpenter was saying, gave you personal power;
not the kind of power that the world had to offer you for ambitious
striving, but the peace-power of the Father's Kingdom. If you must let
everything go to possess that peace-power, let it go! If an oppressor
demands your cloak, give up your cloak--and your coat, too--but keep
your peace-power. Do not insist upon justice. There had been much too
much talk about justice--and not nearly enough talk about mercy.

'There is an old saying among us,' he went on, 'an old saying that our
fathers believed and practised, "An eye for an eye and a tooth for a
tooth."'

Esther had been brought up on that ancient adage. Whatever injury
another person does to you, simple justice recommended that you repay
it in kind. But the Carpenter was saying that we must have done with
that eye-for-an-eye justice, in the interest of mercy and peace.
Henceforth--if you would possess the blessed life--you must do unto
others what you would like to have them do unto you...The blessed
life sounded very attractive. Esther was sensing an intimation of its
richness. She sighed, shut her eyes, and involuntarily shook her head;
for she had an eye-for-an-eye vow to keep.

The Carpenter had ended his speaking now and to the obvious surprise
of the multitude he sat down on the grassy knoll, apparently very
weary. The crowd shifted its posture a little, straightened its spine,
re-crossed its cramped legs, but remained seated. Loosed from her deep
reverie, Esther turned inquiring eyes toward Hannah, who drew a long
breath and shook her head mystifiedly.

'Esther,' she whispered, 'there never was anyone like him--never--never
before--in this world!'

'There's something very queer about all this,' agreed Esther.

Hannah leaned closer and was about to speak again when a stir and a
murmur in the densely packed crowd fronting the knoll brought them to
attention.

Two little children, a boy of six and a girl of four, had run up the
slope and seated themselves on either side of the fatigued Carpenter.
Perhaps he had beckoned to them. But no--for now their mothers were
hurrying forward to bring them back. The Carpenter was shaking his
head, apparently insisting that they let the children remain with him.
Now--more little children broke loose from their parents and were
clambering up the bank. They huddled closely about him. More and more
children joined the party. They sat, blinking and squinting against the
sun, seemingly intent upon what he was saying to them, in a low tone
inaudible to the multitude.

From throughout the great assembly, scores of children, tugged by some
irresistible invitation, were rushing forward, stumbling heedlessly
over grown-up legs. One thin-faced little fellow was limping painfully
up the slope, leaning his frail body against a crutch. The Carpenter,
still speaking, had motioned to the children to open a path for the
lame boy, and they edged over to give him room.

Now a spontaneous 'Oh!' went up from the people close enough to see
clearly what was happening. Without pausing in his gentle speech,
the Carpenter had reached out his hand for the crutch. The boy had
hesitated before giving it up, but now he stood on both feet, erect and
confident. He took a few experimental steps. Now, apparently overcome
by the amazing thing that had happened to him, he knelt down, pressed
his face hard against the Carpenter's knee--and cried. And so did
everybody else.

Raising his voice to embrace the multitude, the Carpenter spoke.

'These children come to me because, in their innocence, they are of the
Father's Kingdom. And if you, too, would be of this Kingdom, you must
enter it with the heart of a child.'

He then spoke a final word to the little ones alone and they arose. The
boy who had been lame marched down the slope with shining eyes. Intent
upon his reunion with his parents, who had pressed forward to meet him,
the crowd was not immediately aware of the Carpenter's retreat down
the further side of the knoll. The people remained seated, thinking
that after he had rested--for he seemed quite spent with weariness--he
might return and speak again. But it soon became evident that the day's
events had ended. In groups the multitude began to scramble to their
feet. There was almost no conversation as the great crowd broke up and
strolled back toward the highway.

Hannah and Esther, hand in hand, too deeply moved for any talk, trudged
slowly along with the other awe-stricken people who had had a brief,
mystifying glimpse into a Kingdom that was not of this world.

Far in advance of them, striding along alone, with slumped shoulders
and bent head, was Simon. The women's eyes met diffidently. Nothing was
said for a long moment. Then Hannah murmured, 'Now we know what ails
him. It's this Jesus.'

 * * * * * *

A tall, handsome, self-assured young sentry was pacing back and forth
in front of the prison when Esther appeared, next morning, with John's
breakfast-tray. He came briskly to attention as she approached, saluted
gracefully, and made a candid inventory of her, with brightly approving
eyes.

'You have come to feed the prisoner?' he inquired unnecessarily; and
when Esther had smiled an affirmative, he said, 'He is a lucky fellow!'

'Yes--isn't he?' drawled Esther. 'Such a nice place to spend these
lovely autumn days.'

'Let me have that tray,' said the sentry, putting down his spear and
extending his hands. 'I'll give it to him, and while he is eating we
will get acquainted. My name is Algerius.'

'And my name is Esther.' She smiled, but held on to the tray. 'And the
girl in the kitchen is Claudia, who is expecting you to come and have
some honey-cakes while I am giving your prisoner his breakfast.'

'I don't know about that,' demurred the sentry, taking off his
heavy helmet and mopping his brow. 'If my captain were to hear
of this, I should be flogged. And besides'--his voice lowered
conspiratorially--'I'd much rather stay here and talk to you.'

'What about?' she demanded, suddenly cool.

Algerius readjusted his helmet and picked up his spear.

'You say her name is Claudia?'

'Yes--and you needn't hurry back. I will be responsible for the
prisoner.'

'Here's the key then.'

'I have one.'

'Sure you aren't afraid?'

'Of the prisoner?--No. He is very respectful.' She put the tray down on
the low stone wall.

'And I am not,' grumbled the lingering sentry, with a grin.

'You could be, I think, with a little more practice--and quite a lot of
encouragement.'

Having given the sentry time to be well on his way, she unlocked the
door and invited John to come out into the sunshine.

'I heard you tell the sentry your name, daughter,' he said, when they
had sat down together.

'Would you like to call me Esther?' She handed him a goblet of grape
juice which he sniffed suspiciously. 'It is not fermented,' she said.
'I pressed it only a few moments ago. Claudia told me you could not
drink wine.'

'I am a Nazarite.' He touched the goblet with his lips experimentally,
and then sipped it with relish.

'Do the people of Nazareth not drink wine?'

'I do not mean that I am of Nazareth. I am a Nazarite, which is a
different thing altogether. There is a monastic order among us known as
the Nazarites. We take a vow--or, as in my own case--it is taken for us
at our birth; chastity, poverty, abstinence.'

Esther offered him the plate of wheaten bread. He put down the goblet
and broke one of the small loaves.

'That doesn't seem quite fair,' she ventured, 'to have had a vow
imposed upon you when you were only a baby.'

'I have never regretted it,' he said. 'It is a good life.' A shy,
unexpected smile lighted his deep eyes. 'And my name is John. It would
please me--after so long away from home--to hear my name spoken by a
friend.'

'What a lonely life you have had!'

'Not until recently. I have spent many years in solitude, pursuant
to my Nazarite vow, but they have been spent under the open sky. I
was not unhappy. But here, in this dark prison, I am quite desolate,
friendless, and strangely beset with forebodings.' He turned toward her
with anxious eyes. 'Tell me, daughter, were you able to see him?'

She had hoped to postpone this query as long as possible, for she was
unprepared to answer it to his satisfaction.

'Yes, sir--John--I saw and heard him yesterday afternoon. There was
the greatest multitude I ever saw. It was gathered about him--in a
pasture--not far from Bethsaida. I was amazed to see so many people. I
wondered where they all came from. It was--'

He had been studying her face intently, as she laboriously put off the
moment when she must tell him what manner of man she had seen. Divining
her difficulty, he broke in upon her hesitations.

'You were disappointed, I think.'

'No, John, I was not disappointed--but I fear you will be. This man
does not seem to be an avenger. He speaks with the most gentle,
entreating voice I ever heard, a soothing voice that makes you
very quiet--inside. He did not talk about punishment in store for
wrongdoers, nor did he say that the mighty would be dragged from their
seats, nor that those of low degree would be exalted. But he spoke
peace and courage to the poor.' She paused for a long moment. 'And
little children crowded about him--and he cured a small boy of his
lameness.'

John stared hard at his prison-door and drew a deep sigh.

'Begin at the beginning then,' he said huskily, 'and tell me
everything.'

So Esther began at the beginning and told him everything she could
remember: the wistful, hurrying pilgrimage on the road, the great mass
of people in the field, the placid voice that reached far and tugged
hard at your heart, the silent, breathless, yearning multitude, the
uncanny sensation of peace.

'I can feel a little of it yet,' she went on dreamily. 'While he spoke,
this peculiar peace laid hold on me so fully that I wished--above all
things--that I might possess it for ever.'

Conscious that John had come out of his moody reverie, and was giving
her better attention, she turned toward him and continued: 'I think
that everyone in the vast crowd must have felt the same way. I found
myself hoping that he would not stop, for while he spoke my heart grew
still--and all the things that ever have troubled me were forgotten.'

'Apparently his voice wrought a strange spell on the minds of the
people,' reflected John.

'Surely you should know, sir,' said Esther, 'for when I heard you
speaking to a great crowd, everyone listened intently to your voice.'

'But the Carpenter's voice was different, I think.'

She nodded her head slowly, and groped for the words that might define
that difference without hurting him.

'Your voice, John, stunned me--and made me afraid of the days to come.
The Carpenter's voice stilled me--and gave me peace. I feel a little of
it today; but it is leaving me, and I am sorry.' Again she was silent
for a time. 'Do you know,' she went on, suddenly confident, 'I believe
that if one could really get acquainted with him--and stay close beside
him for a while--one might learn how to keep it!'

'Perhaps there are others who feel the same way,' wondered John. 'Does
he seem to have any close friends about him?'

She didn't know. She had not noticed any special companions with him,
on the knoll or when he departed.

'Why don't you try to meet him face to face, Esther?' suggested John.
'If he is so gentle and kindly disposed, might he not be willing to
talk with you?'

'But what right would I have to intrude upon him when he is already so
overburdened and weary?'

'Go to him with a message--from me!' said John, in a tone of command.
'Say to him that I have given my life to foretell the coming of the
Anointed One. Ask him if he knows anything about that--about me! Ask
him--in my name--if he is the One I foretold or are we to expect
another!'

Esther gave a little smile and shook her head.

'I'm afraid I couldn't do that, John. He isn't the sort of person one
walks up to with such a query.'

'But I must know! Can't you see that my very life depends on my
knowing? Will you not try?'

'Let me think about it,' she said soberly. 'That's a very large
assignment--for a girl.'

'I agree,' conceded John. 'It is indeed a large assignment--for a
girl--or for anybody; for a rabbi, or the High Priest, or the Tetrarch
himself! But you have already undertaken a very serious and dangerous
errand which shows the courage that is in you. Do this--for me!' He
challenged her silent indecision with urgent eyes, and waited.

'I will try,' she whispered.

 * * * * * *

It was on the same morning, but much earlier--the morning of the
twenty-sixth day of Tishri, a date to be remembered--that Simon rose
from his uncomfortable narrow bunk on shipboard, resolved that he would
go again today into the country and hear Jesus speak.

And he was resolved also that if circumstances permitted he would try
to stand close enough to the Carpenter to be of some aid in keeping
the selfish, jostling multitude from wearing the man out with their
thoughtless importunities. He had slept hardly at all, last night, for
thinking about this, imagining himself standing protectingly at Jesus'
side, keeping the crowd back, admonishing the cot bearers to take their
time and remain in line, and not push in ahead of others who had got
there first. Surely someone should be doing this for Jesus--and why
not he? For he was tall and strong, and the people might listen to
his demand that they keep in order. He was quite alone on the ship,
having sent young Thad home at nightfall. He had wanted to be alone,
for his thoughts were incommunicable and he did not want the boy to be
bewildered and distressed by his moody silence.

A greyish-blue light was showing faintly in the east, presaging dawn.
The autumn mist hung low on the water, obscuring the beach.

Simon walked forward, lowered a bucket, and carried the water into the
little galley where he washed his face. Then he broke one of the barley
loaves that Hannah had sent him and emerged from the galley, munching
the bread dutifully but without relish, for he was wholly preoccupied
with his thoughts about the day's possible adventures.

Strolling aft, he climbed over the side of The Abigail, boarded The
Sara, and sauntered across to her starboard taffrail, where he stood
scanning the faraway eastern mountains. The whole range would show
pink presently. His eyes drifted about to the northwesterly shore. If
the fog lifted a little, he might be able to see whether Japheth's old
boat was still afloat. He thought he heard a voice on the shore, and
turned about, narrowing his eyes in an effort to pierce the fog, but he
could see nothing. 'Halloo!' he called, funnelling his lips with his
hands. 'Halloo!' came the voice--and Simon wondered if it might be an
echo; but--no--it didn't sound like his voice. His heart was beating
strangely. He waited and listened, cupping his ear with his hand.

The dawn was coming now, coming fast, leaping over the mountains,
pouring down upon the sea. Leaning far across the rail, Simon peered
hard into the dissolving mist that enveloped the shore. He made out a
dim figure standing on the beach, close to the water's edge.

The stranger waved his upraised arm, and Simon--after a moment of
indecision--put up his hand and waved it. The fog was lifting. Again
the stranger waved his hand, and called: 'Simon!'

There was no mistaking that voice! For there was no other voice like it
in the world--or ever had been!

'Coming!' shouted Simon, hoarse with excitement. His throat was dry and
his big hands trembled as he vaulted over the rail and dropped into
a rocking dory. He was an experienced oarsman, but no one observing
would have thought so from the awkwardness of his nervous flailings and
splashings. It seemed a long voyage, but eventually he arrived, very
much out of breath, and dragged the dory up on the sand.

Limp with emotion, his face twitching, he found himself staring
mystifiedly into the calm, friendly eyes of Jesus. He dropped to his
knees. He felt the wonder-working hands on his bent shoulders and
experienced the same sensation that had thrilled him when their bare
arms had touched--at Hammath.

Now Jesus was speaking, quietly but insistently.

'Simon, son of Jonas, I have need of you.'

'But I am a very sinful man, Master,' confessed Simon thickly.

'I have come to save sinners, my son,' said Jesus.

'How can I help you, Master? I am only a fisherman.' Simon's voice was
barely audible now, for his pent-up emotion was choking him.

'You are to remain a fisherman always, Simon,' said Jesus. 'But--from
this day forward you will fish for men!'

Humbly and penitently, Simon bowed himself far forward, his eyes
overflowing. Now the invigorating hands were laid gently upon his
shaggy head. It gave him a strange feeling of exultation.

'Come!' said Jesus softly. 'Arise, Simon, and follow me!'

And Simon arose--and followed Jesus.

 * * * * * *

But instead of leading the Big Fisherman to the highway, and south
through Bethsaida and on into the country near Hammath--as Simon had
expected--Jesus walked northward, keeping close to the shore.

He had asked Simon to follow him, and Simon was obeying; trudging along
through the sand, a few cubits behind him, and making no effort to come
abreast, though Jesus was walking slowly.

In this manner they proceeded for half a mile, in silence.

It seemed strange to the Big Fisherman that he could so complacently
consent to follow the Carpenter without asking him where they were
going. It had been his intention to go out into the country today and
volunteer his services as a strong-armed bodyguard to help keep the
jostling people from harassing Jesus with their importunities. He
could do that, he thought, without making any alterations in his own
beliefs or behaviour...Now, it seemed, he was expected to join cause
with Jesus--and 'fish for men.'...Had anyone--the servant-girl Anna,
for example--had Anna asked him, a week ago, whether he had a notion
of following Jesus, he would have sworn a surly oath and spat on the
ground!

Now he was following Jesus--and with a curious sense of peace; for
the mysterious calmness that had briefly possessed him, yesterday
afternoon, had returned.

Japheth's old boat was lazily rocking at anchor, some three hundred
yards off shore, a dory bobbing at her stern. Doubtless the Zebedee
boys were aboard preparing to sail early to a fishing-ground.

Jesus' steps slowed to a stop here. He turned about, silently regarded
Simon with an inquiring smile, and then shifted his gaze seaward. For
a long moment Simon stood beside him, indecisively stroking his chin.
Then he moved toward one of the beached dories, pushed it into the
water, climbed in, shipped the oars, and began to pull steadily toward
the storm-battered fishing-smack.

Facing astern, he kept his eyes fixed on Jesus, who remained standing
on the shore. After a while, as Simon neared the old boat where James
and John were awaiting him at the rail, Jesus waved a hand, turned
about, and moved southward toward the highway.



Chapter IX


After a fortnight's diligent search for Fara, everyone but Voldi gave
it up.

With tireless persistence, but waning hope, the loyal young fellow had
continued his quest, investigating every square cubit of terrain which
she might have covered in a reckless midnight ride.

He had even gone to the length of having himself lowered over
precipices to the unexplored depths of bramble-choked chasms into
which she might have fallen, and had vigorously queried shepherds
in pasture-lands so far remote that the possibility of their having
any information for him was inconceivable. He had pestered the
grief-stricken Ione with questions until she fled at the sight of him.

The plight of the once so well-balanced and self-contained Ione was
indeed pitiable. Upon the death of Arnon and the disappearance of Fara,
King Zendi had taken their helpless servants into his own household
where the older of them fitted at once into the well-remembered
routines of a King's establishment. But the inconsolable Greek slave
seemed dazed. Everyone thought that she was going mad.

According to report, Ione sat all day alone in a far corner of the
female servants' quarters, occasionally breaking into hysterical
weeping; and, when anyone approached her, would shrink back terrified
as if expecting a blow. Advised of her appalling condition, Voldi had
left off hoping that she might be able to furnish a clue.

Of course there were many who recalled the fantastic vow that Fara had
taken when hardly more than a child, but it seemed beyond all reason
that she would have set off alone on a mission so palpably impossible.

To clear the air of these speculations, and, more particularly, to
dissuade the now frantic Voldi from his half-formed decision to seek
for her in faraway Galilee, the King and his Councillors held a
conference in which the matter was fully discussed. And when it was
ready to adjourn, Voldi was invited in to learn the outcome of their
parley.

Disheartened and ill, for his fatigue and sleepless anxiety had worn
him thin, he listened dejectedly while King Zendi reported their
unanimous opinion. It was their firm belief, solemnly declared Zendi,
that no young woman in her right mind--as Fara had seemed to be--would
attempt a solitary expedition into a hostile country with the intention
of assassinating its well-fortified king. And it was the considered
judgment of the Council that any effort to seek for her in that region
would be an act of sheer lunacy.

Were the stronghold of Tetrarch Antipas situated twenty miles beyond
the Jordan, continued Zendi, a thousand experienced cavalrymen might
risk making an attack; but that a seventeen-year-old girl would travel,
unattended, over seventy leagues of bandit-infested territory--to
wreak vengeance upon a king in his fortress--was too preposterous to
be believed even by a courageous young man whose loyalty and love and
sorrow had driven him to desperation.

After Zendi had spoken there was a long silence which suggested that
Voldi might defend his foolish idea if he desired, but he did not
speak. Old Dumah cleared his throat to add a word.

'Even if she had been mad enough to attempt it, she would have come to
grief long before now.'

Voldi suddenly raised his head.

'Do you mean, sir, that she may have been imprisoned?'

'Or worse,' muttered Dumah.

At that, Voldi rose from his place, fell on his knees before the King,
and cried, 'I can no longer bear this anxiety, sire! I entreat you! Let
me go and search for her in Jewry!'

Old Mishma, seated beside the King, whispered a suggestion. Zendi
motioned Voldi to arise and told him to wait outside. It was a full
hour before they called him back. The Councillors had risen from their
seats and seemed restless to be off.

'At the request of your honoured grandfather, Voldi, we are permitting
you to go. We will give you a certificate of your Arabian citizenship,
requesting safe passage through all Jewry. You realize that this
document does not have the value which would be accorded it in
Macedonia, Petra, Cyprus, or Rome. If you get into trouble over there
in Judaea or Galilee, it will be your own affair. We wish you well, my
son; but if you do not return, no one will search for you.'

While Zendi was speaking, Voldi's grateful eyes drifted to his
grandfather's sober face. What a grand old man was Mishma! When the
King had finished, Voldi bowed deeply. Zendi laid a hand on his
shoulder and wished him a safe journey.

'I shouldn't let you do it,' he added.

'If His Majesty were in my place,' ventured Voldi, 'he would take the
chance, I think.'

'What weapons will you carry?' inquired Zendi.

'Only a dagger, sire.'

'Very good. It is better not to bear conspicuous arms. And try to avoid
controversies, however trivial. And don't draw your dagger unless you
intend to use it...Another thing: you should be well provided with
money!'

Voldi's heart skipped a beat. He hadn't thought much about money. He
had never carried money with him; never had had occasion to use money.
Old Mishma instantly lifted that weight.

'He shall have ample funds, my lord.'

Voldi impetuously reached for his grandfather's hand--and gripped it.
Zendi stepped down from the dais, and was moving away.

'Arabia should be proud of you both!' he said.

At Mishma's request, Voldi rode home with him. It had been a long time
since he had seen his grandfather in the saddle, and his heart swelled
with admiration as he watched the effortless skill with which the old
man handled the impatient bay stallion. Mishma's posture in the saddle
was a score of years younger than his deep-lined face. They had little
to say until they reached the old Councillor's gate: there they drew
their horses together.

'Shall we say good-bye, sire?'

'Presently. Come in.'

Dismounting, they entered the luxurious living-quarters of Mishma's
home. He disappeared into the adjacent bedroom and returned with a
newly made money-belt. It was heavy with gold, so heavy that when Voldi
took it he nearly dropped it.

'It is the amount you would have inherited, my boy.'

'Was it not dangerous, sire, to have so much gold in your possession?'

'True--but I have not had it many days.'

'Then--you had prepared it--for me?'

'I thought, at least a fortnight ago, that you would follow her. It is
a great grief to me, Voldi. But I cannot detain you!'

It was a memorable moment. Their voices were low. They were both deeply
stirred.

'I shall not expect to see you again. I am old.' Mishma's words were
barely audible. He was talking mostly to himself. 'I had dreamed of
you as a Councillor. We must give that up now. Whether you find her or
not--we have already lost that opportunity...But--I cannot find it in
my heart to rebuke you...As I grow older my ideas of values change.
The girl is courageous. Not much wonder if you love her enough to
throw your life away for her...You may not find her. I doubt whether
you will. If she is lost, do not hurry to return. You will have
sufficient funds for a considerable amount of foreign travel...If you
find her, you will marry her. Do not bring her back here. You would
both be unhappy.'...Mishma rose heavily and laid his hands on Voldi's
shoulders...'Go now, my brave boy, and comfort your mother.'

After the painful scene in his own home, where Kitra, having made a
valorous effort to control her feelings, finally gave way to a complete
emotional breakdown, Voldi galloped away to pay his final respects to
the King and receive his worthless passport.

At the last minute it occurred to him to say farewell to Ione, but the
servants couldn't find her. Mounting his tall black gelding he rode
away at a brisk trot toward the trail that descended to the Valley of
Aisne.

A few hundred yards ahead, a woman stepped out of the wild shrubbery
and waved an arm. It was Ione, thin and haggard, but surprisingly
animated. There was no accounting for the caprices of an ailing mind.
Ione, who had sunk to the depths of melancholy, now seemed almost
happy. Voldi reined in his horse--and stopped beside her.

'Good, Voldi!' she cried excitedly. 'Go and find her! Here is a little
gift for you!'

She handed up a parcel. It was about the shape and size of a baby's
pillow, and soft to the touch. A scarf that she had knitted for him,
perhaps, encased in an envelope of fine linen securely stitched on all
sides.

'Am I to open it now, Ione?' asked Voldi.

'No, no! You've no time for that! It's just a little present.' She
turned away, waving her hand and smiling. 'May all the gods attend
you, Voldi!' she shouted as he put the spurs to Darik and rode on. But
Ione's strange behaviour stirred his curiosity. A few days ago she
was unapproachable, depressed, fear-harried, and clearly out of her
head. Now that she had learned of his intention to search for Fara in
Galilee, she was exultant! Perhaps she knew more than she had told
about the events of that night when Fara had disappeared. He tried
to reason it out. Ione had been sworn to secrecy! That was what had
driven her crazy! In spite of all the opinions to the contrary, Fara
had unquestionably started for Galilee, intending to keep her vow!
Voldi was on the right track: there could be no doubt of that. It made
him impatient to press on. But when he considered the many possible
misfortunes she might have encountered, he despaired of finding her
alive, unharmed.

That night he stopped for food and shelter at an unpromising
caravansary situated on a small oasis at the southernmost tip of the
Dead Sea. After an abominable supper prepared by a sullen, wizened old
woman, he inquired of the testy inn-keeper, presumably her husband,
whether a well-favoured young Arabian woman had ridden past that way
on a bay filly--or perhaps rested there--some two weeks ago. And when
the surly old fellow, with a frown and protruding lips, had shaken his
head, Voldi prodded hard at his memory. Was he sure?

Of course he was sure! Would he be likely, he growled, to forget
such a strange and pleasant sight? A young woman travelling alone in
this country? No, sir; you could depend on him to remember seeing a
well-favoured young woman! He chuckled slyly, and his withered old
spouse scowled at him, which made him laugh unpleasantly.

Then Voldi tried to probe the old woman's recollection, but she hadn't
seen a pretty young woman, alone, on a horse, here or anywhere else,
ever in her life, which seemed to dispose of her as a witness.

Though it was still early in the evening, there was little to do but
retire. They lighted a candle for him and pointed out the wretched
hovel where he was to lodge. Shouldering his saddle-bags, he groped his
way into the filthy and meagrely furnished hut. Quite weary but not
ready to sleep, he sat down on the edge of the dirty cot, and for lack
of any other occupation decided to see what Ione had given him.

Taking the parcel from his pack, he attacked the fine stitches with the
point of his dagger. It was a tedious and exasperating task, for Ione
had done her work well. At length he laid the cover back, and his eyes
widened with astonishment. The linen sheath contained a long, heavy
braid of hair! Whose--but Fara's?

Voldi took it up and held it against his cheek. He pressed his lips
to it. His eyes were misty. Gradually the implications of Ione's
gift dawned upon him, and he muttered an ejaculation of sudden
understanding. Fara was impersonating a young man! This was Ione's
way of telling him that he should not make inquiries about a girl! He
was to look for a man! How dared Fara take such a risk? But here was
the incontrovertible evidence that she had done so! Poor Ione wasn't
as crazy as they thought. Voldi was exultant, but not for long. His
apprehension soon cooled his joy. How could Fara hope to preserve so
difficult an incognito? Sooner or later she must be discovered--and be
worse off for her disguise.

He went to sleep, after hours of wakefulness, with the tender trophy on
his pillow. Awake at dawn, he found his taciturn host pottering about
in the stableyard.

'Let me ask you this question,' said Voldi sternly. 'Did you see a
young man, an Arabian, in these parts about a fortnight ago--riding a
bay filly?'

'That I did, sir,' replied the old man--'a handsome young fellow he
was, and very well dressed, too. He stopped here; slept in the same
room you had last night.'

'Uhh--what a room!' growled Voldi.

The old man chuckled shamelessly.

'That other young Arab didn't like the room, either. You should have
heard him! Upon my word, sir, that young fellow could swear like a
drunken sailor! I never heard such a mouthful of curses. Some of 'em
were new words that I didn't know.'

Voldi looked puzzled for a minute--and then laughed.

'A pretty rough youngster, was he?'

'He was indeed, sir. He must be very rich; used to having his own way.
He ordered us about as if we were slaves; though I must say he was not
stingy.'

'Why didn't you tell me about him last night when I asked you?'

The old fellow's jaw sagged and a look of comprehension came into his
crafty eyes.

'But you inquired about a young woman!' he countered. 'Might this young
man you're asking for be the young woman you thought you wanted to know
about last night?' He threw back his grizzled head and cackled shrilly.
'We thought there was something queer about him! He! He! Well, I still
say that nobody ever cursed like that on this oasis--and many's the
camel-driver we've put up!'

 * * * * * *

Voldi broke out into loud laughter several times on his way to
Engedi, but he had his sober moments too. Fara was indeed playing
for high stakes. She might deceive the grumpy old pair at the filthy
caravansary--but it was a long way to Galilee.

At Engedi the young Arabian--of a fortnight ago--was promptly
remembered.

'A proud, haughty young fellow?' queried the innkeeper; and when Voldi
had nodded, he went on: 'Do I remember him! Rich, he was! Rode a frisky
bay mare with enough silver on her bridle and enough jewels on his
riding-whip to have bought everything in my house!'

'Did you find him just a bit--disagreeable?' pressed Voldi.

'Just a bit!' grinned the inn-keeper sourly. 'He swore at me in three
languages--Aramaic, Arabian, and Greek. He swore at the servants in
Latin. Nothing pleased him.'

Voldi tried to be serious, but he couldn't restrain a chuckle.

'That's the fellow I'm looking for,' he said. 'He's a tough one--and no
mistake! Did you notice which way he went when he left?'

'The old Salt Trail. Said he was headed for the port--and if he wasn't
robbed before he got there, they probably cleaned him out in Gaza.
Any man's a fool to ride through that pest-hole alone--even in broad
daylight!'

'Did you warn him of that?'

'No--I didn't!' snapped the innkeeper. 'He was so damned sure of
himself. It wasn't any of my business if he got into trouble.'

'I think my friend would be able to take care of himself,' bragged
Voldi, with much more confidence than he felt.

'He certainly could with his mouth,' rejoined the innkeeper.

'Yes--and with his dagger too!' retorted Voldi, wishing he spoke the
truth.

As he rode on, early the next morning, on the busy highway, his mind
was troubled. So many misadventures might have confronted Fara. These
lean, lazy, ragged fellows who led the camels in the long caravans,
what might they not do to annoy and provoke a solitary rider who had
taken no pains to conceal his wealth and rating? And the hawk-nosed,
beady-eyed caravan-directors who looked Voldi over with such candid
impudence, what would Fara's disguise amount to if they insisted on
questioning her closely? Apparently she had felt that to be convincing
in her new rôle she must be noisy and arrogant. Voldi hoped she wasn't
overdoing it. She might meet someone who wouldn't be favourably
impressed by her swagger and profanity. The poor dear wouldn't last
very long in a fight.

At old Hebron he made inquiries at the two inns, but nobody remembered
seeing a well-to-do young Arabian on a bay filly. After a couple of
hours spent in asking questions, Voldi decided that Fara must have
ridden directly on through the historic town without pausing. He fed
and watered his horse, lunched briefly at the principal inn, and
proceeded on his journey. It was a more fertile country now, and the
donkey-carts were coming into the highway laden with melons, grapes,
grain, and green forage.

A few miles west of Hebron, near a cross-road, Voldi saw a rider
approaching who stirred his interest, for the beautiful bay mare he
rode--far too good for the unkempt, loutish fellow astride--bore
a striking resemblance to Fara's Saidi. Slowing to a walk, as the
distance between them lessened, Voldi's suspicions were confirmed. The
stocky, shaggy fellow with the ragged tunic and the uncombed beard
couldn't have afforded a mount of such value. His dark brown skin
identified him as an Idumean, which was not to his credit. He was
riding bareback. The disgraceful old bridle was a patchwork of straps
and hempen cords, no fit equipment for a thoroughbred.

As they neared each other, the shifty-eyed Idumean, now aware that
he was being carefully scrutinized, dug his heels savagely into the
filly's ribs, apparently determined to pass quickly. Voldi instantly
wheeled Darik across the road, blocking Saidi to an abrupt stop.

'What do you mean by that?' yelled the lout in the thick guttural of
half-civilized Idumea.

'How did you come by this filly?' demanded Voldi.

'Who wants to know?' retorted the Idumean.

'I do, fellow!' shouted Voldi. 'She belongs to a friend of mine...Here,
Saidi!' He held out his hand. Saidi's nostrils fluttered. She tipped
up her ears and took an inquiring step forward, her rider jerking the
reins to restrain her.

'This mare belongs to me!' growled the enraged Idumean. 'I bought her
many months ago! Hands off that bridle now--or it will be the worse for
you!'

'No; the mare has been stolen! She does not belong to you. I see you
have disposed of the saddle and bridle. Perhaps you can tell me what
became of the young Arabian who owns her.'

'What are you going to do about it, youngster?' sneered the Idumean,
uncoiling a well-worn bull-whip. 'Will you let me pass--or won't you?'

'Not until you answer my question!' said Voldi.

The Idumean replied by drawing back his arm and lashing hard at Voldi's
face with the long whip. Voldi had defensively thrown up an arm, but
the thong bit sharply into his neck. Again the whip descended, raising
a welt across the gelding's withers. He reared--and backed away.

Neither the Arabian nor the Idumean seemed anxious to dismount and
fight on the public highway. Already two market-carts had drawn up to
view the altercation. A camel-train was bearing down on them from the
west. Apparently apprehensive of trouble, the Idumean now wheeled the
filly about, lashing cruelly at her flanks. Tearing loose from Voldi's
grip, she bolted.

At the crossing, her rider tugged her to the left, on to an
unfrequented road, little more than a lane, with Voldi in pursuit at
full gallop. Both horses were experienced racers. More than half a
mile had been covered before Darik was abreast of Saidi. The country
road had narrowed now, with dense thickets on either side. As Darik
drew into the lead by a neck, the horses so close together that their
shoulders grazed, Voldi, turning about, saw the Idumean leaning far
forward with an upraised dagger poised for a stab in his back. He met
the threat by striking the burly fellow full in the face with his
riding-whip.

Urging his horse, he shouldered Saidi into the briars where--after a
brief struggle to free herself--she stopped and stood quivering. The
Idumean made no effort to go further. He dismounted now, as did Voldi.
It was plain that he would be a very unsportsman-like antagonist, as he
had already proved.

They threw off their coats, drew their daggers, and faced each other
only a little way apart. The Idumean gingerly fingered the red welt on
his cheek--and grinned.

'I am glad you followed, youngster,' he snarled. 'This is a safer place
for what I intend to do to you.' Crouching, like an angry bull, he
began advancing, weaving slowly to and fro, slipping his ragged sandals
forward with short, calculated steps. Voldi remained standing erect,
making no effort to assume a defensive posture.

The stocky Idumean straightened and folded his arms, with an expression
of bewilderment.

'Are you going to stand there--and let me kill you--without raising a
finger? I thought you Arabians were fighters!'

Voldi seemed not to hear the taunt. He was staring, wide-eyed, down the
road, past the Idumean's shoulder.

'Look!' he shouted in amazement.

His swarthy foe instantly jerked his head about to see what might
be coming down on him from behind, and Voldi leaped on him, firmly
clutching the wrist of his dagger-hand. The Idumean drew back his free
arm and struck hard, sinking his big fist into the needlesharp point of
the Arabian's dagger.

Now he had twisted his right hand loose, and raising his weapon, drove
it toward Voldi's heart, but the dexterous Arabian dagger parried the
thrust with a blade that opened a long, deep gash in the Idumean's
forearm. The blood was dripping from the fingers of both his hands.
Again he struck, desperately, but his arm was too badly injured
to deliver an effective blow. Voldi caught at the bleeding wrist
and twisted the dagger out of his hand. Then he clutched the weary
Idumean's beard, jerked his head back, and pressed the flat of his
blade against the bared throat.

'Where did you get that filly?' shouted Voldi. 'Answer me quickly--or
I'll kill you!'

The Idumean gritted his teeth and tried to tug loose, smearing his
beard with his dripping hands. The Arabian's dagger-point moved
slightly, pricking the dirty neck.

With that, the battle was over. The big fellow's knees buckled and he
slumped to the ground, where he lay noisily sick. Voldi opened one
of his saddle-bags, tore up a towel, and bound it tightly above the
spurting wound in the Idumean's arm.

'I have no interest in saving your life, horse-thief,' he said, as he
tied the bandage, 'but I don't want you to die until you have told me
where this filly was when you stole her.'

Weakly the Idumean confessed. It was a strange story, so strange that
it could hardly have been invented. But why would Fara be a member of
a great crowd--in a pasture-field beside the Jordan--assembled to hear
an itinerant prophet? It didn't sound like anything that Fara would be
likely to do!

No, mumbled the nauseated Idumean, he hadn't seen the man who owned the
mare. He had followed the crowd; and at nightfall had found the filly
tethered quite a little way apart from the other animals. No, he had
seen nothing of a silver-mounted bridle or saddle. He had waited until
the camp was asleep and had led the mare away, after a struggle with
her that threatened discovery.

'Very well,' said Voldi quietly. 'When you think you are through
vomiting, we will be on our way to the spot where you found the filly.'

'I can't do it,' muttered the Idumean, 'I am too weak.'

'You should have thought of that before you tried to stab me in the
back, horse-thief! Come on! Get up--or I'll slit your bandage and you
can lie here and bleed to death!'

It was a tedious journey back to Hebron, and the riders drew many
inquisitive stares from the people they passed on the highway. At
the first public watering-trough, the Idumean was helped down to do
a partial job of washing off the clotted blood. Fortunately for both
of them, they encountered no patrols. East of Hebron they turned off
the highway toward the north. It was late in the afternoon before they
reached the pasture on the bank of the Jordan. The dead grass still
showed the hard trampling of a huge multitude.

'There!' pointed the ailing horse-thief. 'That's where the mare had
been staked out.'

Dismounting, Voldi walked about, surveying the landscape. What, he
wondered, would Fara be likely to do when she discovered that Saidi
was gone? Did she have enough gold with her to buy another horse?
Doubtless; for she was on a long journey and would not have started
without funds. It was beyond belief that she would proceed on foot. Her
contemplated trip would be hazardous enough without that added risk.
No, he decided, Fara would have acquired a mount--of some sort.

And now--what should he do with Saidi? She was not his property. He
could not sell her into better hands; nor could he conveniently take
her along with him. His journey involved enough danger. It would be
difficult to explain a led horse this far away from home territory.
After some debate with himself, he mounted and drew up facing the
slumped Idumean. He patted Fara's filly on her velvet muzzle.

'Good-bye, Saidi,' he said, completely ignoring her rascally rider. 'I
am sorry to leave you--but it can't be helped.'

Without a word to the bewildered Idumean, he galloped away, wondering
where, when--and whether--he would overtake Fara.

 * * * * * *

Having had enough excitement for one day, Voldi put back to old Hebron
for the night. Early the next morning he was on his way west again,
past the cross-roads where yesterday he had encountered the thieving
Idumean, on through sleepy little Adoraim, whose bloody history, had
he known it, might have stirred his interest. Frequently he paused to
ask farmers, in their carts and at work in their fields, whether they
remembered seeing a young Arabian pass that way, a little more than a
fortnight ago. Not only was there no information to be had, but the
surly replies indicated that their concern for travelling Arabians was
lacking in enthusiasm. Indeed, they seemed very uncivil, until Voldi
speculated on the probable attitude of an Arabian shepherd if asked by
a well-mounted Jew whether he had seen another Jew on the road some
time ago. The shepherd would have seared him with comprehensive curses
involving not only the Jew himself, but his parents, his uncle, his
grandfather, and his heirs and assigns for ever. A very pretty world,
it was.

These occasional detainments, while brief, added up to a considerable
delay in the travel-schedule he had planned, and it was late in the day
when he arrived at the squalid old town of Lachish, with fifteen miles
more to go before reaching Gaza. The moon was too young to be of much
service for night riding. He drew up in the stableyard of the only inn,
finding it almost empty--a bad sign. He had already learned that where
one found plenty of room there was always an easily discoverable reason.

A couple of loutish hostlers ambled forward to meet him, but he decided
to attend personally to the comfort of his horse. While intent upon his
task of rubbing down the faithful gelding--an operation that involved
some quiet conversation between them to which Darik contributed an
occasional nod and a playful nibble--Voldi became aware of a silent
onlooker standing behind him. Turning, he met the amused eyes of a
quite good-looking, well-dressed man of forty, obviously a Roman. Voldi
straightened and they exchanged amiable greetings.

'You are an Arabian, I think,' said the Roman.

'Yes, sir. My name is Voldi.'

'Mine is Mencius. The caravan I am accompanying is camped up the road a
mile. My horse is lame--or pretending. I had hoped to find a horseleech
here, but there is none; and these stable-boys hardly know the time o'
day.'

'Want me to take a look at him, sir?' asked Voldi.

'That would be very kind,' Mencius said, 'if it isn't asking too much.
You Arabians seem to know everything about horses.'

'Not everything,' protested Voldi. 'But we do know that they get tired
on a long journey and go lame; and the more intelligent they are, the
worse they limp.'

'Right!' chuckled Mencius. 'And sometimes they forget which leg it is
and give themselves away. However--my horse may be telling the truth.'

They sauntered across to the other side of the compound, where a sleek
white stallion was placidly munching his forage. Voldi stood silently
watching him for so long that Mencius was moved to inquire whether he
should lead the horse about for inspection.

'Not yet,' said Voldi absently, studying the animal's posture.
Presently the stallion raised his right forefoot and set it down
gingerly. Voldi immediately approached, patted the horse's withers, ran
his hand down the leg to the fetlock, and gently lifted the foot for
inspection. Mencius hovered close.

'Badly shod,' said Voldi. 'The left wall of the hoof has been pared
deeper than the right, throwing the pastern-joint off balance.' He
called to one of the roustabouts and inquired whether there was a
farrier in the neighbourhood. The oaf nodded.

'I'm afraid no farrier we're likely to find in this place will do us
much good,' observed Mencius.

'That's true--but his tools may,' said Voldi. 'If we can get into his
shop, I'll reset the shoe myself.'

'Do you mean to say you know how to shoe a horse?' Mencius'
astonishment was so sincere that Voldi laughed. On the way to the
farrier's shop he went on to explain how every Arabian boy was a
horse-doctor by instinct. 'I never let a farrier touch my Darik's
feet,' he said, 'and we have some skilful farriers, too.' Again
Voldi laughed boyishly as he noted the puzzled expression on the
Roman's face, and added, 'Our farriers are much better paid than our
scribes...Perhaps that's why Arabia rides more gracefully than she
reads.'

Mencius smiled a little at this drollery but apparently wasn't quite
sure whether he approved of the handsome young Arab's careless lack
of interest in education; he had taken an instant liking to Voldi and
didn't want to think of him as a shameless illiterate. Mencius--without
meaning to be--was a bit of a snob when it came to the question of
education.

Stripping off his tunic and handing it to Mencius--who couldn't help
noting the fineness of its texture and workmanship--Voldi, with the
consent of the bewildered farrier, sorted out a few rusty tools,
dexterously removed and readjusted the badly balanced shoe, gripping
the stallion's foreleg hard between his knees while driving the nails,
to lessen the jar on the sensitive pastern-joint.

Hearing a subdued conversation--in Greek--he glanced up briefly to
observe that Mencius had been joined by another urbane Roman, his
junior and apparently his subordinate. Mencius was doing the talking,
and it was obvious that Voldi was not expected to understand it.

'See how cleverly he does that, Pincus,' Mencius was saying. 'Loves
horses; wants to spare them any unnecessary discomfort. Horses! That's
all he lives for!...It's an odd thing about these Arabs--they're
mentally keen, but they don't know anything but horses!'

Voldi was through with the nailing now; but, not wanting to disturb the
Roman's disquisition on the Arabian mind, he held on to the stallion's
leg, rubbing it gently--and listening.

'You take this fine-looking boy, Pincus; obviously well-to-do,
undoubtedly from one of their better families, gracious, bright; I'll
wager you five hundred sesterces he can't write his own name!'

'I wouldn't mind taking you up on that, your Excellency,' said Pincus.
'But how are you going to find out?'

'Why don't you ask him?' suggested Voldi, with a grin.

The awkward incident, which might so easily have given serious offence,
really speeded their friendship. Mencius, experienced in diplomacy,
humbly admitted that any attempt at apology would only add to their
trouble, which prompted Voldi to say: 'You were right, sir, about
Arabia. I should not have listened; but--well, sir, I couldn't get
away. My knowing Greek was accidental--not intentional, I assure you!'

Pincus, who had been trying hard to maintain his composure, gave way
to a whoop of laughter. The whole episode had been too ridiculous to
be viewed soberly. Voldi, too, thought it was funny. Mencius recovered
slowly from his embarrassment. It was with the dignity of refinement
and respect that he formally presented Pincus as the manager of the
caravan with which he was travelling.

When the younger Roman had gone, with instructions to take his caravan
on to Gaza tomorrow and wait there at the port, Mencius and Voldi
talked. They had supper together. It was late in the evening when they
parted. Their acquaintance had ripened quickly into friendship. They
both felt it.

Mencius, perhaps without realizing it, had opened some gates for the
untravelled young Arabian. Voldi, utterly fascinated, had encouraged
the Roman to talk of his far voyages. The better to explain the nature
of his journeys, Mencius confided without reserve that he was an agent
of the Emperor, engaged in various errands--of investigation, mostly,
and organization, too. He had been on this present roundabout trip
for many months: sailing from Brindisi to Crete in charge of a fleet
of ten Empire ships, he had hustled the procrastinating Cretans into
their mines for iron which he had sent to Rome. He had kept one of
the ships and had sailed to Cyprus, where he had organized a caravan
to bring copper from the mines of the interior; and, when his fleet
had returned--in ballast--from Rome, he had accompanied the copper to
Caesarea, where it was to be used in building the extensive docks.

'You should spend a few days in Caesarea, Voldi, seeing you are
intending to ride up the coast,' advised Mencius. 'The Empire is doing
great things there! A two-mile-long stone breakwater; magnificent
harbour; destined to be one of the greatest ports on our sea.'

'I had not realized that the Jews had so much to export,' remarked
Voldi.

'Nor have they,' agreed Mencius, lowering his voice; 'but the day will
come when the Empire will develop Jewry. Then there will be trade--in
plenty.'

'Meaning that Rome intends a complete subjugation of Judaea?'

'Well'--Mencius debated how best to say it--'when you've seen
the new wharves at Caesarea, I think you will come to that
conclusion...However, I surmise that any calamity to the Jews would not
inconvenience you Arabians very much.'

'I don't know, sir,' said Voldi vaguely. 'We were persuaded to think
so, many years ago, and made a brief alliance, which we regretted.'

Mencius nodded--and shrugged.

'Of course; I remember. Herod got scared. Married that cad Antipas to
your sweet little Princess--broke her heart; sent her home...I had a
glimpse of her, once. Beautiful! It has always been a mystery to me,
Voldi, why you Arabs didn't raise more hell about that!'

Voldi flushed a little and muttered that the Arabs were sometimes a bit
tardy about paying their debts. After a pause, he added, 'It's a long
story, Mencius.'

'I'd like to hear it,' declared Mencius with an unexpected enthusiasm
that proved somewhat disconcerting to the Arabian, who dismissed the
matter with a careless flick of his hands.

'Tell me more about your trip,' he said. 'You unloaded the copper at
Caesarea, and--'

'No; I did not unload the copper. As I told you, I had taken my
stallion, Brutus, with me. How the big fellow hated those voyages! I
left the fleet in the hands of its commander, Fulvius, and rode south
to Gaza. There, according to previous arrangement, I found my young
fellow, Pincus, with a camel-train ready to start for Engedi. We had
dropped Pincus off at Gaza on our north-bound trip to Caesarea...I
wanted to see how much of a working force we had in the salt-fields and
whether our resources there were adequate.'

'And now you're headed back to Rome?' asked Voldi.

'No; not quite yet. We load the salt and see it on its way. That will
take a week, probably. Then I am riding back to Caesarea to join my
friend Antonius, who will be sailing The Augusta to Rome. I've had
enough of these cargo ships: I'm going home in style. The Augusta is
the Emperor's pleasure barge--and a beautiful ship she is, too.'

When they separated, near midnight, they felt as if they had been
friends for years. Mencius was leaving at dawn, anticipating that he
might have to lead his horse most of the day. They parted reluctantly.
Each man laid his right hand on the other's left shoulder in a
comradely farewell.

'If ever you find yourself in Rome, Voldi...' Mencius was saying.

'Unlikely, sir, but you may be sure I should try to find you...By the
way--how would I do that?'

'Inquire at The Praetorium. They will direct you. Ask for Proconsul
Nicator Mencius.'

'And when you come to Arabia, Mencius, our home is yours. Go to the
King's encampment for directions.'

'Am I correct in surmising, Voldi, that your family is prominent in
Arabia?'

'My grandfather, Mishma,' replied Voldi, 'is King Zendi's Chief
Councillor.'

 * * * * * *

It was noon before Voldi resumed his journey. Fara would unquestionably
have ridden through Lachish, and since it was clear that she had not
tarried in Hebron, it was almost certain that she must have stopped
here.

He had had no opportunity to speak to the innkeeper on this subject,
for Mencius had been standing by, but this morning Voldi pressed his
inquiries.

The innkeeper wanted to be obliging, though he professed to have no
knowledge of the young Arabian who had passed this way. Certainly
he had not stopped for accommodation at his house. It was possible,
of course, he admitted, that the young man might have paused to ask
questions at a private home and had been offered lodging for the
night. That happened occasionally. He even volunteered to accompany
his generous guest on a tour of the homes where travellers had been
welcomed. But no helpful information was arrived at, though much
valuable time was consumed. Voldi's heart was heavy as he gave up the
quest in Lachish and rode on.

It was a monotonous journey. A mile west he came upon evidences of the
recent encampment of Pincus' caravan. Three miles farther on he came to
the tumbledown village of Melissa, where, without any hope at all, he
stopped to ask the usual questions, to which the replies were bucolic
stares, scowls, and a spitting on the ground.

The sun was setting when a stone guide-post advised him that Gaza was
still eight miles distant. Twilight came on rapidly. A quarter moon
helped a little, but it would be a long way to Gaza. And Voldi had no
relish for arriving in the night, seeing you could easily have your
throat cut there in the daytime.

As he plodded along in the thickening gloom, he saw--on the highway
some two hundred yards ahead--a group of dim figures engaged in combat.
There was an unmistakable sound of clashing swords, together with brief
barks of warning and savage encouragements.

For an instant Voldi was undecided whether to ride into this mêlée,
which might turn out to be a fight between rival groups of ruffians. He
drew the gelding to a stop. Now he saw a white horse being tugged off
the highway, and the reason for the commotion was clear. Spurring Darik
to a gallop, he found himself within a few yards of a desperate fight
in which Mencius was valiantly but hopelessly defending himself against
three!

Flinging himself out of the saddle, he rushed into the fray. One of
the stalwart robbers turned to meet him with a broadsword raised
high. Voldi did not wait for it to descend on him, but leaped for
it. Gripping the man's wrist with his left hand, he held the sword
suspended for the instant required to drive his dagger deep into the
shoulder of the sword-arm. With a scream of pain and rage, the bandit
tried to strike. This time the dagger caught him in the left breast. It
had found its mark. As the body sagged, Voldi flung it aside and dashed
on into the battle which Mencius was plainly losing; for one of his two
remaining assailants had moved to the rear of him and was preparing to
strike.

'Behind you, Mencius!' he shouted. 'I'll take this fellow!'

As Mencius wheeled about to parry the blow, the robber who had been
facing him shifted his attention to the newcomer. Apparently satisfied
that his fellow-bandit would deal successfully with the wearied Roman,
he seemed disposed to take his time--and enjoy the slaughter of this
youthful intruder.

'What have you there, youngster--only a dagger? What do you expect to
do with it?'

Immediately Voldi showed him what he expected to do with the dagger.
The savage thrust, with his full weight behind it, was so swift, so
recklessly ruthless, that the older man had no chance to assume a
defensive position. The young Arabian had come at him with a rush that
upset his calculations. The big fellow, who had planned to enjoy the
murder, was left no time to indulge in this luxury. It was only an
eight-inch dagger-blade against a three-foot broadsword, but it was a
bold and busy little dagger that laid open the sword-arm, pierced the
hand that moved instinctively to clutch the wound, and drew a deep
semi-circular furrow from forehead to chin; all this in one bewildering
moment. Voldi stepped back quickly to avoid the last determined effort
at defence, but the tip of the descending broadsword slashed his upper
arm. He could feel the warm blood soaking his sleeve. He decided that
the robber must pay hard for that cut; but as he moved in to finish him
off the big fellow crumpled.

Meantime, Mencius had driven his antagonist off the highway and had him
backed up against the low stone fence, where he dropped his sword and
shouted for mercy, a favour that the Roman was pleased to bestow, for
he was thoroughly spent and wounded. Voldi looked at the bleeding hand
and was happy to see that the cut was superficial.

'If you hadn't turned up exactly when you did, Voldi--they would have
killed me.' Mencius, still breathing heavily, leaned against his friend
for support.

'Have they got your money?' asked Voldi.

'Yes--and my horse.'

'Here, you!' shouted Voldi to the weary robber who had slumped down on
the wall. 'If you have the Roman's wallet, hand it over. If not--go
through your friends' pockets and find it. And be quick!'

Heaving himself to his feet, the bandit obeyed. Mencius' money
was found in the blood-soaked tunic of the first robber Voldi had
encountered. The recumbent man did not protest when they relieved him
of the wallet. He lay very still. Mencius picked up his limp hand.

'The rascal's dead, Voldi!' he muttered.

Voldi was stooping over to peer into the grey face. Mencius interposed
an arm and pushed him away.

'You don't want too clear a remembrance of him, Voldi,' he explained.
'It's easy to see you never killed a man before.'

'You mean--he may haunt me?'

'Well, you haven't seen the last of him. They come back in the
night--and waken you. Sometimes they bring small children along and
weeping women.'

'But, Mencius!' stammered Voldi. 'The fellow had no right to live!'

'True, but it makes no difference. They return!...But come--let's see
what is going on here.'

The ambulatory robber had half-led, half-dragged his injured friend
to the roadside and across the stone fence into the pasture where the
horses were tethered. The shadowy figure who had taken charge of the
white stallion had abandoned him and was running through the field
to join his companions. Brutus had made no attempt to leave, and was
quickly taken in hand.

'Give me a lift, Mencius,' said Voldi, after an unsuccessful effort to
mount.

'You've been hurt, Voldi!' exclaimed Mencius. 'Why didn't you tell me?
Your sleeve is wet with blood.'

'I know. Perhaps we had better bind it up.'

'We will stop at the Fort of Minoa,' said Mencius, as he applied a
bandage to Voldi's dripping wound. 'I know the Commandant, an old
friend of mine, Legate Vitelius. I used always to stop there on
these trips; but--not lately. The fort's badly run down, dirty, no
discipline. Poor old Vitelius is a wine-bibber; never dead drunk, never
cold sober; just stupid--all the day long.'

It was midnight before they reached the huge, ugly, shabby, high-walled
rectangle with the faded Roman banners suspended over the gates. Sleepy
sentries admitted them without much questioning. Legate Vitelius, shaky
and dull but sober enough to be affable, was summoned from his bed;
heard the travellers' story, routed out the regimental surgeon, and had
the wounds cleansed and dressed.

Voldi and Mencius shared a commodious chamber. Neither seemed ready to
sleep. The excitement of their encounter was still with them.

'I feel as if I had known you always, Voldi,' murmured Mencius. 'You
saved my life tonight! I am deep in your debt! What can I ever do to
repay your kindness, my friend?'

Somewhat to his own surprise, Voldi impulsively raised up on his
elbows, and said, 'I need your counsel. I am in a serious dilemma. I
want to confide in you!'

Propping himself up on his pillows, Mencius gave full attention as
Voldi told his almost incredible story--of Fara's childhood vow and her
disappearance and his own desperate search for her.

'I don't know, Voldi,' muttered Mencius, shaking his head, when the
tale had been told. 'I doubt whether she could make such a journey
without being apprehended. But she's surely worth looking for; and if
love and courage can find her, you will succeed!'

Before they slept, Voldi had promised to wait in Gaza until Mencius had
dispatched his fleet, and together they would ride to Caesarea.

'But I must exact a promise of you, Voldi, if you are going with me to
Caesarea.' Mencius' tone was serious.

'Of course!' promised Voldi. 'Anything!'

'The Augusta's errand in Caesarea is to pick up a royal family, on a
pleasure excursion to Rome. You are to show no interest in any member
of this royal household.'

'But--why should I?' exclaimed Voldi.

'The man is the ruler of Galilee.'

'Antipas!'

'Correct! Mind you keep your promise. Good-night!'



Chapter X


Voldi had never met anyone with so wide a range of interests as his
companionable new friend from Rome. Proconsul Nicator Mencius knew
something about everything, classic and contemporary.

The Arabians were not very much concerned about history, not even about
their own. Here and there in the high mountains massive sepulchres of
their national heroes bore extravagant, weather-beaten epitaphs, but
almost nobody tried to decipher them; for, in the opinion of Ishmael's
tough posterity, it was as effeminate to be able to read as not to be
able to ride. Literacy was left to the professional scriveners whose
unenvied occupation was practised mostly by men with crippled feet or
weak chests.

There was no written history at all. Vagabond minstrels--rating no
better than jugglers--toured the country, attending the auctions,
fairs, and festal events, where they chanted the ancient legends and
mumbled interminable epic poems extolling the prowess of Arabia's
distinguished kings and champions, but there was nothing resembling
a comprehensive, sensible, sequential story of the Arabian people;
and as for the average Arab's knowledge of the world outside, it was
practically non-existent.

The Arab knew that he should hate and despise the Jews. That prejudice
he had had in his milk. He never paused to examine it. It was as
natural and necessary as breathing and heart-beats. He likewise loathed
the Romans, though his attitude toward them was of distrust and
suspicion rather than the forthright contempt he felt for the Children
of Israel. As for other foreign nations--Egypt, Greece, Persia,
Macedonia, Pamphylia, Cyprus, Crete--they were but outlandish names
that were rarely on his tongue or in his thoughts. He knew nothing
about them--and cared less.

As the grandson of a Councillor, Voldi had been taught to read and
write the language of his own people; but it was not much of an
accomplishment, for there was almost no Arabian literature, nor did
many occasions arise when it was of advantage to know how to write.

At Fara's gentle insistence--and because it gave him a reasonable
excuse for spending longer evenings in her company--he had studied
Greek under the competent supervision of Ione; and, spurred by their
encouragement, he had done very well with the language. As for the
contents of those venerable scrolls which they employed as text-books,
he had very little interest in them. He was too polite to say so, but
privately he considered Aeschylus a morbid old owl, Pindar a windy
dreamer, Herodotus a tiresome bore, and Homer a shameless liar.

Mencius was now introducing Voldi to a new world. He did not parade his
knowledge. Indeed, he seemed honestly apologetic because he knew so
little. But in the opinion of his young friend from Arabia, the Roman's
wealth of information concerning past and present world affairs was
related to Voldi's meagre store as everything was related to nothing.

This morning, as they rode slowly toward Gaza, now only two miles
distant, lagging far enough behind the shuffle-footed caravan to avoid
the worst of its dust, Mencius found plenty of entertainment for
himself and enlightenment for Voldi by calling attention to certain
historic landmarks along the old highway.

'See that huge, tumbled pile of hewn stone over there in the field?'
Mencius pointed with his riding-whip. 'That was the great fort where
the Philistines made their last stand against Alexander.'

'When was that?' Voldi took no pride in his query.

'Of course you know about the various victories of Alexander, all over
the world,' said Mencius.

'Vaguely,' mumbled Voldi, hoping he would not be required to bound or
define the word.

'Well--as you undoubtedly recall--he died about three hundred years
ago, and this was one of his later conquests. The Philistines made a
gallant defence. It ended--over there.'

They drew their horses to a stop and surveyed the ruins.

'Those rocks do not appear to have been there so long,' commented Voldi.

'Granite does not deteriorate as rapidly as the people who quarry
it,' observed Mencius, half to himself. 'To look about on the lousy
cutthroats who now inhabit this region, one wouldn't suspect that they
are descendants of the brave fellows who built that fort and defended
it until the last brave man was dead.'

'It's a wonder they haven't hauled that rock-pile away to use in other
buildings,' reflected Voldi.

'Oh--they will--sometime,' soliloquized Mencius. 'It is in the nature
of nations,' he went on dreamily, 'to rise--and toil--and suffer--and
prosper--and fatten--and fall.' After a long pause he continued,
'Then they lie prone in the dust until some strong man appears among
them--and commands the old stones and the old bones to rise again. All
that these rascally beggars need to put them on their feet is a great
leader. He will come--some day. It always happens--in time. Destiny is
in no hurry.'

'Mencius, you have the mind of a prophet,' said Voldi soberly. 'Or are
you just guessing?'

They spoke to their horses and rode on a little way before Mencius
replied.

'No, Voldi, I am not a prophet; nor am I guessing. The earth is a vast
theatre with many stages on which companies of actors present the same
old play--a tragedy in five acts. Sometimes the company puts it through
to the end at breath-taking speed, if the man who enacts the principal
role is very audacious and impetuous. You take Alexander, for example.
That was a one-man show. He conquered the whole world, and when he
died his Empire--as a military power--vanished overnight. There wasn't
enough left of his army to give police protection to his own town.'

'I had thought that the Greeks held him in high honour,' remarked Voldi.

'So they do,' declared Mencius, 'and very properly, too. They lost
their rating as conquerors, but they gained something much more
valuable--the world's respect. Everywhere they went, they carried
their culture. They became known as the wise ones of the earth!
Moreover--their wide acquaintance with the other nations opened their
own eyes to the fact of their superiority as intellectuals. It made the
Greeks conscious of their cultural supremacy and more eager than ever
to develop their talents.' After a pause, he added, 'Militarily, of
course, Alexander's whirlwind campaigns accomplished little. His was a
very brief dynasty.'

'It usually takes much longer, then, for the actors to finish the old
play,' surmised Voldi, anxious to hear more of this unfamiliar talk.

'Anywhere from three or four generations to half a dozen centuries,'
said Mencius. 'Consider the case of these Philistines: they had been
smashed before; eleven centuries ago. The end of that play was quite
dramatic...You've heard of Samson, I suppose.'

Voldi shook his head and grinned; and Mencius, having found his polite
supposition incorrect, proceeded to tell the story. The Philistines
had had everything their own way for a handful of centuries. Then a
powerful leader had developed in neighbouring Jewry.

'It takes only one strong man, you know, to do the trick,' continued
Mencius. 'If he is bold enough, successful enough, his people will
follow him and fight for him. But he had better stay in the saddle!
That's the only trouble with a one-man show. The great man becomes so
infatuated with his personal conquests that he neglects to build up
a few successors to take over in the event of something happening to
him...The Philistines were quite unprepared to compete with a man of
Samson's stature. They had grown rich, soft, over-confident--and, of
course, corrupt. Samson bore down on them with the courage and voice
of a mad bull!... There are plenty of legends about him; most of them
lies, no doubt, but immensely entertaining. One old story has it that
he single-handedly slaughtered three hundred Philistine braves with the
jaw-bone of an ass.'

'An odd weapon,' commented Voldi.

'Yes--but not altogether inappropriate. The big fellow was a noisy
braggart and buffoon, without a trace of dignity or common sense. It
delighted him to make monkeys of the haughty Philistines; he loved to
play pranks on them. His roars of laughter could be heard for a mile.'

'What sort of pranks?' Voldi wanted to know.

'Oh--theatrical displays of his physical strength. One night he lifted
the city gates of Gaza off their hinges and carried them away on his
shoulders...Then, when he had all Philistia beaten and shamed, he made
the customary mistake of successful warriors, rested on his oars,
enjoyed his fame, and strutted about the city with his head held high.
Presently he became enamoured of a beautiful and designing woman.'

'Of Philistia?' inquired Voldi.

Mencius nodded--and scowled.

'It's strange,' he went on bitterly, 'how many strong men have been
taken in by women. It hasn't been so very long since our brave Marcus
Antonius, with the applause of the Empire in his ears, traded his fame
for the smiles of that scheming little Egyptian slut Cleopatra! A great
man he was--until he threw himself away.'

'I gather that your admiration for Cleopatra is under control,' drawled
Voldi, for something to say.

Mencius growled--and went on with Samson.

'This Philistine girl, Delilah, soon had the big clown eating out
of her hand. When the time was ripe she betrayed him to her fellow
countrymen and they took him into camp. His cohorts made no effort to
rescue him.'

'So--that was the end of the Fifth Act?' asked Voldi.

'By no means!' declared Mencius. 'It was only the end of the Fourth
Act! The Philistines went much too far in their vengeful celebration of
victory over Samson. That, too, is customary. They made a thorough job
of it; roped him and bore him away, burned out his eyes, harnessed him
like a donkey, and made him grind corn in the King's mill. Day after
day after week after month the hapless fellow plodded round and round
hauling the heavy beam, until his big, bare feet wore a path three
cubits wide and two cubits deep.'

'Tiresome occupation--for a hero,' observed Voldi.

'One day,' pursued Mencius, '--and this was the last act of the
play--the sumptuously furnished balcony of Philistia's praetorium,
or whatever they called their capitol, was crammed with banqueting
royalty, generals, councillors, and wealthy tax-payers, celebrating
a religious festival--in honour of Dagon, I believe, or one of their
silly gods--'

'Were they so religious, the Philistines?' broke in Voldi.

'Just on feast-days. I think that's true of all religions--so far as
the top layer is concerned. The influential people like to set a good
example. It makes the common people more confident of their gods.'

'And more contented with their rags and hunger,' assisted Voldi.

'Up to a certain pitch of starvation--yes,' agreed Mencius--'but
that is another story...The paunchy Philistines were hugely enjoying
themselves at the banquet-table, when some ingenious fool suggested
that they parade poor old Samson in the plaza where everybody could see
him--and have a good laugh. So--the flunkeys in the mill haltered him
and a small boy led him forth. Suddenly the blind giant felt a surge of
his former strength, wrapped his long, bony arms round a couple of the
marble pillars supporting the balcony--and pulled the whole house down.'

'Incredible!' shouted Voldi. 'You don't believe that, surely.'

Mencius remained sober-faced and was tardy with his rejoinder.

'Maybe not all of it, Voldi; not the fantastic details. But the fact
remains that blind old Samson wrecked Philistia so completely that she
took orders from other nations for six hundred years!' Mencius appeared
to have ended his speech. They rode on in silence for some time.

'That was indeed a strange story,' mused Voldi, at length.

'No--not so strange, but a bit terrifying. Sometimes, Voldi, I wonder
if the Roman Empire may not finish her play in much the same manner. We
Romans may be nearing the end of the Fourth Act.' Mencius was talking
to himself now, and Voldi had to listen sharply. 'We have gone about,
almost everywhere, capturing and roping and blinding other nations'
giants and making them grind our corn. Some day--unless History is not
to be trusted--they will pull our house down. I hope it doesn't happen
in my lifetime.'

'Meaning that your enslaved provincials are growing restless?'

'Slaves are always restless, Voldi. At present ours are helpless.
But--there will come a day and a strong man! Then we will play the
final act! To predict how long that might take or where the strong man
is to come from is a job for a better prophet than I.'

The noon sunshine bounced off the tarnished cupola of a distant tower.
Mencius pointed down the descending highway toward the city.

'Well, there she is, my friend, the famous old stronghold of Philistia!'

'Waiting for a strong man to appear--and put her in order again,' said
Voldi, after the manner of reciting a lesson.

'Not consciously waiting,' amended Mencius. 'Gaza is too stupid to be
aware that she is waiting for anything. Only when the strong man shows
up will she know that she has been waiting...And, meantime, while she
waits for Destiny to clean her up, we will not drink her stinking water
or her wretched wine; nor will we touch her polluted food. We will ride
straight on through to the docks. The fleet will be there. We will find
plenty to eat and drink on shipboard.'

'And it will be clean food and sound wine, I suppose, seeing it is
provided by the Romans,' remarked Voldi, with a slow wink that made his
friend grin.

'Yes,' declared Mencius proudly. 'It will be clean and sound! You
see--we Romans are still playing our Fourth Act--and doing a good job
of it!'

Suddenly, to Voldi's amazement, Mencius shed his quiet complacency and
assumed a new role. The tail-end of the long caravan was immediately
ahead.

'You are to keep close behind me now!' barked Mencius, over his
shoulder, as he spurred Brutus to a sharp trot.

With his spine stiffened to an arrogant posture, he rode past the
camel-train, looking neither to the right nor left. Arriving at the
docks, with Voldi trailing him, Mencius flung himself off his horse and
shouted a laconic order to Pincus. Then he marched with stiff-legged
hauteur to the wharf where the flagship of the fleet awaited him,
Voldi trudging along behind, feeling much like a convict on his way to
prison. Sailors and stevedores obsequiously saluted, but Mencius gave
them no attention.

Reaching the ship's waist, the haughty Mencius marched aboard, passing
between a double line of sailors and petty officers without seeing
them, and stood stiffly before the greying Commander, whose pose was as
icily formal. Voldi was not introduced. Bowing, the Commander wheeled
about and walked briskly aft, with Mencius striding beside him, and
Voldi--at a disadvantage and a bit offended--tagging behind them.

When they had entered the Commander's spacious cabin and the door had
been closed, the mood of the Romans instantly changed. They whacked
each other on the shoulder playfully.

'Fulvius, my lad,' shouted Mencius. 'It's a treat to see you again!'

'High time you turned up, you lazy tramp!' rumbled the Commander. 'I've
been rotting in this pest-hole for a week!'

'Serves you right! You have been spoiled with luxury!' Mencius peeled
off his tunic and tossed it on to Fulvius' bunk. 'Now I want you to
greet an Arabian friend of mine...Voldi, meet my good Fulvius.'

The Commander, with candid lack of interest, pursed his lips and nodded.

'Perhaps I should have added, Fulvius,' continued Mencius, 'that
Voldi saved my life, at the risk of his own, in a bloody battle with
highwaymen.'

At that Fulvius' eyes brightened--and he smiled amiably.

'Welcome to my ship, Voldi!' he said.

In gay spirits, Mencius became oratorical in his further introduction
of his friends.

'Here's where two of the finest and bravest have found each other!'
he exclaimed. 'Here's where the high mountains and the deep sea clasp
hands! Here's where a gallant Arabian who knows all about horses and
daggers meets a Roman who knows all about ships and storms! Here's
where--'

'If you're going to compose an ode, Mencius,' broke in Fulvius, 'let's
have some wine to wash it down. Odes are hard enough to bear, in
any case.' He opened the door a little way and growled with all the
irascibility of an old dog, presumably addressing a slave. They sat
down, and presently the wine arrived.

'Was it really much of a fight?' inquired Fulvius, eager for some gory
details.

'I was having it out with three bandits, alone and in the dark,'
explained Mencius. 'Suddenly, Voldi appeared and joined in the battle.
They would have finished me promptly but for this foolhardy fellow.'

Fulvius beamed toward Voldi and drawled, 'Well--even if you do stick
your nose into other people's business, you shall have a drink.'

For three whole hours, over their dinner, the talk had been a recital
of the Romans' recent experiences, spiced with persiflage; and at
length Mencius and Voldi were shown to their bunks in an adjacent cabin.

'What are you thinking about so seriously?' inquired Mencius, tugging
off a boot.

'You,' replied Voldi, with a brief chuckle. 'You astonished me today,
Mencius. You play so many parts--and all of them so very well.'

'Perhaps you are referring to our public formalities, as compared with
our unconventional behaviour in private?' asked Mencius, amused.

'I shouldn't have known you for the same man!' said Voldi.

'It's only good usage among us,' said Mencius. 'It's the Roman way
of enforcing discipline. We officers have to be high-handed with
our subordinates; and, in their presence, severely dignified in our
attitude toward one another. It's a serious and dangerous business,
Voldi, keeping slaves and mercenaries in control.'

'Ever try the other way,' ventured Voldi, 'getting acquainted with your
men and showing them that you trust them?'

'No; I never tried that, personally,' admitted Mencius; 'but it has
been tried and it doesn't work. Give the average man an inch and he'll
take a mile. Let the commanding officer show himself to be friendly and
he is immediately suspected of being soft--if not scared.'

'Our officials in Arabia do not strut and bark,' said Voldi.

'Of course not!' agreed Mencius. 'Why should they? Your King Zendi
can eat with shepherds if he wants to, and they love him for it. But
you're all Arabians: one big family! Look what we have to deal with,
Voldi! In my caravan there are rascally Philistines, sullen Parthians,
slit-eared Macedonians, and all manner of scheming ruffians! And on
this ship--why, if good old Fulvius relaxed his vigilance for a moment,
the riffraff of a dozen nations would stick him in the back and toss
him overboard! That's why we're cold and haughty and severe! It's the
Roman method of government--all the way down the line from the Emperor
to the overseer of my caravan!'

After a reflective moment, Voldi said, 'What if all the riffraff in the
Empire organized?'

'Slaves are hard to organize, Voldi. The Parthians would insist on
having a Parthian as the great emancipator. The cut-throats of Sicily
would follow only a Sicilian. It would take a very strong man to unite
the Empire's provincials!'

'Like Alexander, maybe?' wondered Voldi.

'Much more powerful than Alexander! He would have to appeal to
something that all these polyglots possess in common. I'm sure I don't
know what that would be.' Mencius leaned over toward the table and
snuffed out the lamp. 'Let's go to sleep, Voldi,' he said drowsily.
'It's too big a problem to settle tonight.'

After a quiet moment, he asked, 'Have you your dagger in bed with you?'

'No,' said Voldi.

'Better get it,' advised Mencius.

'Is that a Roman custom?' asked Voldi, suppressing a chuckle.

'He is an impoverished and forsaken Roman,' replied Mencius soberly,
'who dares go to sleep without a dagger strapped to his wrist.'

 * * * * * *

Now they were riding north on the broad and busy coast highway, their
horses frisky after a three-day rest at the port; eventful days for
Voldi, who had never seen a ship before and knew nothing of the ways of
seafaring men.

Seemingly endless files of slaves, each with a huge cake of Dead Sea
salt on his shoulder, had plodded up the gangways and down the ladders
into the dark holds of eleven sturdy ships. There was no haste, nor
was there any rest for these empty-faced toilers. Overseers stood,
small distances apart, along the wharf, occasionally flicking their
bull-whips expertly, as if to keep in practice, but not often letting
the lash bite into a slave's bare hide. It was enough for the burdened
men to know that the whips were in experienced hands.

As each ship was loaded and the hatches battened down, she would move
slowly away from her temporary berth and find a mooring half a mile
away in the quiet harbour, and another vessel would be warped into the
vacancy at the dock. Voldi spent most of his time alone at the stern
of the flagship, listening dreamily to the lap of the waves against
the barnacled piles and the screams of careening gulls; more enjoyable
entertainment than might be had where the work was in progress. Indeed,
Voldi was glad to find any distraction from the sight and sound of that
slave-labour. With his belligerent Arabian background, he was anything
but thin-skinned; but this monotonous scuff--scuff--scuff--scuff
of spiritless sandals had taken on an ominous significance. Some
day--according to Mencius' confidential forecast--this hopeless,
helpless scuffing of enslaved sandals would suddenly attain a swifter
tempo! It would spontaneously break into a run! It would be accompanied
by savage shouts for vengeance! And the Empire's Fifth Act would open
with a clash of angry metal!

For two hours, on that first day, Voldi had stood leaning against a
forward capstan, watching and listening, until he became oppressed
by an hallucination that the steady scuff--scuff--scuff--scuff
was, even now, this instant, accelerating to a threatening
SCUFF!--SCUFF!--SCUFF!--SCUFF! that would raise the curtain for the
final events of the old tragedy. He tried to comfort himself with
the thought that, after all, the well-merited collapse of the Roman
Empire need be of no concern to Arabia. But, on sober reflection, Voldi
decided that the wreck of the Empire would be everybody's business;
Arabia's too!

Bewildered and moody, he had moved away from the pattern and symbols
of this threat, finding a measure of serenity in the blue sky and
bluer sea. This sky and this sea had witnessed many an enactment of
the inevitably recurrent drama and would doubtless witness many more
repetitions of it in the ages to come. Nations would come and go, rise
and fall, but the same sky would look down upon these mutations with
calm detachment. The tide would roll in twice a day, no matter if all
the nations in the world destroyed one another--and themselves. It was
comforting to let one's eyes rest upon something that would endure--for
ever and ever.

At high noon on the third day, the last laden vessel was ready to
put out to sea. Mencius and Voldi stood together on the wharf as
the flagship drew in her frowsy hawsers and drifted from the dock.
Commander Fulvius, with a letter in his pocket for personal delivery to
Mencius' wife explaining his delay, cupped his mouth to shout into a
brisk seaward breeze, 'What shall I say if she asks me when to expect
you?'

'Tell her you don't know,' yelled Mencius.

More canvas was slowly creeping up the foremast, sailors tugging in
unison at the ropes. Pulleys squealed. Fulvius and Mencius, facing each
other soberly, stood at attention, thrusting forward stiff right arms
in a farewell salute. Voldi, less formally, waved a hand. A much-mended
sail was crawling up the mizzen-mast. Out in the bay the other ships
were winching up their anchors. The fleet was on its way to Rome.

In less than an hour Voldi and Mencius were riding through an
increasingly fertile and well-kept country, strikingly different from
the unproductive and ill-conditioned lands eastward of Gaza. The
vineyards showed good care. The houses and barns were larger. The
cattle in the pastures were sleek and fat. Mencius swept the rich
landscape with a panoramic gesture and discoursed of its value.

'This is what Alexander wanted when he laid siege to Philistia. It has
always been coveted by somebody, for it is truly a garden-spot. The
owners of these farms and vineyards are temporarily unmolested--but it
will not be for long. Voldi, if a man hopes to live at peace in this
world he must pitch his tent in a desert so bare that even a bug would
starve on it.'

'How do you account for the peace that these prosperous people are
enjoying at present?' inquired Voldi.

'That is an interesting and amusing story,' replied Mencius. 'For
some time there has flourished in Jerusalem a politically powerful
family--the Maccabees. They are rich as Midas and shrewd as Satan. Many
years ago they took pains to ingratiate themselves with Herod, backed
him solidly in his reign, flattered him with gifts and compliments.
Remembering that the war-battered little town of Askelon was Herod's
birthplace, they volunteered to rebuild it in splendour. You will
see, presently, what they made of it. The King, much gratified,
donated a beautiful consulate. Then the Maccabees--with Herod's
consent--encouraged a colony of wealthy fugitives from Athens to move
in and redeem the neglected countryside.'

'Now that it has been put in order,' remarked Voldi, 'it's a wonder you
Romans haven't--'

'That's the amusing part of the story,' broke in Mencius. 'Tiberius
would like to have it; but, if he were to take it, he would instantly
find himself at war with the Maccabees. He isn't quite ready for
that--and the Maccabees know that he knows it. As the matter stands,
the Emperor considers himself better off by levying heavy taxes on the
Maccabees than risking a costly war with them. That will come--later.'

'In our time?'

'You will think so when you see what is going on at the harbour in
Caesarea.'

'Don't the Jews realize what is in store for them?'

'Of course! But they are riven by sects and parties. It's the old story
of internal feuds and factions stubbornly refusing to co-operate with
one another even in the emergency of saving their own skins!' Mencius
was silently thoughtful for a while. 'You may recall my saying, a
few days ago, that the strength of a nation always depends upon the
leadership of the one powerful man who has it in him to bind all the
discordant elements together--and induce them to follow him! Let him
be popular enough and they will share his glory or his shame! Well,
the Jews have no such man among them. Each fanatical party has its
chieftain, but no one of them can command the loyalty of the whole
country. For ages the Jews have been expecting a great leader to appear
and deliver them from their enemies. Their prophets have spoken of this
fabulous person as the "Messiah." Now and again, the various sects have
burst into revolutionary flames incited by a "Messiah," but no one of
these leaders has lasted very long, not even in the esteem of his own
party. They have always ended up in some drab little martyrdom. And
within the space of a generation or two nobody remembered what became
of the great man's ashes.'

'Apparently the real "Messiah," when he comes, if he comes, will have a
big job on his hands,' surmised Voldi.

'According to the Jewish prophets, he is to be something of a divine
person. That might be greatly to his advantage.' Mencius' tone was so
ironical that Voldi laughed outright.

'I gather that you are not very religious, Mencius,' he remarked dryly.

'As for the traditional host of deities, no: I have no interest in
them, much less any faith in them. If they serve any useful purpose, it
is only to frighten small children into behaving themselves.'

A heavily laden caravan was bearing down on them from the north, and
they drew aside into a cypress-shaded lane to let the long procession
pass. Mencius guessed that it was a cargo of grain for embarkation at
Gaza, but Voldi refused to be diverted from the serious discussion they
had begun.

'Surely, Mencius, you do believe in the existence of some Higher
Power,' he said soberly.

'Oh yes!' admitted Mencius. 'It is obvious that a Great Mind--or a
group of Great Minds--created the world. Inconceivable that it could
have created itself. Whether any High Power is still in control of the
world is, in my opinion, doubtful. Humanity's antics do not indicate
that any sensible Overseer is in command...Sometimes, however, I find
myself privately worshipping a god whom I think of as the Torchbearer.'

Voldi's eyes widened with fresh interest. He urged Mencius to explain
what he meant by a Torchbearer.

'He has been going about for ages, Voldi,' said Mencius, slowly
measuring his words. 'Up and down, across the world, in every era, in
every country--patiently searching for men with lamps in their hands,
larger lamps than those of their neighbours or their fathers. And this
light-giving god touches the wicks of these unusually capacious lamps
with his divine torch.'

'Go on, please!' insisted Voldi, when Mencius, having seemed to have
made an end of his strange discourse, was counting the sullen, nodding
camels as they passed.

'That's about as far as I've gone into it,' confessed Mencius vaguely.
'My favourite god, the Torchbearer, wants the world to have more
light, for men to see by--so he keeps on looking for lamps. It must be
a very disappointing quest. I marvel at his perseverance. Only a few
men--widely separated by leagues and centuries--have borne lamps worthy
of the divine fire; and such light as they have kindled has brightened
the way for a mere handful of adventurers. As for the multitudes, they
still stumble along in the old darkness. Sometimes the Torchbearer
lights a large lamp that attracts smaller lamps. Plato brings his lamp
to Aristotle, and there is an unprecedented brightness on the path--for
a few, for a while. For a little while.'

'But--the mass of the people, they will keep on groping through the
dark,' mused Voldi. 'Is that what you believe?'

'I'd much rather not, of course,' sighed Mencius. 'It would please me
to hope that the Torchbearer might some day come upon the one great
man--with the one powerful lamp that would illumine the highway for us
all! But history does not encourage that hope.'

The camel-train had passed now and the dust was clearing. They rode, in
thoughtful silence, on to the highway. Mencius pointed to a graceful
tower in the distance.

'Askelon!' His tone was almost reverential. 'Now you will see what the
Maccabee money made of a squalid, dilapidated little town.'

'The Maccabees must be a great-hearted family,' remarked Voldi.

'That depends on one's point of view,' drawled Mencius. 'According
to general opinion the Maccabees are tyrants. Wealthy patrons of
the arts,' he added, 'are not necessarily great-hearted. The finest
architecture and sculpture in the world may be found in Rome, but
plenty of people could testify that we Romans are not benevolent.'

 * * * * * *

Two days later, at sundown, the travellers arrived in the amazing city
of Caesarea. If Voldi had been bewildered by the transitions from
dirty and degraded Gaza, of the Philistines, to the marble splendour
of beautiful Askelon, of the Greeks, and to the frowsiness of decayed
Joppa, of the Judaeans, he was now even more astonished by the feverish
confusions of this rapidly rising metropolis, which, according to
Mencius, would one day be the focal point from which the Empire would
move toward the utter subjugation of all Jewry.

Heretofore the Emperors had insisted only upon tribute in cash. The
Jews were sheep to be shorn annually but not converted into mutton.
Presently the Romans would want more than Israel's fleece. They would
march in and take everything, Mencius had declared; and when Voldi
had inquired whether this threat was a secret, his friend had replied
airily, 'Secret? Not at all! The Jews know the invasion is sure to
come! Preparations for it are going on right under their noses!'

Too tired that night for sight-seeing, they had ridden through the
congested streets to the principal inn, The Agrippa, recently built
by the Romans to accommodate three hundred guests. It was situated in
the very heart of the city and crowded to capacity; but Mencius had a
friend in the management and a room was found for them.

After an excellent supper, they strolled through the spacious,
newly furnished foyer, where scores of opulently dressed Romans of
self-assured and distinguished bearing stood in conversing groups or
lounged in the richly upholstered chairs and divans. This unfamiliar
view of flamboyant wealth dazzled Voldi's senses. He wasn't quite
sure whether he was infatuated or infuriated. Every man in sight was
extravagantly garbed and groomed. The air was heavy with pomades.
Jewels flashed on well-kept hands. It was true then: the Romans were
not only men of the world, they were the important, the impressive men
of the world! It belonged to them--there could be no doubt of that!

Voldi's memory--which he suspected of something like disloyalty--rolled
back for a glimpse of King Zendi and his Council, carelessly clad
in their unadorned burnouses; grave, hard-muscled men who despised
ostentation. How their thin, haughty nostrils would have flared in
contempt of this gaudy show! But--wasn't it costing Arabia a pretty
penny to maintain that attitude of scorn for prosperous people? Voldi
wondered whether proud poverty wasn't, in the long run, more expensive
property than ropes of pearls.

Suddenly a tall, handsome, close-cropped Roman--on the left breast of
whose scarlet tunic the imperial black eagle was appliquéd--detached
himself from a small party of friends and came forward beaming a
welcome.

'Nick! You're here at last! The gods be praised for your safe arrival!
I was getting anxious.'

They clapped their hands on each other's shoulders.

'Why anxious, Tony? I'm not late. This was the day.'

'No, you're not late. But my distinguished passengers showed up this
afternoon, hours before I expected them, and who knows when they might
decide to sail! The wishes of Her Highness are never predictable...I
hope you've attended to all your business--and are ready to be off at a
moment's notice.'

Mencius nodded; and, reaching for Voldi's arm, drew him forward.

'Tony,' he said, 'I want you to meet a young Arabian friend of
mine...Voldi, greet my long-time-ago schoolmate, Antonius Lucan,
Commander of the Emperor's ship The Augusta.'

Voldi bowed briefly. The Commander's eyes narrowed a little. He lifted
his forearm perfunctorily and mumbled that any friend of Proconsul
Nicator Mencius was his friend also; after which he turned toward his
old crony with a quizzical arching of his grizzled brows, plainly
inquiring how we happened to have an Arabian on our hands at this
particular moment. Mencius was prompt to reply. Voldi had come upon him
in the night, on the road alone, badly outnumbered by robbers, and had
joined the fray. The reckless Arabian had saved his life; no less!

In response to this speech, the Commander of The Augusta bowed to
Voldi in recognition of invaluable services rendered to a comrade, and
Mencius supplemented his story of the fight with, 'It's amazing--this
young fellow's skill with a dagger! I think his parents must have given
him a knife to play with when he was a baby.'

Voldi gave a deprecating grin, shrugged slightly, and seemed eager for
a change of topic. He was conscious of the old sailor's uneasiness
about him. The tension was somewhat relaxed, at this juncture, by the
appearance of another urbane, middle-aged Roman--more conservatively
dressed than any of the others--who paused to greet Mencius with quiet
affability, after nodding to Tony.

'What brings you here this time, Mencius?' he inquired lazily. 'More
copper?'

'At present the fellow's not a peddler, Atrius,' drawled Tony. 'He's a
tourist, absolutely empty-handed, sailing home with me on The Augusta.
We're taking His Highness Antipas and his family on their annual
excursion.'

Atrius, taking pains to be extravagantly disrespectful, sniffed audibly
and wrinkled his nose.

'I wish somebody would explain to me,' he declaimed, 'how the ruler of
poor little Galilee rates a free voyage, every season, on the Emperor's
pleasure-barge!'

'Psst!' warned Tony. 'I mustn't be seen listening complacently to such
talk.' Then, lowering his voice, he remarked, 'You may be sure the
Tetrarch will eventually pay his passage...And he is abundantly able to
do it--when Tiberius bills him for it.'

Mencius broke in now to introduce Voldi with appropriate explanations
of the circumstances accounting for their friendship. Then, to Voldi,
'Should you get into any trouble while in Caesarea, our excellent
Atrius--who is the best-known lawyer in the city--will befriend you, I
know.'

Atrius, who had been gnawing at his bearded underlip and staring into
Voldi's face with undisguised curiosity, chuckled gruffly.

'Arabian, eh? And handy with a blade! Doesn't ask what the fight's
about, so long as he can get in there--and gut somebody!' He laughed
with evident relish and poked Tony in the ribs with his thumb. 'Hell of
a time for an Arabian gladiator to turn up, I must say!...What part of
Arabia do you hail from, my son?'

'The southern mountains, sir,' replied Voldi stiffly.

'Anywhere near the King's domain?'

'Not very far, sir; a few miles.'

'Your King Zendi seems a popular man.'

'Yes, sir.'

'I dare say you know him,' ventured Atrius. The others were growing
restless. The Commander was absently patting his be-ringed left fist
with his right palm. Mencius shifted his weight and frowned.

'Voldi's grandfather, Mishma, is the King's Chief Councillor, Atrius.'

'Ah? So!' Atrius grinned. 'Well, if there is anything we can do for you
while you are in Caesarea, Voldi, we will be happy to serve you...See
you later, Tony...You'll be glad to be home again, Mencius. Wish I were
going with you. You will be arriving in time for Saturnalia.'

With the departure of Atrius, conversation lagged; and Voldi,
surmising that the two Romans might wish to have some private talk,
excused himself and sauntered through the lobbies to the loggia which
half circled a pool where a beautifully wrought fountain played.
He sat down on a deeply upholstered divan and reviewed the recent
conversation...This Atrius might be a good man to know.

For some little time after Voldi had strolled away from them, Mencius
and Tony found it difficult to sustain an interest in their talk about
the forthcoming voyage. Finally Tony blurted out: 'What's this boy
doing in Caesarea, Mencius?'

'He is on his way north.'

'Sight-seeing--or business?'

'A little of both, I think.'

'Meaning that you aren't going to tell me.' Tony's voice showed
annoyance.

'He confided to me the nature of his errand,' admitted Mencius. 'It is
nothing to cause you anxiety. He is looking for a fugitive. I shall
be obliged if this much information contents you, Tony. I gave him my
word.'

'Very well,' conceded Tony grumpily. 'But I'll expect you to see to
it that your blood-letting Arab keeps his distance from my ship!
If anybody sticks a knife into the Tetrarch while he is not in my
custody, I shall make no protest; but--By Jove!--he's not going to be
assassinated on The Augusta!'

'It's a wonder the fellow makes these voyages,' observed Mencius.

'He can't rot up there in Galilee all the year round! He'd go crazy!
Nothing ever happens. He has no friends among his subjects. They all
despise him...However--he may be in for more excitement than he wants
presently. His Chief Scrivener was telling me, this afternoon, that
something like a revolution is brewing--'

'In sleepy, stupid little Galilee?' scoffed Mencius. 'You're jesting!'

'According to this scribbler, Pamphylios, it's not an uprising against
the government--at least not yet. It seems that a young carpenter has
been haranguing great crowds. So far, he has said nothing to inflame
the people. On the contrary, he has been urging them to be law-abiding
and content with their poverty.'

'And how could such soft words collect a crowd?' wondered Mencius.

'Pamphylios says the man has been healing the sick by laying his hands
upon them,' said Tony. 'That, of course, is nonsense. Pamphylios admits
he has no first-hand knowledge of it. But--the rumour is in the air and
all Galilee is buzzing with these stories.'

'Bad time for the Tetrarch to absent himself,' remarked Mencius.

'That's what Pamphylios thinks,' assented Tony. 'But Antipas couldn't
be talked out of his customary excursion. Half the year, in Tiberias,
he lives on his anticipation of the other half in Rome. The Scrivener
says that a deputation of priests waited on His Highness a few days
ago, pleading with him to silence the Carpenter; but Antipas made
short work of them; told them they had better make their synagogues a
little more attractive and useful--and maybe the people wouldn't be
congregating in pasture-fields to listen to this carpenter.'

'Not a bad suggestion,' put in Mencius, with a chuckle.

'Any suggestion would be good enough, in the Tetrarch's opinion, so
long as he wasn't hindered from going to Rome. He wouldn't miss the
pageants and games of Saturnalia--not even if the Sea of Galilee went
dry!'

Mencius was soberly meditative for a while.

'Ever hear of the Jewish "Messiah," Tony?' he asked irrelevantly.

Tony shook his head and scowled; muttered that he had given up trying
to understand the Jews. Mencius explained briefly; but his friend was
uninterested. The Jews had always been too religious for their own
good, he said.

'I'm surprised that you have so much concern for such rubbish,'
continued Tony impatiently. 'You read too much! You think too much! You
know too much! It wouldn't surprise me to hear, some day, that you'd
gone off to live in a cave in the mountains, having it out with the
gods--and the fleas.'

'I'll admit,' said Mencius, 'a man can live a much happier life by not
using his mind at all...I'm going to bed now. I have been all day in
the saddle. Doubtless you will be turning in, too.'

'Not quite yet,' growled Tony. 'I've an errand to do first. I must go
down to the docks and notify my mate to be on the alert for an Arabian
stowaway.'

'You're putting yourself to unnecessary bother,' said Mencius.

'I shall be satisfied if your new friend gives me no more bother than
that,' said Tony.

After Voldi had sat alone, staring absently at the fountain for a
quarter of an hour, he was joined on the divan by the lawyer, who hoped
he was not intruding.

'Expect to be with us for a while?' inquired Atrius casually.

'I am leaving in the morning, sir,' replied Voldi. It had occurred to
him that if he showed an inclination to be frank, his explanations
might be more readily believed. 'I have an errand in Galilee,' he went
on. 'I have been sent to look for a young Arabian who ran away from
home and is believed to have gone up into the neighbourhood of the Sea
of Galilee. I am to persuade him to return--if I find him.'

'Know anything about the city of Tiberias?'

'Not much. It's the seat of the Tetrarch. There is a Roman fort hard
by.'

'You will make inquiries at the fort?'

'Not at first; not until I have to. I'd much rather find my fugitive
friend without calling so much attention to him. I shall not needlessly
embarrass him...Do you know that country, sir?'

'A little. If I may venture a suggestion, Voldi, there is a discreet
man of my acquaintance living in the small town of Bethsaida, only a
short distance from Tiberias. He is a lawyer, in retirement now: a
man of broad sympathies and much prudence. You might give him your
confidence.'

Voldi was glad to accept the advice. He brought out a small slate
tablet from his pocket and wrote the Bethsaidan's name and the
directions for finding him. Atrius negligently allowed his eyes to
follow the red chalk as the Arabian wrote.

'You've lived in Greece?' he inquired when Voldi had pocketed the
tablet.

'No, sir; I have never been in Greece.'

'Do many Arabians understand Greek?'

'Probably not.' Voldi rose, thanked Atrius for his kindness, and
remarked that he must find Mencius before retiring.

'It would please me to learn how your mission succeeds,' said Atrius,
as they parted; 'and please convey my greetings to my friend, and
former colleague, David Ben-Zadok.'

 * * * * * *

At the first intimation of dawn Voldi slipped out quietly so as not to
waken Mencius, to whom he had said farewell at midnight after a lengthy
but inconclusive discussion of the probability of his finding Fara in
Galilee.

Mencius had then gone promptly to sleep, apparently undisturbed by the
relentless racket of heavy traffic in the street below, where enormous
wagons, laden with building materials, ground their iron-shod wheels
into the cobble-stones, and drivers screamed and lashed at their
straining oxen. The hideous clamour had not annoyed Mencius. He was
quite accustomed to it, he said. That was the way it sounded all night,
every night in Rome. The Emperor, wanting to keep the streets free of
construction traffic in the daytime, had decreed that all heavy hauling
must be done between sunset and sunrise. Caesarea, being now a Roman
city, observed this rule. But Mencius didn't care. He was more than a
bit homesick and the infernal din seemed to soothe him. Not so with
Voldi, who had had no experience in big, bustling cities. The unceasing
noise had kept him wide awake, and the dilemma confronting him had
grown to appalling dimensions in the darkness.

At the well-kept stables, where he found Darik sleek and shining from
the diligent grooming he had received (another attestation to the
proficiency of Roman discipline), Voldi was not much surprised to
encounter an armed legionary waiting courteously to escort him out of
the city; for Mencius had confided that Commander Antonius Lucan of
The Augusta would feel more comfortable after being informed that the
grudge-bearing young Arabian had ridden through Caesarea's east gate
and had disappeared on the open road toward Galilee.

In half an hour he was alone on that road, after having received the
legionary's deferential wishes for a safe and pleasant journey, though
they were both fully aware of the reason why the honour of a Roman
escort had been conferred upon a young citizen of Arabia. Voldi looked
back over his shoulder, waved a hand, and laughed quietly over the
little drama in which he had been invited to play. In spite of their
reputation for insufferable egoism and bloody-handed ruthlessness,
reflected Voldi, the Romans were--in many respects--to be admired. They
were superbly organized. They were effective. They were cruel, yes; but
not because they loved cruelty. They preferred your friendship to your
enmity. They would rather lead than drive. They could even set a watch
over your movements and do it so graciously that you wanted to wave a
friendly farewell to your keeper when he was done with you.

The road, angling to the north-east, was not so busy as the coast
highway. It was therefore narrower. With a long day's journey ahead of
him, Voldi encouraged Darik to settle down to a comfortable canter.
They were in level country now, the broad Plain of Esdraelon, where
the landscape was too monotonous to divert a stranger's attention from
his own problems...One fact brought a crumb of comfort: the Tetrarch
was still alive. Of course, he didn't deserve to be alive; but at
least Fara had not got herself into trouble by killing him. And it
was unlikely that she had attempted to kill him, for surely Commander
Antonius Lucan would have known of it; and having known of it, would
have told of it.

Came now a plodding donkey-train, bearing small, greasy-looking casks,
probably containing sesame and olive oil bound for Caesarea, in charge
of shabby, shaggy, sullen men who frowned and spat as they passed.

But what would Fara be likely to do now that her mission had failed
of accomplishment? Assuming that she had arrived in the vicinity of
Tiberias to await an opportunity for settling with her rascally father,
would she await his return from Rome?

Here came a lone traveller, ambling along on an infirm, sore-eyed
camel, followed--at a hundred yards--by a hump-backed old man with a
scowl on his wrinkled face and an axe on his bony shoulder.

Voldi greeted each of them in turn with a cheery good morning. Neither
replied. Was that because he was riding a good horse and they were
envious? Or was it because he was an Arabian? Or because he was a
stranger--any stranger? Or because they were by nature impolite? He had
to admit, though, as he rode on, that the Arabians would have shown no
more courtesy to a travelling Jew.

Perhaps Fara would decide to return to Arabia, now that she had failed.
But, having risked so much--to come so far--would she not persevere and
wait for the Tetrarch's return? There really wasn't much in Arabia for
her to go back to since her mother was gone. Himself, of course, but
she may have put him out of her mind. Having left him without a word of
farewell, she might assume that he would have given her up--and turned
his attention elsewhere.

Now a family on foot, single-file, was overtaken. Reluctantly they
sidled off the road and stood stolidly in the dusty weeds waiting for
the rider to pass. Father, leading the procession, wore an impressive
black beard and a ragged black robe, but bore no burden. Mother had a
sleepy baby in the crook of one arm and a big basket of wheat in the
other. The boy towed a white milch-goat. The half-grown girl carried a
bulging bag of apples on her back. Voldi rode by slowly, yielding room.
He nodded amiably. Father and the goat raised their chins and sneered
with expressions so similar that Voldi grinned. Mother, imitating her
lord, made an ugly face. The boy stared, without malice. The girl
lifted pretty eyes and smiled shyly.

It was the older people's fault, thought Voldi, that the different
races despised one another. He wondered whether the world might be more
harmonious if all the old people were abolished: say, everyone over
twenty. Luckily for himself, such a commendable decree would leave
him to help establish the new order in which strangers meeting on
the road would be more ready to smile than spit. But--they would all
have to remain at twenty--and never grow old. Perhaps the project was
impracticable.

Well, it wouldn't be long now before he might know something more about
Fara. An Arabian boy in his teens would be noticed in a small fishing
village, where everybody knew everybody else. Someone would remember
having seen this young Arab. Voldi wondered what success Fara might
have had--posing as a boy. Risky business that was!

At a cross-roads in sight of a village that the sign-post said was
Megiddo, four legionaries, their spears and shields leaning against
the stone fence, were sprawled on the ground intent upon a dice-game.
Voldi expected them to challenge him. In that event he was going to say
that the Tetrarch had bought the black gelding while in Caesarea and
he was delivering it at Tiberias. But the soldiers barely glanced up
as he passed. Apparently the discipline of the troops had been eased
somewhat since the Tetrarch's departure. Or perhaps the attention of
the officers had been diverted by the large assemblies that Mencius had
spoken of, lately congregating in the vicinity of the Sea of Galilee. A
carpenter had been addressing the people and was reputed to be healing
all manner of diseases. This latter feat being clearly an incredible
rumour, it was not likely that the carpenter would last very long as a
popular leader, Mencius had said. There was nothing inflammatory about
it or the Tetrarch would not have left the country.

Voldi wondered how much interest Fara might have in such a movement.
He could not conceive of her showing any curiosity about a thing like
that, except for the fact that she had turned aside at Hebron to listen
to another itinerant prophet. It had seemed quite unlike Fara to be
attracted by a performance of that nature.

A bad lunch--smoked fish and stale barley-bread--was sullenly tossed
on to a dirty table at Megiddo's only inn. Voldi nibbled at the
unappetizing food and paid the pockmarked woman with a shekel. She
threw down a handful of unfamiliar copper coins. He kept one of them,
meaning to examine it later, and went out to water his horse at the
public trough. A group of small boys, in soiled tatters, gathered
about. A woman screamed from a near-by doorway and the oldest boy
ambled off in that direction, turning to spit before leaving. There was
another female screech from somewhere in the neighbourhood and all the
lads scurried away but two. The smaller boy's eyes were brimming with
pus. Voldi reached in his pocket and brought up the copper he had been
given in change at the inn. He offered it to the sore-eyed boy, who did
not reach for it.

'He's blind,' explained his brother. 'Give it to me!'

Voldi handed him the coin.

'Yaa! Yaa!' screamed the boy, flinging the copper down. 'Bad money! No
good! Yaa! Yaa!' He set off, dragging his little brother--doubtless
to report the incident. Voldi mounted and rode on. A small group of
indignant men and women was collecting about the outraged boy who had
been offered a worthless coin. They reviled the Arabian as he passed.
Megiddo was not an attractive village. Was it typical of Galilean
communities? Voldi hoped not. Poor Fara!

As the afternoon wore on, the country became more fertile, but it was
plain to see that the inhabitants had not made the most of it. It was
indeed a backward land. One day the Romans would come in and prosper.
The Galileans would be virtually enslaved, but have more to eat, no
doubt, than now.

At sundown Nazareth was sighted. At a distance, with the late afternoon
glow on the squat dome of the synagogue and the houses whitely
gleaming, the town promised to be picturesque. On closer acquaintance
it was a disappointment. The residences were small, shabby, and
forlorn. As usual, the principal street widened at the centre of the
village, describing a circle around the inevitable community well.
Apparently most of the mercantile business was concentrated here.
Little bazaars and shops elbowed one another for standing-room. Beyond
the circle was the inn. The proprietor made it obvious to Voldi that he
was unwelcome, but grumblingly consented to give him lodging when he
heard the clink of substantial money. After toying disgustedly with the
worst food that had ever been set before him, Voldi strolled out on to
the deserted street. Everyone was at supper.

He came upon a farrier's shop and found a greying man of fifty or more
at his forge, mending a broken cistern-wheel, probably a matter of some
urgency. Always interested in farriers' shops, he paused in the open
doorway. The man looked up from his work and nodded amiably. It was
a pleasant surprise to be greeted in this friendly manner, and Voldi
sauntered in.

'Stranger in these parts?' The farrier gave the bellows-rope another
tug and pointed to a seat on an old tool-chest.

'Yes--I am an Arabian.' Voldi thought it better to have this awkward
subject disposed of without delay.

'We don't see many,' said the farrier. 'Are you staying with us awhile,
sir?'

'Tonight only. I am on my way from Caesarea to Tiberias.'

'The Tetrarch came through here a couple of days ago. Quite a
procession. Going to Rome. Perhaps you know about it.'

Voldi said he did.

'Ever been in Tiberias?' asked the farrier.

'No. I suppose you have been there many a time.'

'Never. But I mean to go--tomorrow. That's why I'm working late. Big
doings over there, these days. Perhaps you've had wind of it along the
way. Our prophet, Jesus, has been talking to great multitudes.'

'Your prophet? Meaning that you believe in him? Have you heard him?'

'I've known him since he was a baby! This is his home!' The farrier
put his hammer down on the anvil and leaned comfortably against his
work-bench, relishing the stranger's evident interest in him.

'Is it true that he performs miracles?' asked Voldi. 'I've heard a
rumour to that effect.'

'That's what I want to know,' said the farrier soberly. 'It wouldn't
surprise me much; though he never did anything strange here in
Nazareth. He is a carpenter, a good one too.' He pointed through the
open window behind Voldi, who turned to look. 'That's the shop, over
there, across the road. It's his father's. And it was his father's
before him. Jesus has worked there ever since he was a youngster--until
a few months ago.'

'Anything queer about him?' encouraged Voldi.

'He was a dreamy little fellow,' remembered the farrier, averting his
eyes. 'The other children liked him though. As a lad he used to tell
them stories.'

'What kind of stories?' wondered Voldi.

'I never heard any of them myself. He seemed shy of grown-up people and
didn't talk much when they were around. But my eldest brother Laban's
boy, Ephraim--my namesake--said the stories were mostly about some
far-away country where there was no winter and no darkness--and the
rivers never dried or overflowed--and nobody was ever sick--and nobody
died--and nobody wept. And everyone loved the King.'

Voldi waited in silence for the farrier to continue.

'It seemed strange for a small boy to have such fancies,' soliloquized
Ephraim. 'According to my nephew, Jesus always talked about this
distant land as if it was real; almost as if he had been there. The
country was at peace. There were no soldiers, no forts, no prisons, no
alms-houses. Everyone had some work to do, but not for money. There
wasn't any money. No one was rich; no one was poor. And flowers grew
everywhere and always--but nobody gathered them...The child made much
over flowers. From the time he was able to toddle, the little chap
would carry water from the village well to his garden. We all thought
he wouldn't amount to much, being so interested in flowers. But--as he
grew up he turned out to be a skilful carpenter; better than Joseph,
his father.'

'But he never gathered up a crowd--and talked?' asked Voldi.

'No. As I say, he was not a one to talk much, except to the smaller
children; and, after he came into his teens, he was very quiet and
walked alone most of the time. I think that was because--as he grew
up--the older children laughed among themselves at the stories he had
told. Once it was spread about that a half-grown boy, tormenting him
about this faraway land, rudely accused him of being a liar, and Jesus
replied that he had told them the truth; that there was such a country;
that he knew more things about it than he had told them.'

'And then the people thought he was crazy, I suppose,' remarked Voldi.

'Well, we couldn't help feeling that he was different, and perhaps he
guessed how we felt about him--for he spent most of his time alone,
except when he was working in the shop.'

'What did his family think about him?'

'They didn't know quite what to make of him. He used to go for long
walks by himself, in the hills. His mother worried about him. Shortly
before he left Nazareth, he was gone for a couple of months, and when
he came back you would have thought he was walking in his sleep. He had
something on his mind--and it weighted him. Nobody seemed to know where
he had been. Maybe his folks did. But it was plain that he was much
stirred up--inside...On the morning of the day he left Nazareth--for
good, I fear--he attended the service in the Synagogue, for it was the
Sabbath Day. He sat with the family, as usual. Sometimes our good old
Rabbi Ben-Naboth would ask some man in the congregation to read the
Scripture Lesson; some one of the old men who were known for their
piety. On this day the Rabbi called for Jesus to come forward. It was
unusual to invite one so young. The place grew very quiet.'

'You thought it would be something out of the ordinary?' asked Voldi.

'Wouldn't you,' countered Ephraim, 'considering how out of the ordinary
Jesus was?...Well--he walked forward and took up the scroll containing
the writing of the Prophet Esaias...I suppose you've heard of our famed
Prophet Esaias?' he interrupted himself to say.

'No,' admitted Voldi. 'I have little knowledge of your great
ones--since our Father Abraham.' They both grinned.

'Nearly as I can recall the words,' continued Ephraim, 'what Jesus read
went something like this: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me. He has
appointed me to bring good news to the poor. He has sent me to release
men in bondage and open the eyes of the blind. I am to raise up those
who have been beaten down, and I am to announce that the Lord will make
this a blessed year..." Then Jesus rolled up the scroll, handed it back
to the Rabbi, and said, "This prophecy is now to be fulfilled." Then
he returned to his seat. All eyes were fixed on him. Even the Rabbi
seemed bewildered, and it was some little time before he went on with
the devotions...After the meeting, the congregation gathered about
Jesus, as he came out, and asked him what he meant; and was someone
coming--here--now--to Nazareth--to open the prison and free the slaves
and give sight to the blind?'

'It hadn't occurred to any of you that Jesus might be referring to
himself as the promised healer?'

'No; you see, he had grown up with us. It was beyond our thought that
one of our own neighbours might be gifted to do such things.'

'What did Jesus say then?'

'He declared that it was to be his mission to spread the good news. And
the people were silent and unbelieving--and slanted their eyes at one
another with sulky faces. One old man shouted crossly, "You think you
are going to open the eyes of the blind--here--in Nazareth?"'

'I'll wager they all listened to his reply!' said Voldi.

'They did indeed--and it made them angry. Jesus said, "Not here--not in
Nazareth. A prophet has no value in his own community." At that, the
people drifted away, grumbling; many of them turning to scowl or laugh
scornfully.'

'And--after that--they mistreated him?'

'No; he gave them no opportunity to mistreat him. He left Nazareth
at once; not even tarrying to have dinner with his family. After the
meeting at the Synagogue he wandered away--and he hasn't been back.'

'Perhaps,' surmised Voldi, 'if he is really doing great things for
people elsewhere, the people of your town will beseech him to return.'

Ephraim shook his head and renewed his forge-fire.

'No,' he replied. 'It wouldn't be like Nazareth--to do that.'

'Not even to have your blind ones see?' asked Voldi.

'No; not even to have our blind ones see!' Ephraim was now resuming
his interrupted work with diligence. Voldi felt that the interview was
over, and rose to go. At the door he turned to say with a smile:

'What will your fellow townsmen think of you for making a journey to
see Jesus? Will they be annoyed?'

Ephraim tapped his anvil a couple of times, chuckling to himself.

'They can't be too much annoyed,' he said. 'I'm the only farrier in
Nazareth. Perhaps if there were two, I shouldn't risk my neighbours'
displeasure.'

Voldi bade him farewell and returned to the inhospitable inn. Shortly
after midnight he was awakened by a violent thunderstorm followed
by a heavy rainfall that continued throughout the night and until
mid-forenoon of the next day. When finally it cleared, he set off at
the best speed he could make on a slippery road, hoping to arrive in
Bethsaida before darkness fell.



Chapter XI


It had rained steadily all night and was still hard at it when Jairus
roused in the morning. He sat up in bed and frowned.

Ordinarily, Jairus would not have cared. Of complacent mind, it was his
habit to accept all weathers without complaint. Besides, the country
needed rain, for it had been the sunniest autumn that Galilee had seen
for many years.

But, much as his cherished gardens and vineyards would benefit by a
refreshing downpour, this was clearly an inconvenient day for it,
and Jairus was annoyed; so very much annoyed that when Adiel, his
uncommonly attractive wife, entered the room, she found him in a
posture of dejection, with both hands in his tousled hair. He mumbled
a gloomy acknowledgment of her presence without looking up. Seating
herself on the edge of his bed, Adiel gently patted him on the
shoulder. What was the trouble? Didn't he like the rain?

'Any other time,' muttered Jairus, slipping his arm about her. 'I was a
fool to consent to that meeting here today. These tedious discussions
always bore me, even when the day is fine and they can do their dull
haranguing out in the pergola. Now we will have them on our hands--all
day--indoors--with no chance of escape...But one can't offend Rabbi
Ben-Sholem. He is a good old man.'

'Yes, dear; he is indeed--though a bit tiresome,' murmured Adiel. 'I
had forgotten that you were having company today. What is this party to
be: one of those dreadful all-day meetings of the Synagogue Regents?'

'Worse than that,' sighed Jairus. 'This is a deputation of priests,
scribes, legal counsellors, and such things, who are coming all the
way from Jerusalem to decide what should be done with this preaching
Carpenter.'

'Maybe they won't come,' said Adiel hopefully, 'now that it's such a
bad day.'

'Of course they'll come!' grumbled Jairus. 'They will have been on
the road for three days. We may as well prepare for them. They'll be
here. You can depend on that!' He glanced up, brightened perceptibly,
and waved his hand to a pair of smiling, twelve-year-old eyes that
had appeared in the crack of the slowly opening door. His invitation
brought the happy child dancing into the room. She snuggled down on the
other side of her father.

'Breakfast's ready,' she announced gaily. 'And Rachael says we're to
come directly and eat it, for there's to be a lot of company here for
dinner...What kind of company, father? Will they be jolly--and tell
funny stories; or are they the other people?'

Jairus absently fondled his daughter's curls and replied sadly that
they were--he regretted to say--the other people.

'No funny stories today, Sharon.'

'Go and tell Rachael we will be there immediately, dear,' said her
mother; and when the child had scrambled out of the bed and was on her
way Adiel asked, 'What are they planning to do to this strange person?
You said he hadn't broken the laws. What charge will they bring against
him?'

'That's what they are going to discuss today,' replied Jairus. 'They
can't apprehend him as a disturber of the peace. If he has disturbed
the peace by preaching to these big crowds, it is the business of the
provincial police to arrest him. I had a talk with Antipas about this,
a few days before he left. He had sent several of his men out into the
country to see what the Carpenter was trying to do, and they reported
that nothing seditious had been said. The Tetrarch seemed satisfied
that the fellow was doing no harm with his admonitions to the people
that they should try to be contented--and live at peace with all men.'

'Surely the Rabbis can't object to that,' reflected Adiel. 'Perhaps
they have been disturbed by all these tales of miracles.' She grew
suddenly serious, searching her husband's eyes. 'You don't think
there can be any truth in these stories, do you, Jairus? All the
people on our estate are talking of nothing else! I've never known our
house-servants to be so excited about anything!'

'Well,' drawled Jairus, 'you know how servants are. They dote on such
yarns. It's quite beyond belief that the Carpenter is really healing
diseases. Have any of our people told you that they themselves have
been cured of anything?'

'No, but they are convinced that the man has done some very remarkable
things.' Rising, Adiel held up Jairus's exquisitely quilted robe.
Hoisting himself out of bed, he slipped his arms into it and ambled off
toward the spacious bath, pausing in the doorway to remark, 'I think
it's rather undignified for these pundits from Jerusalem to be making
a big thing of this. If they pay no attention to the man, he will soon
dispose of himself--and the people will forget all about him and he can
go back to his carpenter-shop. I'm ashamed to be serving as host to
this foolish business, Adiel.'

She loitered in the corridor for him, and when presently he rejoined
her, Adiel tucked her hand under his arm and said, with some
hesitation, 'I wish you would have a talk with a few of our farmers;
old Simeon, for one. You can trust him to tell the truth. He claims
that he actually saw this Jesus give sight to a man who had been born
blind!'

'Pouf!' scoffed Jairus good-naturedly. 'Don't be silly! There's some
sensible explanation for these tales. You may be sure of that!'

They strolled toward the breakfast-room. It was on the east side of
the villa, adjoining the large dining-room, and was usually flooded
with sunshine. On fine summer days the servants rolled back the central
panels of the roof, made of tightly woven goat-hair, and the family
breakfasted under the blue sky. It was closed today and the room was
dreary. Even the beautifully crafted mosaics on the walls were dingy
and lifeless.

As they neared the high-arched doorway, Jairus slowed to say, before
they entered, 'If our people want this sort of entertainment, I've
no objection. The crops are all in. The men have nothing much to do.
Listening to the Carpenter is certainly better than loitering around
the wine-cellars down in Capernaum...Good morning, Rachael! We will
make short work of our breakfast. You and the maids have a busy day
before you, with the large party for dinner.'

'Yes, sir,' sniffed old Rachael, beckoning to her crew to proceed
with their table-service. Then, with the bland impudence to which her
seniority entitled her, she remarked, 'And they will eat a lot!'

'What makes you think so?' inquired her master, anticipating some
astringent drollery.

'We've had their like before, sir--men who speak big words. They always
eat big dinners.'

'I had never noticed that, Rachael,' chuckled Jairus; 'but by Jove I
believe you're right! Well--make sure you have enough for them.'

Sharon now came up out of her half-drained milk-goblet, with a gasp,
and solemnly remarked, 'Nurse says "By-Jove" is a Roman swear-word,
father.'

'Perhaps, if we must swear,' commented her mother, 'it is better to
take the names of the heathen gods in vain.'

'Is this By-Jove a heathen?' asked Sharon.

'Drink your milk, little one,' admonished her father gently. 'We'll all
have our fill of theology before the day is over, without beginning it
now.'

'I'm not expected to attend this dinner, am I?' asked Adiel.

'No, dear,' said Jairus. 'Not if you don't want to. It's a business
affair. You needn't show up at all. It's Rabbi Ben-Sholem's party
really. We're just providing food and shelter.'

 * * * * * *

By mid-forenoon it had cleared. Patches of blue sky were appearing
and the sun was glinting on the puddles in the rose-garden as Jairus
sauntered out to the pergola. Perhaps it would dry off sufficiently
for the learned men--having fed well--to carry their weighty matters
out of the house. That would be a relief. Jairus could see to it that
they were comfortably seated--and then drift quietly away. The wise men
would not miss him.

Upon examination, the vine-bowered pergola was still a-drip, but giving
off a promising steam, and the wicker chairs and divans were drying
fast. Jairus was almost cheerful when Rabbi Ben-Sholem appeared,
punching holes in the wet gravel with his cane. The Rabbi, habitually
sedate, was almost animated.

'This promises to be an interesting day, my son,' he said, in a tone
that hinted at a treat in store.

'That's good,' rejoined Jairus, without enthusiasm. 'I have been hoping
that the gardens and the pergola would be dry enough for your people to
hold their meeting, this afternoon, out-of-doors.'

'Well, as for that, this will not be a festive occasion,' declared
Ben-Sholem soberly. 'It is not a garden party. What we have to do today
can better be done indoors!'

'Oh? So serious as that?'

'Yes. The Carpenter is to be here!'

Jairus, who had been shaking a dripping vine, straightened--and
brightened a little.

'Indeed!' he said. 'That's interesting!'

'Yes. A couple of our young students for the priesthood hunted the
fellow down yesterday, and--'

'Hunted him down, eh?' There was a trace of asperity in Jairus' tone.
'That must have called for much shrewdness, seeing that the Carpenter
has been openly speaking to great throngs. Had he hidden himself
somewhere?'

'No, he was not in hiding,' replied the old man frostily. 'He was
shamelessly eating his supper in the home of Simon the son of Jonas.'

Jairus grinned and the Rabbi scowled at his amusement.

'You don't mean to say, sir, that he was visiting the Big Fisherman! I
thought this Carpenter was some sort of a religious teacher. Apparently
he isn't very particular about the company he keeps. The Big Fisherman
hasn't any more religion than our dog!'

'That is one of the things we will discuss with him,' said the Rabbi.
'He makes pretence of being a holy man; talks to the multitude about
holy things; and then associates himself with all manner of profane and
uncouth people. Some of our men saw him, a few days ago, sitting in the
Revenue Office chatting with Levi--that abominable Collector of Roman
tribute!'

'Maybe he was trying to talk Levi into a reduction of his taxes,'
chuckled Jairus. 'I must ask him how he got on with it.'

'It is not a jesting matter, my son,' said the Rabbi sternly.

'Sorry,' mumbled Jairus. After a moment of constrained silence, he
asked, 'Did your young men have any trouble getting the Carpenter's
consent to come here today? Of course they couldn't command him to
come.'

'They did command him,' declared Ben-Sholem. 'By the authority of the
Synagogue!'

'Then he needn't come unless he wants to,' said Jairus brusquely. 'He
probably knows--as well as you do, sir--that the Synagogue has no power
to arrest him--or subpoena him.'

'Be that as it may,' said Ben-Sholem testily, 'he is coming. He had the
effrontery to say that he would be free to come because it was going to
be too stormy this afternoon for the people to turn out.'

Jairus' jaw sagged a little and his brows contracted.

'You say he made that forecast yesterday--when there wasn't a cloud in
the sky? He must be a weather prophet.'

'Not a very good one,' remarked the Rabbi, with a brief smile. 'It will
be fair this afternoon.'

'Apparently,' agreed Jairus. 'By the way--did your bright young men
invite the Carpenter to come early enough to have dinner with us?'

'Certainly not!' snorted Ben-Sholem. 'He is not coming here as a guest!
I must say, Jairus,' the old man continued hotly, 'I am surprised
at your attitude toward this matter. Here you are, a Regent of the
Synagogue, the most influential man in this region, supposed to set
a good example--but not caring what manner of doctrine is taught to
the people. You even talk of having this blasphemer in your home as
a guest, when it is clear that the fellow consorts with the ungodly,
dines with Simon the brawler who openly reviles the Synagogue and
hasn't attended its services for years!' The Rabbi's voice was
trembling as he finished his impassioned speech, and Jairus reproached
himself for permitting the unhappy episode to develop. Perhaps good
old Ben-Sholem had some grounds for his indignation. As a Regent of
the Synagogue, Jairus was expected to take more than a casual interest
in the community's religious beliefs. To atone for his intimations
of indifference, he made a long face and showed concern for the
reclamation of Simon's wayward soul.

'Rabbi, did you ever speak to the Big Fisherman about his infidelity?'
he inquired solemnly.

'It wouldn't have done any good,' muttered Ben-Sholem. 'I have known
the headstrong fellow from his youth. There is no doubt but his
apostasy hastened the death of his godly father...Once, a few years
ago, two of our young men of the Synagogue asked him respectfully why
he did not pay his tithe, and he sneered at them. At that, they chided
him--as indeed they should have done--and he grabbed them by the hair
and whacked their heads together. Then, realizing the gravity of his
offence, he added insult to injury by presenting them with a basket of
perch!'

Jairus frowned heavily at this outrage and seemed about to denounce
such inexcusable conduct when, to the Rabbi's pained surprise, he broke
forth with a loud cackle of involuntary laughter.

'I am amazed, Jairus!' murmured the old man.

'So am I, sir,' confessed the culprit, suddenly sobering. 'But I
couldn't have helped that--if I had been on my death-bed. Please
forgive me!'

'I sincerely hope, Jairus,' entreated Ben-Sholem, 'that you will regard
this unfortunate affair of the Carpenter with the gravity it deserves.
When he appears in your house today you must give him to understand
that he is coming at the behest of the Synagogue!'

'Then you had better take him to the Synagogue!' retorted Jairus. 'I
do not like the part you are asking me to play. If I am to be this
young man's host, there will be no rudeness, certainly not by me! I
had surmised that you were inviting him here for a conference; now it
appears that he is summoned for a condemnation. I shall not be a party
to such procedure! Indeed, if he comes here friendless and alone, you
may expect me to be on his side! Do you mean to say that all the Rabbis
in the neighbourhood are congregating here to judge the man without
giving him the advantage of any defence? Are you all solidly against
him?'

'The man must be silenced, Jairus!' declared Ben-Sholem firmly. 'We are
all agreed on that, except...' He hesitated for a moment, and went on
reluctantly. 'I cannot understand the attitude of Rabbi Elimelech of
Bethsaida. He came to see me yesterday, to tell me not to expect him
here today.'

'Did he give his reasons?' inquired Jairus, with interest.

'Elimelech is getting old,' explained the elderly Ben-Sholem. 'He is
in his second childhood. Indeed, it is said that he spends most of his
time telling stories to the children. The substantial people of his
congregation hardly know what to make of him.'

'And he refuses to join you in rebuking the Carpenter?'

'Elimelech was imprudent enough to go out into the country himself--to
hear this Jesus. His people do not approve of that: he admitted as
much. He even took more than a score of their children with him.
Elimelech needs to be careful or he will be retired.'

'I must have a talk with the good old man,' remarked Jairus. 'It might
be worth knowing what he really does think of this Nazarene. What did
he say to you--about him?'

'He said the man might be the Messiah, for all we knew! We can't have
that kind of talk, you know!'

'Of course not,' mumbled Jairus absently.

 * * * * * *

The dinner was a dull and difficult affair. Valiantly but vainly did
Jairus endeavour to dispel the constraint of his taciturn guests.
At first he had breezily introduced conversational topics which, he
thought, might induce them to show some interest for sheer courtesy's
sake, but they gave him no aid. They ate in silence.

Turning to Nathan, the High Priest's representative, Jairus inquired
how Pilate was getting on these days with the Sanhedrin. After a
lengthy interval, Nathan had stiffly replied, with his eyes on his
plate, 'As usual.' It was implicit in Nathan's icy rejoinder that
whatever might be the present relation of the Roman Procurator and the
Jewish Court it was certainly none of Jairus' business. The forthright
rebuff nettled him, but he kept his temper.

Addressing Obadiah, the eldest of the scribes, at his left, Jairus
asked whether the improvements to the Galilean Embassy had been
completed. The old man shook his head. After a pause he elaborated on
his response by mumbling that he did not know. He did not bother to add
that he didn't care, but it was plain enough that Jairus was talking
too much. He felt lonely and out of place. Perhaps he had been impudent
in seating himself with these distinguished men. He had done better, he
felt, to have donned an apron and helped serve the table. A few times
he lifted his eyes hopefully in the direction of Rabbi Ben-Sholem, but
the old man moodily munched his mutton without glancing up.

Now it occurred to Jairus that Ben-Sholem, who had had time for a
private word with the Jerusalem party before dinner, might have
whispered that their host was not sympathetic with the inquisition to
be held in his home. That was it! They were deliberately snubbing him!
After that, Jairus--in the role of a mere innkeeper--saw to it that
their plates and cups were replenished, addressing himself only to the
serving-maids...Another helping of chicken, Rachael, he murmured behind
his hand, for his Grace the High Priest's Emissary...And bring more
wine...And open the windows. It is close in here...And light the lamps.

Perhaps that was part of the trouble. The air had become oppressive and
the room was growing dark. Jairus turned about toward the windows and
faced a blackened sky. There was going to be a severe storm. Presently
the very house shook under a crash of thunder. Vivid tongues of flame
stabbed at the close horizon. Detached gusts of wind flung their weight
at the awnings and thrust their shoulders against the straining doors.

Spurts of rain splashed noisily on the tessellated pavement of the
loggia, as if pitched from enormous buckets.

Jairus rose hastily and made for the high-domed atrium, now enveloped
in gloom. That precariously supported ceiling had always worried him on
stormy days, despite the architect's assurance that it was strong. He
entered the huge room and looked up anxiously into the dome as another
blast of thunder roared overhead.

Calmly seated, quite within the range of a catastrophe, were four men.
Apparently Joseph, the butler, having admitted them, had been too busy
fastening doors and windows to announce their presence. They rose. A
gigantic, bearded man, whom Jairus instantly recognized as the Big
Fisherman, stepped forward, bowed, and deferentially tipped his head
toward the evident leader of their party.

'Sir,' said Simon, in a deep voice, 'this is Jesus--of Nazareth.'

On any other occasion, Jairus would have had at least a nod and a smile
for the man who had so graciously introduced his friend, but there was
something about the Nazarene that demanded his full attention. So--this
was the Carpenter! Well, it was easy to see why the people were
following him about. He was not an ordinary man. Jairus advanced toward
him--and bowed respectfully.

'You and your friends are welcome to my house, sir,' he said.

There was another crash of thunder and Jairus glanced up apprehensively.

'May I suggest, sir,' he urged, 'that you step back from underneath
this dome? We are not safe here!'

'You need have no fear, Jairus,' said Jesus quietly.

'But that roof is dangerous!' insisted Jairus.

'Perhaps,' said Jesus; 'but not for me, nor for you while you are
beside me. My time has not yet come.'

Jairus, rarely at a loss for an appropriate word, couldn't think of
a suitable thing to say. He found himself held by the Carpenter's
reassuring eyes: strange, searching eyes they were, that asked, without
impudence, what manner of man you were, as if they had a right to know.
There was another savage blast of thunder, but this time Jairus did not
look up. Apparently divining his host's relief, Jesus smiled, glanced
aloft, and nodded his head. And Jairus smiled too, but shook his head a
little, as if to say that something was going on here that he couldn't
understand.

Now the face of the Carpenter sobered. He turned about and walked
slowly toward the tall windows facing the highway, the others following
him. Simon indicated his two young friends, who had not been presented.
'James and John, sir,' he said. 'Brothers. Fishermen.' Jairus nodded
to them absently. He was thinking of the men from Jerusalem who
were waiting, probably with some impatience, to interrogate this
mysterious Nazarene. Perhaps they were sitting with their heads
together, organizing pedantic queries that no untutored carpenter could
be expected to understand; hopeful of showing the fellow up as an
ignoramus...Well--he might surprise them!

Jairus joined the men at the window. Out along the roadside a great
crowd stood huddled and hunched under the cypress and olive trees in
the drenching rain. Simon, towering beside Jesus, turned to Jairus and
murmured apologetically, 'He entreated them not to follow him here,
sir.'

'Are these people friends of yours?' asked Jairus, moving to Jesus'
side.

Jesus nodded his head and continued to gaze compassionately at
the multitude. Then, as if talking to himself, he said, 'They are
sheep--without a shepherd.'

'Well,' said Jairus, 'we can't have them out there in this storm!' He
turned to the Big Fisherman. 'Bid them come in!'

Striding quickly to the great doors opening upon the terrace, Simon
waved a beckoning arm. The rain-soaked throng could not believe, at
first, that they had been invited into the palatial home of Jairus.
Simon continued to beckon to them. They raised a grateful shout and
broke into a run across the terraced lawn. Jesus watched them coming,
for a moment; then turned to give his host a comradely smile.

'You are bringing a blessing upon your house, Jairus,' he said softly.

Gratified, but somewhat embarrassed by this tribute, Jairus replied
that he hoped his wife would think so, a sally that briefly broadened
Jesus' smile.

The crowd was literally pouring into the atrium now, wet to the
skin. Simon, beside the open doors, was admonishing the people, in a
strangely compulsive, resonant voice, to be orderly, not to push, and
not to sit down anywhere in their soaked garments. Jairus thought it
high time to conduct his strange guest away from this swarming pack. He
touched Jesus' arm and signed for him to follow. They moved toward the
corridor. As they came to the open door of the breakfast-room, Jairus
observed that the party from Jerusalem had assembled there and were
standing silently at the windows, apparently watching the advancing
crowd. He signed to Jesus to enter the room and invited him to sit
down. The storm was abating. The rain still poured, but the thunder had
subsided to mutterings in the mountains.

Approaching the preoccupied group at the windows, Jairus spoke to Rabbi
Ben-Sholem.

'Your Carpenter is here,' he said

They all turned about and stared.

'I have the pleasure to present Jesus, whom you have asked to meet,'
said Jairus.

Jesus rose and bowed respectfully. Jerusalem was glum. They all
sat down. The crowd had got out of hand, apparently, the foremost
inching along the broad corridor to the doorway of the room where the
conference sat.

Ben-Sholem, flushed with annoyance, rose to say sternly, 'Jairus, the
public has not been invited to this meeting! I insist that the house be
cleared of these people!'

'They came in out of the rain, sir,' explained Jairus.

'But they have no business here!' expostulated Nathan.

Jairus was about to say that if they wanted to put the people out,
they were at liberty to do so--if they could--when a sudden commotion
overhead raised all eyes toward the roof. The portable roof-panels were
being rolled back, letting in a downpour. Hurriedly dragging their
chairs away from the opening, the men of Jerusalem were astounded
at what they saw above them. A cot was being lowered into the room.
It bore the rain-soaked, shivering, emaciated form of a young man.
The roof was quickly replaced as the cot came to rest on the floor.
Everyone in the room remained standing. Nobody spoke. Jairus tried
to frown, without success. The situation had become ludicrous. It
was quite clear that the servants had connived with the sick man's
friends to give him this extraordinary entrance to the crowded house.
It had all the appearance of an atrocity that old Rachael might have
conceived, probably in collusion with Joseph the butler, who was
reputed to be much interested in the Carpenter.

At this juncture, Jesus stepped forward and gazed down into the
bewildered eyes of the invalid. Anybody could see at a glance what
ailed the emaciated young fellow with the twisted, shrunken limbs.
Every few years a dreaded epidemic of paralysis, to which children and
youths were unaccountably vulnerable, would make helpless cripples of a
dozen, a score, a hundred. No one knew the cause--or the cure.

Jairus edged in closer, full of curiosity to see what might happen. The
silence in the room was tense. The Carpenter had quietly become the
commanding figure in this company. All eyes were upon him.

'My son,' he said gently, 'your sins are forgiven.'

There was an impatient stir among the critics from Jerusalem and a
sullen rumble of indignation. Nathan, the High Priest's representative,
growled angrily, 'This is blasphemy!' Old Obadiah, Chief of the Temple
Scribes, called out, 'How does this man forgive sins?' Ben-Sholem
snorted, 'That is not what the sick man came for! He wants to be healed
of his paralysis!' 'Aye!' they all muttered. 'Heal him!'

Jairus' heart was pounding hard now. He had found himself instantly
attracted to the Nazarene and had hoped that he might give a good
account of himself before these surly pedants; but it was clear that
he had got himself into an indefensible position. The wiseacres
from Jerusalem were right. It was sheer blasphemy for any man to
forgive another man's sins. The Carpenter was merely temporizing with
his problem--and doing it in the worst possible way. How could he
expect his enemies--or his friends, either--to endorse this stunning
sacrilege? Jesus would have to do better than that if he hoped to
combat the criticism of his detractors.

Now the room was suddenly hushed to silence again as the Nazarene,
stretching forth an arm toward the sick man, calmly addressed the
murmurers:

'You have questioned my authority to forgive sins. Let me ask you: is
it easier to forgive sins or to say to a paralytic, "Arise and walk"?
To assure you that I have been given this authority...' He broke off
here to turn his full attention to the young man on the cot. Lowering
his hand until it touched the thin arm, he commanded, 'Rise up, my son,
and walk!'

It was the craning crowd, massed in the open doorway, that broke the
strained silence with a gasp and a cry of astonishment. The paralytic
had reached up to take the proffered hand of Jesus, had pried himself
up on his elbow, had sat erect, had struggled laboriously to his feet!

Jairus' throat was tight and dry and he had a sickish feeling.
Confusion broke loose now among the men from the Temple. 'A fraud!'
they shouted derisively. 'Prearranged!...' 'The man was not a
cripple!...' 'Away with this impostor!'

Out in the broad corridor the wide-eyed throng backed away to clear a
path for the young man, who advanced with short, experimental steps.
His eyes were swimming and his lower lip twitched. The open-mouthed
spectators stared into his contorted face as they lurched back to give
him room, trampling their neighbours' toes. No one offered him a word
or a smile as he passed. He was as one risen from the dead.

The rain had ceased while this strange event was in progress, and the
sun was shining brightly. Slowly and silently the awe-stricken crowd
was moving out of the house. The visitors from Jerusalem had circled
into a compact, whispering group by the breakfast-room window that gave
upon the front verandah, now congested with the departing multitude.
Nathan was addressing them. Old Rabbi Ben-Sholem was solemnly nodding
his head. Jairus gave them a brief glance, and decided that his
obligations as their host had been discharged. The venerable Ben-Sholem
could attend to them from now on.

Jesus had slumped into a chair near the doorway, his posture denoting
complete exhaustion. His elbows rested on the broad arms of the chair
and his bowed head was supported by white, trembling hands. As Jairus
neared he slowly lifted his head and smiled wanly. Tiny beads of
perspiration dotted his pale brow.

'I shall go now,' he said huskily, 'if there are to be no further
questions.'

'You are welcome to remain, Master,' said Jairus. 'You seem to be very
tired. Tarry with us--and rest awhile. Come with me.'

Wearily acquiescing with a nod, Jesus rose slowly and followed his host
down the long corridor and through the atrium and on to the adjacent
library. As they entered, Adiel and Sharon, who had been seated by the
window, apparently in complete ignorance of the amazing thing that had
happened, rose to go.

'My wife, Master,' said Jairus...'Adiel, this is Jesus--of Nazareth.'

Sharon, hugging a small harp in her arms, stood staring up into the
stranger's face as her mother murmured a response to the introduction.
Jesus looked down into the child's wondering eyes with a smile.

'Our little daughter, Sharon,' said Jairus.

Laying his hand lightly on her curly head, Jesus remarked that it was
an appropriate name. 'Name of a rose,' he said. Sharon nodded soberly
and continued to stare bewilderedly into his face.

'Come, dear,' said Adiel, taking her hand.

'Let her remain, Adiel,' said Jesus. 'I shall tell her a story.'

His calling her by name--a familiarity not to be taken by a
stranger--warmed Adiel's heart. For an instant she felt as if they had
been long-time friends, but this sensation was quickly succeeded by the
feeling that he had addressed her as if she were a child, though she
surmised that she was somewhat older than he. Jairus, taking note of
her pleased bewilderment, remembered his own surprise and gratification
when Jesus had spoken his name. It was not customary for village
carpenters to address him as 'Jairus.'

'May I stay too?' asked Adiel.

Jairus pushed the luxurious leather chairs into a smaller circle and
they sat down. For a little while Jesus' head drooped and his eyes were
closed. It was apparent that he was utterly spent.

At the conference in the breakfast-room the question had risen whether
it was easier to forgive a man's sins or to cure him of his paralysis.
As Jairus sat sympathetically regarding the exhausted Nazarene he
reflected that it must have taken a tremendous volume of energy to have
done either of these mystifying deeds. According to the widespread but
largely unsubstantiated tales of the Carpenter's marvels, one gathered
that the self-confident magician had moved from one spectacular event
to another with no diminution of strength. Now it appeared that these
outgivings of vital force were made at great cost.

Sharon, who had a child's natural diffidence in the presence of adult
strangers, now surprised her parents by drawing her low stool close
beside Jesus. Becoming aware of her nearness, he opened his eyes,
sighed, smiled, and took her small hand in his. Expectantly, Sharon
drew her legs up under her and rested her dimpled elbows on the broad
arms of his chair. Jairus and Adiel exchanged puzzled glances.

'This story,' began Jesus softly as if to the child alone, 'is about a
Kingdom in another land.'

'A fairy story?' asked Sharon hopefully.

'No--it is a true story, my child.'

In a quiet voice and with simple words, Jesus talked of his Kingdom
where all who wished to do so might live in happiness for ever.
Occasionally little Sharon interrupted with a query, somewhat to the
embarrassment of her parents, though Jesus regarded her questions with
interest and consideration.

As the colloquy proceeded, Jairus found himself yielding to the
infatuation of an ideal life to come, in a land where there were no
storms, no quarrels, no courts, no prisons, no slaves, no tears, no
fears. And when Sharon wanted to know whether we would all go there,
Jesus had replied that not everyone would want to go; for it was a
brightly lighted city, and many people, accustomed to performing their
deeds in darkness, would not like the perpetual light. And many people
who had been proud of their control over others' lives would not enjoy
a land where everyone was free.

The calm voice was interrupted now by a light tap on the door. Joseph's
face appeared. Jairus, roused as from a dream, rose, crossed the room,
went out, and softly closed the door behind him.

'It is the Big Fisherman, sir,' whispered Joseph. 'He wonders how the
Master is feeling--and whether he is to wait.'

'The Master is very tired,' replied Jairus. 'When he is rested I shall
give him conveyance to wherever he wishes to go. Tell the Big Fisherman
he need not tarry.'

The butler made off with his instructions and Jairus laid his hand
lightly on the library door, but hesitated to re-enter. In some
curious manner, Joseph's intrusion had broken the strange spell that
had stilled his mind and had brought Jairus back abruptly to familiar
footing on solid ground. His mind had resumed its normal process. There
had been much too much mystery that day. He had drifted along on the
compelling tide of it, offering no resistance, asking no questions. Now
that he had been suddenly and roughly beached by this clutch of the
commonplace, he began--rather dazedly--to put his thoughts in order.

One thing was sure: his credulity had been severely overtaxed. He had
always been a practical fellow, with no talent for belief in things he
could not see, hear, taste, or handle. Today he had allowed himself
to be influenced by a succession of mysterious events for which the
strange Carpenter was responsible.

To begin with, he had had a friendly interest in the Carpenter because
he had determined that the man should not be mistreated in his
house...Then, in the excitement and confusion of the storm, there had
been that peculiar incident under the dome of the atrium. The Carpenter
had calmly assured him that it was safe, and Jairus had taken his word
for it. But--so had the architect assured him that the dome was safe.
Doubtless his fears had been groundless. Now that the storm was over,
Jairus felt ashamed of his apprehensions.

Then, there had been a miracle; or, so it had seemed, though until
now he had had no opportunity to examine it calmly. The young man was
ill and crippled; there was no doubt about that. Indeed, he had been
far from well when he departed, as one could see by his pallor and
weakness. Whether he had been helpless and quite unable to walk at
all--well, there had been no testimony about that. The sullen critics
from Jerusalem, whatever might be the unfairness of their hostility to
the Carpenter, certainly had a right to raise that question. To what
extent was the young fellow paralysed?

Jairus had been willing--and was still willing--to give the Nazarene
the benefit of the doubt concerning the validity of this miracle;
though, with all respect for the Carpenter's obviously honest belief in
his own power, it would be less disturbing if it could be shown that
the young man had been able to walk; maybe not very well or very far,
but--able to walk.

But now another factor had been injected into the strange case of the
Carpenter. He had been describing--and in a tone of deep sincerity--a
Kingdom prepared for all who might be presumed to enjoy living in a
land where it never stormed, where no one was ever sick or sorry, where
no one owned anything for himself, and all were equal in the sight of
the King.

Perhaps these were reassuring words when addressed to people who, in
this lifetime, had never possessed anything. Jairus wished that Jesus
had not ventured upon this story of his Kingdom. Let every man have his
own hopes and illusions about a world to come. It distressed Jairus
that Jesus had turned out to be a visionary. Apparently his imagination
had been affected by his efforts to deal with the invisible.

Turning away from the library door, Jairus strolled through the atrium
and out upon the trampled path that led to the rose-garden. He would
return presently and resume his duties as Jesus' host, but he felt
the need of this brief respite under the open sky. It had been his
intention to invite the Nazarene Carpenter to stay for supper--and to
spend the night if he wished. But now he felt that it would be a relief
to see this Kingdom-to-come dreamer on his way. What would he do with
Jesus if he remained as their guest? What would they talk about? What
had they in common? No--the man's presence here was an embarrassment.

The rose-garden had taken quite a beating. In several places the
splintered arbours hung limp over the drooping bushes they were
intended to support. Jairus sauntered across to a damaged trellis where
old Abner, the head gardener, was making repairs, bracing the arbour,
cutting away the broken branches and re-tying those that remained
unhurt. Life, reflected Jairus, was something like that. It had its
misadventures and injuries; but, more often than not, you could tie up
what was left and expect it to blossom and bear fruit again. For all
its buffeting, our life here was worth all the worry and work it cost
us. It had its frights, frustrations, and storms, but it also offered
many satisfactions--and these satisfactions were real--and they were
to be had here and now. What folly to spend one's days in brooding
anticipation of a Kingdom-to-come where it would always be fair
weather! Jairus doubted whether he would enjoy such security even if it
were to be had. He had accustomed himself to uncertainties; he knew how
to deal with them. He was not so confident of his ability to deal with
certainties. Even the promise of endless happiness threatened one with
a manner of living for which one had had no training. Far better, mused
Jairus, to content ourselves with come-what-may. Let the Carpenter
dream of his fair-weather Kingdom: Jairus would feel more at home in a
world beset by storms.

It occurred to him, as he slowly retraced his steps to the house, that
he must presently have a serious talk with his architect about the dome
of the atrium. It would be foolhardy to take any more chances there.

 * * * * * *

With heavy steps and a heavier heart, Simon slogged along over the
muddy mile that slanted toward Capernaum. He was alone and lonely. This
singular day of excitements and exultations had come to a drab ending.

Early in the afternoon Simon had been amazed and uplifted to find
himself possessed of a peculiar talent that would make his service to
Jesus of much value. At a difficult moment he had taken full charge
of an importunate multitude; and, if he did have to say so himself,
it had been a good job. Tactfully but firmly he had kept that sopping
wet, tatterdemalion pack in order and had successfully insisted upon an
appropriate respect for the unusual privileges accorded the public by
the eminent Jairus.

Their prompt and willing compliance had surprised him. He had not
shouted or scolded or entreated. He had calmly commanded, as if he
had a right to tell them what to do, and they--all of them, young and
old--had acknowledged his authority. Scores of them he had recognized,
finding in their sober, astonished eyes a bewilderment over the power
he was exercising, doubtless wondering by what strange magic this huge,
uncouth fisherman had achieved such leadership; for surely they knew
that they were under no obligation to obey his voice.

It was the first time that Simon had ever issued orders to a crowd.
Until now his commands had reached no further than the decks of his
fishing smacks and had been obeyed only by his employees. Today he had
suddenly become aware of a hitherto unsuspected capacity for compelling
the attention and respect of a great throng. They had seemed mystified
by it, but no more than Simon himself.

Even Jairus had given him a grateful smile and an approving nod. And
Joseph, the butler, had sidled up to remark deferentially, 'I don't see
how you do it, sir! I'm sure they wouldn't have listened to me.'

When the densely packed crowd had finally come to a stand, Simon,
suffused with a new elation, had said to himself that this must be
the reason why Jesus had laid hands upon him...Apparently the Master
had divined that Simon had been gifted by nature for the skilful
handling of great multitudes. Not much wonder that Jesus had asked his
assistance. 'Simon--I have need of you,' he had said. Or could it be
that Jesus had endowed him with this power? Well, however he had come
by it, here it was; and Simon was deeply stirred.

After the spectacular event of the day had occurred, and the rain
had ceased and it was time for the house to be cleared of its
dripping guests, Simon had again assumed command, speaking calmly but
confidently to the people; and again they had obeyed him. His words
still re-echoed in his ears as he trudged through the mud on the way to
Capernaum. He had said, simply, 'We are all leaving now.' And they had
left, without disorder and without tarrying.

When the last of them were out of the house, Simon had come upon James
and John, who had lingered on the verandah, uncertain what was expected
of them.

'Jesus is with Jairus,' Simon had explained. 'He is resting. I shall
wait for him...I think Andrew may he taking the fleet across to the
south shore for fishing at sundown, now that the weather has cleared.
Perhaps he would be glad to have your help.'

Nodding briefly, the brothers had turned away to follow the departing
throng. They too had accepted Simon's quiet orders without a sign of
reluctance.

Hitching up his belt, he had leaned against one of the marble pillars
in a posture that might easily have been mistaken for an air of
proprietorship, and had absently watched the bobbing heads of the
people as they plodded doggedly down the sloping road. He had been
moved to pity over their bewilderment and their helplessness. They were
like so many sheep. Jesus had said so. Simon had straightened to his
full height and had drawn a sigh of satisfaction. 'Sheep,' he murmured.

While thus reflecting upon the very considerable and gratifying
difference between his present rating and theirs, his attention
was diverted by the appearance of Joseph, attended by a crew of
men-servants bearing mops, buckets, and brooms.

'I am waiting for the Master,' said Simon casually. 'Do you happen to
know how long he may be tarrying?'

'No, sir,' said Joseph respectfully.

'See if you can find out.' Simon had spoken quietly but
authoritatively; and, after an instant of perplexed indecision, Joseph
had set off on his errand, returning presently to say, with some
embarrassment, that Simon was not to wait.

It seemed a rather cool and curt dismissal. Of course, Simon knew he
had no right to expect that Jesus himself would come out and explain
that he wasn't ready to go; nor was it likely that Jairus would appear
with this message. As he tramped down the stone steps which descended
from one terrace to another, he tried not to feel hurt. Jesus was
indeed very weary. Jairus was taking good care of him. Perhaps it was
an excellent opportunity for them to become acquainted. But--Simon
was humiliated. After the singular service he had rendered, it was
disquieting to be sent away by the butler.

Trudging along with his eyes on the road, Simon reviewed the events of
the past few days. Not all of them had been entirely to his liking or
his understanding. To begin with, there was that deeply moving episode
on the beach at dawn, when Jesus had laid his hands on Simon's bowed
head and had commanded him to follow. It had been a high moment! And
Simon had followed, gladly, proudly, blind with welling tears. But
where had Jesus taken him? Not to some quiet spot for a conference or
instructions in his new duties. No; he had silently led the way to the
old boat leased by the Zebedee youngsters and had indicated that Simon
had an errand there.

As he recollected it, this reconciliation with James and Johnny had
given him some momentary pleasure. It was a relief to have their
friendly relations restored. But now, flushed with disappointment,
it occurred to him that if any apologies were due in patching up
that estrangement, it might have been more fitting if Johnny had
been invited to attend to it. Simon had not abandoned Johnny: it had
been the other way about. It wasn't quite fair to make Simon do the
apologizing; or so it seemed this afternoon, after the rebuff at
Jairus' house.

And then, the next day, Simon had invited Jesus to come aboard The
Abigail, and Jesus had seemed glad enough to say that he would do so.
It had delighted Simon. Doubtless Jesus would be surprised to see what
valuable ships he owned. Maybe Jesus would appreciate the sacrifice he
had made when he consented to devote himself to the new cause.

'Master,' Simon had said, 'I am going to show you the finest fleet on
the lake!'

And Jesus had suddenly changed his mind about visiting the ships.
'Another day, Simon,' he said absently, as if he didn't care whether he
ever saw them.

Wholly preoccupied with his depressing meditations, Simon marched
through the main thoroughfare of Capernaum, nodding soberly to those
who hailed him, and proceeded toward Tiberias. His fleet, he observed,
had put out to sea. He was glad that Andrew had decided to sail,
though it would have pleased him to go along. It might have lifted his
depression.

He slowed his steps to a stop and for a long moment gazed at his fleet
with a feeling of pride. They were indeed beautiful vessels, even if
Jesus had no interest in them and didn't care to visit them. A homesick
memory of carefree, sunny, happy days at sea swept through him, a vivid
remembrance of restless sails overhead bending to a capricious breeze,
wisps of sailors' songs drifting back from the little forecastle, the
blended aromas of wet hemp, warm tar, fresh paint. Simon sighed deeply
and wondered whether he would ever be really happy again.

Perhaps there would be some comfort in going home. Hannah would welcome
him, he was sure of that. Hannah was dependable in all weathers. She
could be sympathetic without being silly. He hoped she would not
question him about his absence from home. Maybe she would chatter him
out of his despondency. He brightened a little and lengthened his
stride.

He found her near the front gate, mending a broken rose-trellis.

'Simon!' she cried, hurrying to meet him. 'What a storm! And what a day
you have had! How proud you should be!'

He laid a big hand on her shoulder affectionately.

'Proud?' he said, soberly. 'What about?'

'Why--how you took charge of that crowd at Jairus' house! They're all
talking about it! The neighbours have been here. Many of them were over
there. How happy you must have been to be of so much help to Jesus! Do
tell me more about him!'

'How much do you know about him, Hannah? Have you seen him?'

'Yes, Simon. I went out into the country to hear him. I would have done
so sooner; but I feared you might be offended. Esther wanted me to go.
He is indeed a wonderful man!'

They strolled toward the house.

'You were surprised, I think,' said Simon, 'that I should have anything
to do with him.'

'Yes--I was surprised.' She waited for him to explain how it had
happened, but Simon said no more until they had sat down in the little
parlour. Hannah's eyes were bright with expectation.

Impulsively--for he had not planned to confide any of his recent
experiences--Simon began, haltingly at first, to tell her how he had
been forced to abandon his prejudices and admit the miraculous power
of the strange young man from Nazareth. He told Hannah about the blind
baby. He told her how Jesus had summoned him, in the early morning, to
be his friend and helper. It was a moving story, and when he had ended
it Hannah's eyes were full of tears. There was a long silence.

'But--it is not easy, Hannah,' murmured Simon, shaking his head.
'Following Jesus is not easy.'

'Tell me,' she entreated softly.

With averted eyes, he slowly unburdened himself of the disappointments
and humiliations he had suffered. No--following Jesus, he repeated,
was not easy. He reviewed the events of the day at Jairus' mansion;
the exaltation he had felt when Jesus had looked to him to control
that dripping, selfish mob of curiosity-seekers; the strange sense of
power that had come to him; and the dismaying rebuff that had sent him
plodding off alone through the mud, plainly aware that--after all--he
was nobody!

Hannah's eyes lighted with sudden understanding.

'Simon!' she exclaimed. 'Has it not occurred to you that Jesus may
be wanting you for some great service? Maybe he is training you for
it!...You know, the way they train soldiers--to endure hardship--and
learn to obey--and ask no questions! The commander gives them heavy
packs to carry--and long marches--and they are not told where they are
going or why!'

For a long time Simon sat moodily staring out of the window before
attempting a reply.

'I should have been much happier, Hannah, if I had never met him. I
was quite contented to be--just a fisherman. Now, I don't know who--or
what--I am!'

'Why don't you go out with your fleet for a few days--and get this all
off your mind?'

'I don't even want to do that!' rumbled Simon dejectedly. 'That's part
of the trouble, Hannah. Even my ships mean nothing to me--any more...I
am this man's captive!...What is to become of me, I do not know.'

'You are tired and hungry,' said Hannah gently. 'I shall get
your supper ready. You will feel better when you have eaten--and
rested...Come--and gather a few eggs for me.'

Willing to be diverted, Simon followed her to the kitchen, caught up
a small basket, and started out toward the chicken-yard, pausing at
the little feed-room in the storage shed for a basin of corn. The hens
fluttered about his feet, dabbing at the grain. They were unafraid,
untroubled. Nothing ailed their world. Simon envied them.

Hannah stood in the kitchen doorway, watching him with brooding eyes.
Her intuition told her that their quiet, uneventful life together had
come to an end. Simon, she felt, would never be the same again.



Chapter XII


Considering all the dangers she had faced and escaped on her audacious
journey from the mountains of Southern Arabia to the Sea of Galilee,
the young daughter of the Tetrarch felt that her expedition had been
singularly successful.

However shabbily the gods had treated her in filling her veins with
the incompatible blood of two mutually contemptuous nations, making
it impossible for her to feel at home in either of their lands, it
was clear that her quest of vengeance had not been disapproved on
Mount Olympus where (according to Ione) these deities maintained their
headquarters.

True, Fara's vow still lacked fulfilment; but perhaps the gods, having
thus far blessed her adventure, might be counted upon to help her see
it through. Even if it should culminate in a swift tragedy for her, an
untimely death would be preferable, she thought, to any length of life
in a world that had made such poor provision for her happiness.

But, resolutely as she had schooled her mind to a stoical acceptance of
her probable fate, there were occasional days when her courage ebbed,
and for its renewal Fara would take counsel of their heroism who had
lived dangerously--and, in many cases, briefly--for honour's sake. She
was in need of such courage today.

Curled up childishly in a heavily upholstered leather chair that
had been built expressly for the comfort of Tetrarch Antipas, and
was therefore several sizes too large for his daughter, Fara had
been trying to bolster her morale by reacquainting herself with her
favourite hero. What a gallant youth was Demosthenes! No burden could
weight him down; no obstacle could slow him up! He too had vowed a
vow, pledging himself to prepare for a bold attack on the rapacious
merchants and wicked politicians who had impoverished and debauched his
beloved Athens. Like Fara, Demosthenes had had his bad days. Sometimes
he felt that he was throwing his youth away on a hopeless undertaking,
and only by the most rigorous self-discipline had he been able to
adhere to his resolution.

The story about him that Fara liked best was of his shaving one side
of his head so he wouldn't be tempted to abandon his hard studies and
rejoin his gay companions in the baths and at the theatre. Having
herself done a bit of sacrificial barbering in the interest of keeping
a vow, Fara felt that she and young Demosthenes had a great deal in
common. Her admiration of him was unbounded. Of course this devotion
took no toll of her maidenly modesty, for her hero had been dead these
three hundred and fifty years and would never know how tender was her
sympathy.

But this afternoon--it had been raining all day--not even Demosthenes
was able to do much for Fara. As she riffled through the yellow old
scrolls that eulogized his bravery, she wondered whether his famed
career hadn't cost more than it was worth. True, he had stirred
Greece to a noisy house-cleaning, but the evil-doers had survived
him. Demosthenes had kept his vow--but lost his life. Fara pushed the
scrolls off her lap and asked herself what was the good of it. Maybe
she and Demosthenes were a couple of fools to have set their youthful,
dancing feet on the rough and lonely road toward a guaranteed disaster.

The afternoon was wearing on and the sombre, high-ceilinged library,
never a bright and cheerful room even when the sun shone, was filled
with depressing shadows. The gilded spool-ends of a pair of scrolls,
high on a shelf in the corner, stared down at her through the gloom
as if to inquire how long she thought she could sit there in the
oppressive silence and ghostly shadows without losing her mind.

It had been her intention, yesterday, to leave the palace early this
morning and spend the day with Hannah. She was homesick to see this
motherly woman who had so tenderly befriended her. And perhaps Hannah
could be persuaded to go with her into the country for another glimpse
of the Nazarene Carpenter.

For a whole day, after her first experience of listening to Jesus, Fara
had moved about, half dreamily, under the spell of his tranquillizing
voice. Sitting there in that vast, stilled, yearning multitude, she
had gradually yielded herself to the contagion of his calmness; and,
retiring at length from his presence, she had carried with her a new
possession. Indeed, it had so suffused her habitually unquiet spirit
that for many hours thereafter nothing any longer mattered but the
satisfaction of walking confidently under an almost tangible aureole of
peace.

But she was not without misgivings, for she had never been really happy
and carefree before, and something told her she had no right to this
relief from her anxieties. Ever since she was a small child, Fara had
had something to worry about: her sweet mother's frailty, her rascally
father's neglect of them; and, overshadowing all other frets, the
feeling that she wasn't wanted anywhere. She was the little Arabian
who wasn't really welcome in Arabia, the little Jew who would never be
really welcome in Jewry.

Now, by the magic of his persuasive voice, this Jesus had relaxed her
tension and lifted her burden. 'Let not your heart be troubled,' he had
said; and it was as if he spoke to her alone, with a full understanding
of her heart and its trouble.

But, after a day of this peculiar ecstasy, the sensation of peace
gradually gave way to the old anxieties. Again she strapped on her
burden. Nor was she disconsolate over the loss of her strange quietude
of mind; for had not Destiny ordained for her not only certain cares
to be carried but responsibilities to be accounted for? It was all
very well to possess an untroubled heart if one's troubles were
honestly disposable. Whether peace was a virtue depended on how
much duty-shirking was involved. What indeed would have become of
Demosthenes' moral character had he resolved not to let his heart
be troubled? Doubtless there were plenty of fortunate people who
could dismiss their cares; but Demosthenes couldn't--nor could Fara.
Returning that day from her curious experience in the presence of
Jesus, she found that she had lost all interest in her vow; and, that
night, her brightly polished dagger, with the jewelled handle, seemed
an ugly, loathsome thing!

And so it was that Fara, briefly experiencing this singular sense of
peace, gave it up for duty's sake. But the Carpenter's entreating voice
continued to haunt her, and she had a mounting desire to hear him speak
again. Often and often she found herself wondering about the nature
of this strange man. He was a Jew, a citizen of Galilee, a carpenter;
but these facts about him did not, Fara thought, explain him at all.
He seemed to live outside the bondage and security of his race and
nationality. This wasn't his world. Fara felt a strange kinship with
him; for it wasn't her world either.

This morning, when she had wakened to find it raining, her
disappointment had so depressed her that even Claudia's unfailing
cheerfulness brought no response.

'I shall myself take the bug-eater his breakfast,' Claudia had
volunteered. 'The poor fellow is sad enough without having to look at
you.'

Soberly nodding her approval, Fara had made off to the gloomy library,
where she had closeted herself throughout the whole wretched day, now
almost ended.

Because the great house had been for so many hours as quiet as a tomb,
the shrill voice of Claudia, quite obviously excited, startled Fara
out of her apathy. From the foot of the winding staircase Claudia was
shouting some unintelligible urgency. Perhaps the villa was on fire.
Bounding out of her chair, Fara rushed to the doorway and ran into
Voldi's open arms.

For a long moment their joy was too deep for any words of greeting.
Utterly unnerved by her surprise, Fata leaned limply against him,
snuggling her face into the folds of his tunic, while Voldi held her
slim body tightly to him. After a time, she drew a long sigh, with
something like a childish sob tugging at her throat, and softly patted
his cheek. Voldi tightened his embrace, drawing her so close she was
on tip-toe. Slowly raising her arms, she circled them around his neck
and lifted her swimming eyes to meet his. He bent to kiss her parted
lips and her instant response speeded his heart. It was not the first
time he had kissed Fara, but always before it had been Voldi's doing.
She had received his kisses without reluctance; but they had been
Voldi's kisses. Now Fara was sharing them, eagerly, hungrily! Voldi was
ecstatic, shaken, suffocated by his emotion. Again and again he kissed
her until, breathless and trembling, she relaxed in his arms.

'You are all mine now, darling!' he murmured, huskily. 'We belong to
each other--for ever and ever!'

Pressing her cheek hard against his breast, Fara slowly nodded her
head. Deeply stirred by her complete surrender, Voldi felt free to
speak at once of their future.

'We will forget all about this dangerous business of revenge,' he
said, gently caressing the tight little curls on her forehead with his
fingertips.

'I'll take you home, sweetheart, and we'll never be separated again.'

Fara made no response to this, and he continued softly while she
listened with her pale face uplifted and her eyes closed. Impetuously
he poured out the story of his grief, the agony of his relentless
search for her on the mountain trails, the lonely days and sleepless
nights, his despairing descents into deep ravines, calling, calling.

'And now I have found you! We will go back to our beautiful mountains!
Nothing can ever part us--ever--as long as we live!'

Suddenly, to Voldi's surprise, for he had never seen her weep--not even
when Arnon died--Fara gave way to an uncontrollable seizure of crying,
her whole body racked with convulsive sobs. Gently supporting her in
his arms, Voldi waited in bewildered silence for the storm to subside.
Gradually the sobs diminished to involuntary little spasms. Resolutely,
she straightened, dashed the tears from her eyes and released herself
from his arms.

'Come, Voldi,' she said thickly. 'Let us sit down--and talk calmly if
we can--and we must!' Taking him by the hand, she led him across the
room to the huge leather chair and signed to him to sit down. He made a
brief effort to draw her with him, but she gently resisted, drew up a
low footstool, and sat facing him, with her arms folded on his knees.
There was a moment of silence, while her tears again ran unchecked. At
length she spoke, barely above a whisper.

'Voldi--dearest--I cannot go back with you to Arabia...No, no,
darling'--she went on, insistently, when he made a murmur of
protest--'you must hear me out!...Voldi--if I loved you only a little
less than I do, perhaps I could obey my selfish heart--and you. Believe
me, it is not easy for me to make this sacrifice. You see, it isn't as
if you were a common shepherd with no responsibilities beyond the care
of your cottage and your flock. You are one of Arabia's most favoured
sons, destined to be one of the King's Councillors--provided you are
not encumbered with me.'

'But I am willing, glad to give all that up for you!' broke in Voldi
earnestly. 'Nothing matters--but you!'

'That's the trouble, dear!' Fara went on. 'You would give up your duty
and your distinction for me. Do you think I could ever be happy, in the
days to come, knowing it was my fault that you were unable to serve
your King and your country?' And when Voldi mumbled impatiently that
it meant more to him to have her love than any honour the King might
bestow, Fara warned, 'It may seem so now--but the time would come when
we would realize that our love had been too costly...Voldi--think of
your father and mother and their pride in you!'

'They would understand.'

'They might try to understand, but it would be a lasting grief to
them...And that wise and good old man, Councillor Mishma! How he has
counted on your future!...And there is another problem to be met.' Fara
lowered her voice almost to a whisper. 'We would have children.'

'Wouldn't that be wonderful, Fara!' exclaimed Voldi.

'Yes, dear, it would be wonderful--but not for them. They would soon
learn that they were--somehow different from other children, and that
they were different because of me! Voldi--they might even grow to hate
me as the cause of their unhappiness.'

They sat in silence for some time, Voldi having no answer to the
problem Fara had proposed. At length, heartened by a new idea, he said,
'Very well, then. We will not return to Arabia. We will make a home
somewhere else. We will go to Rome.'

Fara shook her head and sighed.

'Dear heart, you know you would be wretched there,' she said. 'You
hate cities, as I do. We would be exiles, we and our children--people
without a country.'

At this juncture, Claudia appeared at the door. Supper was ready, she
said. Would they come down, or should she bring it up? Fara murmured a
word of thanks and said they would come down. Claudia, divining that
she had arrived at an inopportune moment, disappeared.

'Sorry, darling,' muttered Voldi, 'but I can't eat this rascal's bread!'

'This is my father's house,' said Fara. 'Surely his daughter has a
right to invite a friend to supper.'

Voldi leaned forward and searched her eyes for a twinkle, but found
them sober and sincere. The incongruity of the situation made him laugh.

'What's so funny?' demanded Fara, soberly.

'You came here to kill your father, didn't you?'

'Yes--but I haven't done it yet.' Fara's tone was still serious, but a
little smile twitched her lips.

'And so long as you haven't yet had a chance to kill him,' grinned
Voldi, 'you feel free to extend his hospitality to your guest!
Fara--this is very amusing!'

She rose and reached for his hand.

'I'm glad to hear you laugh again, darling,' she said, 'even if you're
laughing at me. Come--let us see what Claudia has for us. By the way,
did she make eyes at you when you came?'

'Just a little, perhaps,' admitted Voldi obligingly.

'Well, don't let that turn your head,' drawled Fara, as they moved, arm
in arm, toward the stairway. 'Our Claudia is as friendly as a muddy dog
and not very particular in her choice of friends.' They both laughed.
It eased their tension.

 * * * * * *

The next morning dawned brilliantly bright but chilly. The two-month
season called winter in Northern Galilee was at hand, a dreary period
of searching winds and cold rains when the people were more comfortable
indoors. This might be the last day of autumn.

With Lysias' gracious co-operation, Fara had overcome Voldi's
reluctance to spend the night at the palace. The steward had been
given to understand that Voldi was from Petra; and, as a student of
the classics, had wanted to see the famous library. Seeing that the
personable young man had been directed there by no less a prominent
citizen than David, no further explanations of Voldi's visit seemed
necessary. Anyone from Petra was welcome to the Tetrarch's hospitality.
The beautiful, highly bred Darik had been properly stabled, groomed,
admired.

After an early breakfast, Fara and Voldi had repaired to the library
for a further discussion of their dilemma. It was soon made clear
that the girl was adamant in her decision not to return to Arabia.
She wasn't going to ruin Voldi's life and bring endless humiliation
upon herself by being his wife and the mother of his children. No, she
conceded, it was no fault of hers that her veins bore alien blood, but
it was a misfortune that need not be bequeathed to others still unborn.
In short, Fara had made up her mind and it was useless to argue with
her.

'Let me give you a little more time to think it over, dear,' pleaded
Voldi; and when Fara had pointed out that there was no suitable place
for him to lodge, either in Tiberias, Capernaum, or Bethsaida, he said,
'I shall ride back to Caesarea and tarry for a few weeks. Then may I
return--and see you again?'

She tried to convince him that this would only be salting their wounds,
that they would both be better off if he rode away to occupy himself
with other interests; but, after his earnest entreaty to be allowed
to come back in the spring-time, she consented. Voldi saw that she
was glad to have made this concession, and kissed her. Fara shook her
head demurely, but shared the kiss, after murmuring helplessly that it
wasn't fair to either of them. Voldi's failure to debate this point was
an admission that she was right about that; but, drawing her closer
into his arms, he kissed her again and again. 'I shouldn't let you
do this,' she whispered; but she did. At length, reluctantly tugging
herself loose from his embrace, she walked to the open window, Voldi
slowly following. He put his arm around her gently.

'Let us get out into the sunshine,' she said. 'We will take a walk.'
Her eyes lighted with a happy thought. 'We will visit Hannah!'

Voldi frowned thoughtfully, wondering whether it was discreet to add
this emphasis to Fara's Arabian origin. Hannah might inadvertently say
something to a neighbour that would expose Fara to the community's
inquisitive conjectures. How does this Jewish girl happen, they would
say, to be visited by a friend from Arabia? He voiced his anxiety.

'Hannah will not talk,' said Fara. 'My secret will be as safe with her
as it is with David; and you have told me that you trust him fully.'

'It is different with the Sadducee,' said Voldi. 'He knows who you
are--and why you are here. Your friend Hannah is in the dark about you.
If you trust her at all, you had better confide everything.'

'If I promise to do that, will you come?'

They sauntered down the winding driveway, Voldi leading Darik, who
tossed and shook his head impatiently, for he disliked to be led and
made no bones about his annoyance. Presently they came out through the
imposing gates and upon the broad road, joining the heavy southbound
traffic.

'Where are all these people going?' Voldi wanted to know. 'They're all
headed in the same direction. What is it; a fair or a feast-day? Hardly
a carnival: none of them seems to be very gay.'

'Jews are never gay,' observed Fara, avoiding his query.

'That's true enough,' agreed Voldi. 'They are a sober lot. But these
people look troubled, frightened! Perhaps some calamity has occurred.
Shall we inquire?'

She turned toward him momentarily, with indecision in her eyes as if
debating whether to explain, but did not reply, which added to Voldi's
bewilderment.

'You have more than your share of cripples in this country,' he
remarked. 'And there goes a woman, leading a blind man.' They drew
aside to pass a party of four, carrying a half-grown girl on a cot.
'What's all this about, Fara?' persisted Voldi.

'They are going out into the country, a little way beyond Bethsaida,'
said Fara, 'where a village carpenter speaks nearly every day to great
crowds. He has been creating quite a sensation. It is believed that he
heals diseases.'

'The Carpenter!' exclaimed Voldi. 'The man from Nazareth!'

'You have heard of him, then?' Fara searched his eyes.

'Indeed, yes, all along the way! There was talk of him as far down as
Caesarea. It's a wonder you haven't tried to see him, what with your
curious interest in religious prophets.' He gave her a teasing smile:
she had lost a valuable horse by showing too much concern about an
itinerant preacher. Fara accepted his raillery with a wisp of a smile,
but sobered to say that she had seen and heard the Carpenter. Voldi's
steps slowed. Cupping his hand under her elbow, he drew her closer.

'But why are you so mysterious--and reticent--about it?' he queried.
'It's nothing to be ashamed of. Didn't you want me to know?'

'I hesitated to tell you, Voldi,' she confessed. 'I know how you feel
about magic, and miracles, and the weak-mindedness of superstitious
people who believe in such things...I didn't want you to think I had
gone crazy.'

'That sounds a little as if you had been impressed by this fellow. Did
you see him do anything out of the ordinary?'

'If you like, we can go out and see him,' suggested Fara. 'Hannah may
want to go with us. You will have a chance to form your own opinion.'

'So you would rather not tell me any more until I have seen him?'

'I can tell you this much, Voldi,' she replied, measuring her words
deliberately; 'his voice is not like that of any other man, and the
things he says have not been spoken--just that way--ever before. He
does not scold or condemn or threaten: he quietly takes possession of
your whole mind...You shall see for yourself, my dear...The man does
not belong to this world, at all.' Fara's voice had lowered to a mere
whisper as she added, 'He is from somewhere else!'

There wasn't anything much to be said in response to that strange
remark. Voldi studied her eyes with candid anxiety.

'I wonder,' he murmured gently, 'whether you realize what you are
saying. Surely you don't think that this Carpenter is a god!'

'I don't know,' she mumbled vaguely; and, after a long interval. 'It
wouldn't surprise me--if that were true.'

They had come now to the northern outskirts of Bethsaida and were
turning off the busy highway into a quiet leaf-strewn street where Fara
pointed to the cottage shared by Hannah and the fishermen Simon and
Andrew.

'The men will not be at home,' she said. 'I wish you might meet Simon,
who is the master of his fleet--a gigantic fellow. He has no learning
and knows nothing beyond his occupation, but one can't help feeling
that if he had had any advantages at all he might be a very forceful
person.' Arriving in front of the cottage, Voldi said he would wait at
the gate while Fara inquired whether her friend was prepared to receive
them.

There was no response to her knock at the front door. She stepped into
the hallway and called cheerily. A weak voice bade her come in. Hannah,
fully clothed, was lying on her bed. She tried to smile a welcome.

'Hannah!' cried Fara. 'You are ill!'

'It is nothing, dear,' protested Hannah feebly. 'I am very tired;
that is all.' She made an effort to sit up, but slumped back upon the
pillows. Her grey eyes were cloudy, her cheeks were flushed, and an
agitated pulse pumped hard at her temple. 'Give me your hand, Esther,'
she muttered thickly. 'Perhaps I can get up now.' But a sudden seizure
of faintness swept her and she made no further protest when entreated
to lie still.

After what seemed like a long delay to Voldi--and Darik, too, whose
restless capers were bringing elderly neighbours to their doors and
windows--Fara reappeared at the gate, her serious face warning that
something had gone amiss. Hannah, she reported soberly, was ill,
perhaps very ill indeed. Voldi had better go quickly down to the
business district where, hard by the Synagogue, he would find the old
physician Gershon.

'When I have found the doctor and sent him here, I think I shall be on
my way,' said Voldi. 'There is nothing I can do. Hannah will need your
full attention. My tarrying here will be only an embarrassment to your
friends--and you.'

Fara's face showed mingled regret and relief. She nodded her approval
of his decision. Promising to return with the spring flowers, he
vaulted into the saddle; and Darik, apparently already late for some
urgent engagement, clenched his teeth on the bit and bolted. At the
corner of the street, Voldi was able to wave a farewell. It was not a
satisfactory way to take leave of Fara, but--was there a better way?
Perhaps this was less painful than a more deliberate parting.

To locate the physician's house was easy enough. The white-bearded,
taciturn Gershon, having stiffened haughtily when approached by the
young Arabian, listened, nodded, scrambled out of his chair; and,
hastily stuffing an old leather bag with the various trinkets of his
trade, tottered up the street in the direction of Hannah's house. He
did not look back. Voldi watched him until he had disappeared round the
corner.

The highway seemed even more congested with the unorganized procession
moving southward. There were very few spectators along the edges of
the road. This, thought Voldi, was in need of an explanation. Almost
any parade, anywhere, however insignificant, was good for at least a
scattered audience of loafers; but the main thoroughfare of Bethsaida
was all but deserted except for the passing throng. Voldi ventured to
express his curiosity about this to a wizened, toothless, bent old man
who stood near-by sourly staring at the multitude.

'Where is everybody?' inquired Voldi, raising his voice as the old man
bared his gums and cupped his ear with a trembling hand.

'Out yonder!' growled the ancient, pointing with his stick. 'All
Bethsaida is out there listening to the blasphemer from Nazareth, that
dirty, thieving town from which no good thing could come!' He spat
angrily but unskilfully, wiped his bearded chin with the back of a
shaky hand, and dried the hand on the skirt of his faded robe. 'You
should laugh, Arabian, to see Israel renounce his proud heritage! This
should be a day of rejoicing in the tents of Ishmael! Woe is come upon
Bethsaida! Even our Rabbi Elimelech has joined the apostates!'

'How far do they go?' shouted Voldi, unimpressed by the tirade.

'To their destruction!' screamed the old man.

'I mean--is it a mile or five?'

'Less than a mile. You had better go! It's just the place for you,
Ishmaelite! Then you can ride that fine horse back to Arabia and
say that you saw the House of Israel fall!' The angry old eyes
were dripping. Voldi could think of nothing to contribute to the
conversation. Bowing, in respect to the Bethsaidan's years rather than
his views, he mounted and joined the procession, keeping close to the
rim of the road, Darik seeming to realize that no foolishness would be
tolerated.

It was unlike any pilgrimage that Voldi had ever seen. Like a river at
flood, with swift currents channelling the central stream and sluggish
eddies eating into the weeds and bushes of its banks, the crowd pressed
on in silent, sober, sweating, desperate haste. Crude, home-made
crutches dug into the loose gravel, scraping dangling legs and crooked
feet through the dust. Barrows and carts bore haggard old men and
women, pale, dull-eyed, emaciated children, and on cots and litters
helpless invalids lay supine, their sunken eyes tightly closed against
the glare of the mounting sun and the callous stares of the passing
pack; for, far outnumbering and outspeeding these hapless ones trudged
a pushing, elbowing multitude apparently bent upon appeasing its
curiosity. It was by no means a pleasing spectacle, this conglomeration
of misery jostled by a heedless throng whose behaviour too closely
resembled the conduct of stampeded cattle.

The procession was moving faster now. Three hundred yards ahead, the
more agile were breaking into a run as they reached the place where
their ruthless predecessors had toppled the stone wall, and were racing
across a flat-trampled stubble-field. Darik jumped easily over what was
left of the wall. Voldi turned toward the old farmhouse and rode on to
the stableyard, where a stocky, middle-aged, greying man was stirred to
prompt interest in the sleek Arabian horse.

'You like horses, I think,' remarked Voldi, pleasantly.

'I don't know much about them,' replied the farmer. 'Never owned one.
That's the finest horse I ever saw.'

'How would you like to take care of him for a little while?' Voldi
dismounted, hopefully. Darik tossed his head and snorted.

'Is he dangerous?' inquired the farmer dubiously.

'Tame as a kitten, after he's acquainted. I see you keep bees. Give him
a little piece of honeycomb and he'll be one of your best friends...Of
course I shall want to pay you for your trouble.'

'You're going over to hear the Carpenter?'

'Thought I would. Quite a crowd. I must see what it's all about. Some
kind of religion, isn't it?'

'I haven't heard him,' admitted the farmer. 'I've got to stay on
my place and see that the rabble don't carry anything off. If it's
religion, it isn't doing them very much good. They trample down as many
berry bushes on their way out as on their way in.'

'You could have them all thrown out for trespassing, couldn't you?'
suggested Voldi.

'I suppose so,' nodded the farmer; 'but that might cause trouble for
the Carpenter. He stopped here, one day last week, for a drink of
water.'

'And you were favourably impressed?'

'Bring your horse into the paddock,' said the farmer, ignoring Voldi's
query. 'Want him to have a basin of grain?'

'Oh--I'll not be gone that long.'

'I wouldn't be too sure about that,' chuckled the farmer. 'If he gets
to healing diseases you may want to stay awhile.'

'You mean--the fellow really does heal the sick?'

'Well, my boy Jake--he's fourteen now--hadn't heard a word since he had
the red fever when he was nine. I signed him to draw a bucket of water
from the well and give the stranger a drink. The Carpenter took the cup
and said, "Thank you, son," and Jake heard it. You should have seen the
way his eyes popped open wide!'

'And--now he can hear?'

'Good as you can! Better than I can! Jake's over there now, listening
to the Carpenter. He likes to tell about it when the neighbours ask
him.' The farmer laughed good-naturedly. 'I can't get much work out of
him any more. The boy was quite a help to me before the Carpenter came
along. In fact, nobody wants to work since the Carpenter showed up in
this country. What time they're not out here listening to him, they're
sitting around at home talking it over. I hear that the landowners
are complaining about their labourers. Lots of corn still out in the
weather...There's going to be plenty of empty bellies this winter.'

 * * * * * *

Upon Voldi's arrival at the luxurious new hostel in Caesarea, where he
was immediately recognized, welcomed, and accommodated, he learned that
an Empire ship, having disembarked a cargo of iron and other building
materials, was sailing tomorrow for Rome in ballast, which promised
a speedy voyage. Having sought an introduction to the Commander he
requested that a letter should be conveyed to Mencius. The Commander, a
long-time friend of the Proconsul, gladly complied. Voldi finished the
letter at midnight.

He had found Fara (he wrote) employed in the Tetrarch's palace,
if Mencius would believe it! Their meeting had been tender,
painful, disappointing. Fara was determined to keep her vow. It
was inconceivable that she would succeed; or if, by some strange
circumstance, she did succeed, it would be at the cost of her life; no
question about that! Voldi had done his utmost to dissuade her, had
begged her to come back with him to Arabia; but none of his arguments
had availed...He would return to her in a few weeks and try again.

Having ended his account of his unsuccessful visit with Fara he
proceeded to another subject that he felt would be of immense interest
to Mencius.

'Yesterday I saw the Nazarene Carpenter in action. It was said that
more than three thousand were present. The assembly had gathered in an
open field. Many blind professed to have received their sight, most
of them so joyful over their good fortune that it was difficult to
disbelieve in the validity of their healing.

'When the crowd dissolved, after the meeting, the lucky ones were
surrounded by astonished neighbours and friends whose amazement was
too spontaneous to have been feigned. One bewildered fellow, a man
of thirty, seemed annoyed when questioned. A circle of scribes and
youngish priests blocked his way and asked questions which he was
reluctant to answer. He was accompanied by his elderly parents, who
appeared to be embarrassed, if not frightened, by the attitude of the
critics. When it was obvious that their son was in no mood to discuss
the matter, the old people were asked for their opinion of what had
happened, to which they replied cautiously, "We do not know. Our son
is of age: ask him." The inquisitors then renewed their attack on the
young fellow. He tried to shake them off. At length he shouted, almost
desperately, "I cannot say what he did to me. All I know is that I was
blind and now I can see!..." Things have come to a pretty pass in this
wicked world when a country's religion denounces a citizen born blind
for accepting the gift of sight!

'My own opinion of the mysterious Nazarene is difficult to define.
On first sight of him I was a bit disappointed. He is not an heroic
figure. I found myself wondering how he would look on a horse--probably
not very impressive; but I believe my Darik would stand still while
he mounted--a courtesy he does not often accord to his owner. The man
has a compelling voice. I can't describe it or the effect of it. It's
a unifying voice that converts a great crowd of mutually distrustful
strangers into a tight little group of blood relatives.

'I never have had any respect for people who pretend to work wonders,
but the things that happened out there yesterday, if not miraculous,
need quite a lot of explaining...But it was what the Carpenter said,
even more than what he did, that has disposed me to write you at such
length of this strange business.

'After he had apparently given sight to a dozen or more blind ones, he
went on to say that the entire population of the earth was groping in
darkness; and that went for everybody, kings and peasants, philosophers
and fools. He had been sent, he said, to give sight to these blind
people. "I am the light of the world!" he declared; and, strangely
enough, nobody laughed, nobody sneered.

'Of course an assertion of this character sounds like the boasting of a
crack-brained fanatic; and if I were to read of it in a letter, instead
of hearing it from the man's own lips, I should marvel how the writer
could have taken so much nonsense seriously.

'I confess I gasped a little when the Carpenter committed this
outrageous audacity, but I couldn't help remembering what you said, one
day, about your belief in a "Torchbearer".

'I was still further stirred to remembrance of your remarks on that
matter when the Carpenter added that the light he carried would reflect
from those who received it: they too would illumine the path for those
who were lost in the dark, even as a lighted city on a hill-top.

'Whoever had his lamp lighted at the Nazarene's torch was in duty bound
to let it shine. The lamp was not to be hidden where it would benefit
only the possessor in his little corner. The lamp was the property
of the man who held it, but the light belonged to the public!...(I
hope I am doing the Carpenter's speech justice. You should have been
there, Mencius. It was the sort of thing you would have enjoyed--and
understood.)

'It is unlikely that the political and religious pundits will permit
this Jesus to continue his present course very long. He has the whole
province by the ears. Many well-to-do employers of farm and vineyard
labour are protesting that their men have been absent whole days from
their duties. Presently they will arrest the Carpenter, as a disturber
of the peace--which, of course, he is--and if he gets a long term in
prison he will be lucky...He may be--as he says--the light of the
world, but it is doubtful whether the world wants light...I wish I
might hear what you think about this.

'I remain in Caesarea until spring. Then I shall return--without much
hope, I admit--to Tiberias for further talk with Fara. If she still
refuses to go back to Arabia, I may have no inclination to return
alone. I cherish the memory of your kindness...'

'VOLDI.'



Chapter XIII


Now that the weather had become too inclement for outdoor assemblies,
comfortable lodging was found for Jesus in the well-kept cottage that
had belonged to the departed Jonas and Rachael.

It had been Andrew's suggestion. The snug little home in Capernaum,
though jointly owned by the two brothers, had been the elder's special
care, for Simon's chief concern was his fleet; and, besides, Andrew's
memories of his childhood were more cherishable.

While privately agreeing with his prosperous brother that their good
old father may have given too much of his time to the Synagogue,
as between the overworked piety of Jonas and the noisy infidelity
of Simon, Andrew had considered his saintly sire's attitude toward
religion less objectionable.

For a couple of years after their parents' death, and while Simon's
lovely but fragile Abigail still survived, Andrew had lived alone in
the old house. When Abigail was gone, Simon had urged him to join
Hannah and himself in Bethsaida, but he had continued his interest in
the Capernaum home, visiting it every day or two, tending his mother's
flowers and dusting the shabby but beloved furniture.

Various offers had been made to buy or lease the property. Simon had
felt that this was a sensible thing to do and had generously assured
his less affluent brother that he might regard as his own whatever
income was derived, but Andrew had been reluctant to let the place fall
into the hands of strangers.

The general excitement stirred by the Nazarene Carpenter had not
affected Andrew very much, one way or the other. He was not one to
take up readily with new ideas. The old ones doubtless had their
imperfections but it was to be noticed that the new ones never lasted
very long. Occasionally dissenters created local confusions which
put old friends at loggerheads, but the hotter the fire the sooner
it burned out, leaving everything much as it was before. True, the
expanding tales of the Carpenter's sayings and doings were amazing,
but Andrew's conservative intuition told him that it wouldn't be long
before the whole thing blew over. The Carpenter would be silenced
and the people who had been following him about would return,
disillusioned, to their neglected duties.

Even when it had become common talk that Simon--of all people!--had
been taking a serious interest in the Carpenter, Andrew had silently
maintained his belief that there was something crazy about all this
hubbub and resolved that he wouldn't have any part of it. He was
privately amused, but not surprised, by his tempestuous brother's
avoidance of the subject in his presence. Indeed, it seemed that Simon
was deliberately seeing to it that they were not left alone together;
but that was easy enough to understand. Simon had been so blatant
in his excoriations of the Nazarene and so contemptuous of all the
half-wits who had been taken in by this hullabaloo, that it wasn't much
wonder if he preferred not to discuss the matter. That, thought Andrew,
was the trouble about uttering strongly spiced words of condemnation:
they didn't taste very good if one had to eat them. Meditating on this,
Andrew grinned, asked no questions, made no comments, and waited for
the inevitable collapse of the new movement.

But when, one evening, Simon had brought this Jesus home with him for
supper and lodging for the night, Andrew became aware that they were in
the presence of a new kind of man. Although Andrew had never travelled
further than a day's journey from home and had no notion how others
than Galileans talked, as he sat there directly across the table from
the Carpenter he felt sure that there could be no one else in the world
like him.

Upon Jesus' unexpected arrival at supper-time, Hannah had been pretty
badly flustered and was profuse with apologies for their poor little
house, which, she untruthfully declared, was untidy, and for the skimpy
meal, which, in fact, was more ample than usual because she had known
that Simon--frequently absent from home in these days--intended to be
here.

Apparently Jesus had heard such talk before, it being customary for an
excellent housekeeper to belittle her hospitality, but her remarks had
given him an occasion to speak about the things that really mattered.
He defined poverty by telling a brief story of a rich farmer who had
prospered until his accumulations had become a serious problem. His
fields had produced so abundantly that his barns were too small to
house the corn: so he had torn down the barns and built bigger ones.
And his harvests increased, requiring more barns, until all he thought
about was larger barns. And when, one night, an Angel came for his soul
and inquired what he was worth, he had nothing to offer but huge barns
bulging with corn. This was unfortunate; for there was no market for
corn where the farmer was going, and there was nothing the Angel could
do with a barn--no matter how big it was.

The story was told soberly enough, but Andrew couldn't help smiling a
little. It was so simple that a child could have understood it. The
priests, who never talked that way, might have considered it trivial.
But, when Jesus told it, in his quiet voice, it was more than a mere
story: it seemed real! You could see the puzzled old rich man--whom
everybody had envied for his wealth--sitting up in bed at midnight with
his grey hair tousled and his silken nightcap askew, blinking into the
disappointed eyes of the Angel who was shaking his head, and saying,
'Corn? No; you can't bring the corn along--or the barns. You may bring
only whatever you have given away.'

When the story was ended, Simon, who had been eating industriously,
made a little chuckle deep in his throat and glanced up to say: 'I'm
afraid I wouldn't make a very good farmer, master. If the Angel were to
come for me, I wouldn't even be able to offer him corn-barns.'

Andrew had wished, in the embarrassing silence following this speech,
that his brother hadn't said it; for the attempted drollery sounded as
if Simon was showing his family that he and Jesus were chummy enough
to share a little jest. But, if that had been intended, the Master had
quietly set Simon right by remarking: 'Ships--perhaps?'

Simon had not ventured to comment on that, and it was some time before
anything else was said.

By nature shy and reticent, Andrew was accustomed, when guests (never
of his own invitation) were present, to consider himself a mere boarder
who had purchased his place at the table and whose sole interest in the
party was his rightful share of the food. He always ate in silence,
attentive to his plate, seeming not even to hear the conversation,
much less to show any interest in it; and by his long practice of such
detachment, guests who did not know him very well but hoped to draw him
into the talk for courtesy's sake, invariably raised their voices when
looking his way, presuming him to be deaf.

But that night, such was his uncontrollable fascination, he neglected
his food and listened. Presently, finding himself staring hard into
their guest's far-seeing eyes, he made an impulsive effort to avert his
gaze--and discovered that he couldn't do it. And the peculiar thing
about this captivity was that--after the first bewildering moment--he
didn't want to get away; nor was he any longer self-conscious. Jesus
had made him a member of the party, in good and regular standing.
It was really the first time in his life that Andrew had felt like
a member of any party; and when Jesus asked him if he enjoyed his
occupation as a fisherman he had surprised himself and his relatives
by replying, with a smile, that fishing was fun only for people who
had some other means of support. They all laughed merrily; and Andrew,
instead of being embarrassed, felt a previously unexperienced glow of
pleasure.

Next morning, after Jesus and Simon, having finished their breakfast,
had left the house, Andrew had made a clumsy effort to define his
impressions.

Hannah had said, when the silence between them had become oppressive:
'Andrew, what is it--about this man--that makes him different from
everyone else?'

'Well,' Andrew had replied, after considerable deliberation, 'everyone
else is a body--with a soul. He is a soul--with a body.'

'But surely, Andrew--you don't think that Jesus is--is more than
human!' exclaimed Hannah.

'I don't know,' mumbled Andrew, rising from the table; 'but I think he
knows!'

 * * * * * *

So it was arranged that Jesus was to have the use of the old home in
Capernaum. Simon had been delighted with Andrew's offer of it. Indeed,
the proposal had drawn the brothers closer together than they had been
since early childhood. The truth was that while Simon had not wilfully
patronized--and, by implications, belittled--his self-effacing older
brother, their relationship, in the opinion of the fleet and everybody
else who saw them together, was no more intimate than that of any
generous employer and a trusted employee. No one had ever heard Simon
speak a harsh word to Andrew, but no stranger would have suspected that
they were of the same flesh and blood. Their acquaintance with Jesus
had somehow made them kin, Simon showing a new affection and Andrew
beaming in the warmth of it.

When Jesus had been shown through the house, he inquired whether there
would be any objection to his doing some light carpentry. Both brothers
were prompt to approve. Indeed, Simon was enthusiastic. There had been
criticism of Jesus. Plenty of substantial people had asked whether the
Nazarene intended to live off the country. And didn't he believe in
work? And--it was easy enough for him to tell the people to live like
the lilies that dressed better than kings, though they never spun or
wove; or like the birds that God fed. That might be all very well for
birds and flowers, but it was impractical for the father of a family to
entertain any such delusions.

Even Jairus, who had shown a friendly attitude toward Jesus, had been
heard to express this opinion. Jairus had said, further, that if the
Nazarene wanted to live without working, it was his own business; but
he shouldn't entice the people to leave their jobs and trail around the
country after him. Jairus had been quite outspoken! Now Jesus was going
to show them all that he did believe in work.

Surmising that old Ebenezer, a recently retired carpenter in the
neighbourhood, would not be needing his equipment any more, Andrew
inquired whether they might rent it for the Master's use. When he
returned to the cottage, well soaked by the rain, he was wheeling a
barrow piled high with all manner of wood-working implements, most
of them out of order. Except for the adze, the drawknife, and three
variously sized planes, which were in fairly good condition, the
heavier and more complicated instruments would have to be repaired or
discarded. The old lathe, clumsy at its best, had been long in disuse
because of Ebenezer's rheumatic feet, and the chisels which served it
were dull and rusty. But Jesus was not dismayed. Ebenezer's lathe, he
said, could be rebuilt.

The living-room, which fronted the street, was cleared and its
furniture stored in the basement. In a day's time it was a
carpenter-shop, and Jesus had already begun the repair of the tools.
Andrew had put the small guest-room to rights for the Master's
occupancy, and he himself had been sleeping at the cottage for several
nights. The weather was cold, raw, and wet.

In all this work of transforming the old house into a place of
business, Simon had not participated. He had remained at home. Hannah
was ill, had been ill for days; nor was she showing any signs of
improvement; growing worse, if anything.

The testy old physician, Gershon, had been attentive, but his medicines
were ineffective. Rabbi Elimelech had called and was astonished by
Hannah's haggard appearance. The relentless fever had taken a heavy
toll of her, as if she were gradually melting in its fire. Esther
was doing her utmost to make the patient comfortable, but every
hour increased her anxiety about Hannah, who lay half-conscious,
unresponsive, rousing only to accept a spoonful of cold water on a
parched tongue. Simon clumsily tried to help Esther with the housework.
Most of the time he wandered about from room to room, rubbing his
bearded chin and trying to make Esther say that Hannah was a little
better.

Strangely enough, it had not occurred to the Big Fisherman that Jesus
should be summoned. Somehow, Jesus' ministry of healing seemed to
belong to great crowds of miserable people, strangers, the general
public. Simon sincerely believed in the Master's power to heal
diseases. Had he not seen it happen again and again? Indeed, he had
become so accustomed to these breath-taking restorations that even
while they were in progress he would calmly admonish the impatient
cot-bearers, waiting their turn, to keep in line.

'No crowding, please!' Simon would say. 'The Master will attend to
you.' Why--it was almost as if Simon owned the show and employed Jesus
as an accomplished healer. Simon had enjoyed the sensation of seeing
strangers tug their forelocks when they asked him, deferentially, if he
would not speak to Jesus on their behalf.

And now, with such dire necessity for better help than old Gershon
could offer, Simon had not called on Jesus. Looking back upon
it afterwards he admitted to himself, with appropriate shame,
that--without realizing the foolishness of his vanity--he had become
a professional. Jesus could do, and had done, amazing things for the
public; and Simon as partner in--if not manager of--this awe-inspiring
enterprise had let his distinction go to his head. The public listened
when Simon spoke--and obeyed him, too.

How long it might have taken him to become aware that he, Simon,
desperately needed Jesus in the privacy of his own house!--now!--was
left undetermined by Esther's appearance in the open doorway of the
living-room where Simon sat holding his shaggy head in his hands.

'I'm afraid Hannah is growing weaker, sir,' she said.

He rose quickly, mumbling that he would go and notify Gershon. She laid
a detaining hand on his huge, hairy forearm, and murmured: 'Had you
thought of sending for Jesus?'

The girl's query resounded accusingly in his mind all the way to
Capernaum. Having reached the highway his rapid strides had quickened
to a run. He was too heavy for such exertion. His lungs hurt and his
mouth was dry; and his soul cried out against him. Why hadn't he
sent for Jesus? His mind was in tumult as he ran. What a weakling he
was!...True--he had confessed to Jesus, that early morning on the
lakeshore, that he was weak and sinful, and that Jesus had better not
have anything to do with him. But he really hadn't meant that he was
that bad. It had seemed the right thing to say at the time. Within an
hour, he had begun to feel that his self-abasement had been somewhat
extravagant. Jesus had invited him to come and help him: Jesus knew
what he was about; Jesus would not have asked him had Simon been as
weak and wicked as he said...Well, now we knew how weak and wicked we
were!

Through the early part of the forenoon, Jesus had been diligently at
work on Ebenezer's old lathe. It had rained all night, but had ceased
now, and Andrew had been out in the door-yard bracing up some fallen
vines. Passing the window, he observed that the Master had discontinued
his labours and was sitting bolt upright on the battered tool-chest,
staring straight ahead of him with troubled eyes. It worried Andrew;
and after a while he decided to go in and inquire. Entering, he was
relieved to find Jesus busily at work again, his tension apparently
eased. Presently the Master walked to the door and stood looking down
the street expectantly.

Simon was ready to drop when he arrived. Too breathless and exhausted
to speak, he flung himself into a chair, panting.

'Whatever is the matter with you?' demanded Andrew, stooping over him.
Jesus was slipping his arms into the sleeves of his robe.

'Come quickly, Andrew,' he said quietly. 'Simon will follow us when he
is rested.'

 * * * * * *

There had been need of haste. Neighbour women filled the house and
their men stood about, in low-voiced groups, under the dripping trees.
Everybody made way for Jesus as he entered.

Gershon was ostentatiously packing his bag. He glanced up and frowned
darkly when the Nazarene, whom he had often reviled as a conscienceless
fraud, appeared in the doorway.

'And what might you be doing here?' he demanded savagely.

Rabbi Elimelech moved forward, looking as if he wanted to intervene.

'I say the woman is dying!' Gershon faced the Rabbi indignantly. 'Is
she to be tormented by this--this Carpenter?' He glared scornfully at
Jesus, who made no reply.

'But--if Hannah is dying, friend Gershon,' ventured Elimelech, 'she is
beyond any harm. I beg you to let this young man see her.'

'Very well!' rasped Gershon, making off with his kit. 'You are all
fools!' he shouted, as he elbowed roughly through the silent neighbours
who had congregated in the hallway. 'Fools!' he yelled back angrily
from the open door. 'All of you! Fools!'

'We must make allowances for Gershon, sir,' explained the Rabbi gently.
'He is getting old--and he isn't very well.'

Jesus affectionately laid a hand on the Rabbi's thin shoulder and
smiled into the old man's eyes.

'That,' he said, softly, 'is the right spirit. You are a blessing to
these people, Rabboni!'

Elimelech's eyes filled as he turned away. The women stared into his
contorted face as he passed. He seemed exalted! Something--they knew
not what--had happened to their good old Rabbi!

Jesus now quickly and confidently assumed charge of the situation.
Motioning the women to withdraw, he was closing the bedroom door. As
Esther followed them out, he detained her.

'You will remain, daughter,' he said.

For a time he stood gazing down into Hannah's waxen face, with sorrow
and anxiety in his eyes. Then he drew up a chair close beside the bed
and sat down. Glancing up at Esther he signed for her to kneel at the
bedside; and, after some little hesitation--for she wasn't sure what
was expected of her--she obeyed, resting her elbows on the edge of the
bed and taking Hannah's hand in both of her own.

'It's so cold, sir,' she said, in a half-whisper.

Jesus took Hannah's other hand in his and for a long moment there was
complete silence.

'Do you know how to pray, Fara?' he asked softly.

Startled, she looked up, wide-eyed, into his face; then put her head
down on Hannah's arm.

'No, sir,' she murmured in a shaken voice.

'Do they not pray--in Arabia?' he asked.

'Some do, I think,' she said. 'We never did--in my home--except Ione.'
She did not explain Ione, implying that Jesus would know. 'Ione prayed
often. She had many Gods.'

'There is only one God, Fara. Ione prayed for His many benefits
thinking that there were as many Gods...Shall I teach you how to pray?'

She nodded her head, without replying.

'Say, "Our Father."'

'"Our Father,"' she mumbled, in a voice that was full of tears.

'Now, tell Him--in secret--that you love Hannah and want her to
recover.'

Fara was crying now. Shaking her head despairingly, she looked up
through blinding tears and said thickly: 'It would do no good, Master;
not from me. I am unworthy.'

'Then--perhaps you had better ask Him, first, to cleanse your heart of
evil. You are carrying a great weight, Fara. You too need to be healed.'

Again she looked up into his compassionate eyes.

'You--you know about it, Master?'

Jesus drew a deep sigh. 'Ask our Father to set you free, Fara. Then ask
Him to help Hannah.'

She buried her face in Hannah's arm, her body trembling with convulsive
sobs. Gradually her weeping ceased. At length Jesus spoke, not in a
tone of entreaty but command!

'Hannah!' he called. Rising to his feet, and grasping both her hands,
he called again: 'Hannah! Come! Awake!'

With a long, shuddering sigh, Hannah opened her eyes, looked up dazedly
into Jesus' face, smiled, and drifted off to sleep. Fara sat up,
staring in open-mouthed amazement.

'Prepare some porridge for her,' said Jesus. 'She will waken again,
presently.' The sweat was dripping from his face and his hands were
trembling. As Fara reached the door, he spoke sternly. 'If you have
made a new promise today, see that you keep it! God is not mocked!'

 * * * * * *

Having been house-bound for several days by the rains, David had
decided to stretch his legs. It was still wet underfoot and dark
overhead; not a pleasant day for a walk, but he couldn't stay cooped up
any longer.

Slogging along through the mud he wondered why, when he didn't really
have to, he remained in Galilee through the tedious and depressing
weeks of the winter season. Of course there was his sister to consider.
Deborah couldn't be budged from home and David disliked the thought of
leaving her alone with the servants.

Approaching the corner where Hannah lived, he was surprised to see the
number of people who had gathered about the house. It was apparent
from their attitude that something serious had happened. He paused and
was about to beckon to one of the solemn-faced men when he saw the Big
Fisherman toiling wearily up from the highway.

Sighting his eminent neighbour, Simon moved toward him and explained
what the trouble was. Hannah was grievously ill; beyond recovery,
maybe. David shook his head and murmured his sympathy.

'She may have taken a turn for the worse,' added Simon, anxiously
surveying the silent assembly of neighbours. 'I have been gone for an
hour. I went to summon Jesus.'

'Ah? The Carpenter?' David was astonished. 'I am surprised that you
have any faith in the fellow.' And when Simon made no reply, he went on
dryly, 'And perhaps you haven't...Any port in a storm; eh?'

Simon gnawed at his underlip, as if contemplating a response, but
remained silent. It was evident that the cynical old Sadducee had not
heard of his public association with Jesus. David had no reason to
think that the Big Fisherman would take the slightest interest in this
wandering preacher.

'Is the Carpenter in there now?' asked the lawyer.

'I suppose so,' said Simon almost indifferently. 'If you will excuse
me, sir'--turning away--'I will go in--and see how she is.' He walked
rapidly round the corner and was unlatching the gate when the crowd
on the stoop was ploughed apart by old Gershon, who, noisy with
indignation, tottered down the path. Simon stood in his way.

'What is it, Gershon?' he demanded.

'Fools!' shrilled the old man.

'How is Hannah?' Simon clutched at Gershon's sleeve.

'Dying! Let go of me! You are all fools!' Gershon nearly upset himself
by his angry tug to be free. At the gate he came face to face with
David, who had rounded the corner and stood waiting. Instantly the
old physician's manner changed. Bowing deeply, he rubbed a shaky hand
across his forehead and tried to steady his voice as he explained his
rage.

David listened impassively until Gershon had finished.

'How do you know he can't!' he inquired. 'Apparently, all you know
is--you can't! Perhaps you had better wait and verify your opinion.'

'But'--spluttered Gershon--'the fellow is not a physician! He is
a carpenter!' He was moving sullenly away, disappointed over this
interview with the most influential man in Bethsaida, when the sound of
many voices came from the cottage--excited, astonished, happy voices!
Amazing news circulated through the crowd that massed about the steps.
Simon, his heart pounding hard, pushed his way into the house and down
the hall toward Hannah's bedroom. Andrew was emerging with wet eyes
and a queer little whimper that seemed oddly out of keeping with his
radiant smile. It was true then! It had happened!...Hannah was sitting
up. Esther, kneeling beside the bed, was feeding her from a bowl of
broth. Simon stood there silently, his eyes overflowing.

'Hannah!' he murmured.

'It was Jesus!' she said, hardly above a whisper.

'Where is he?' asked Simon.

Esther glanced up to say that he must be somewhere in the house; that
he was here only a moment ago. Simon withdrew to inquire. He met
Andrew, and asked him.

'The Master has gone,' replied Andrew.

'Did he say where he was going?'

'No. He may have gone back to Capernaum.'

'You didn't see him leave?'

Andrew shook his head.

'He...the Master didn't inquire for me, did he?' asked Simon, after
some hesitation.

Andrew shook his head.

'Did he have anything to eat?' asked Simon.

'Probably didn't want anything,' said Andrew. 'He was very tired.'

'I shall try to overtake him--on the road,' said Simon, moving away.

Walking rapidly to the highway, he shaded his eyes for better vision
and searched the thoroughfare, as far as he could see; but without
sighting Jesus.

Troubled, lonely, ashamed, and sick at heart, he trudged slowly toward
Capernaum. As he neared the old home, his steps lagged. The door was
open. Jesus was at work on the old lathe. Simon went in and sat down on
the tool-chest. He waited for Jesus to speak.

After a long silence, Jesus put down Ebenezer's broken contraption
and said, with a sigh: 'Simon, Satan has been beating you on his
threshing-floor.'

There was nothing that the remorseful Simon could say. He hung his head
and tugged at his lip.

Leaning forward with a sigh, Jesus again took up the broken lathe and
resumed his work. Presently he turned toward Simon with a compassionate
smile and said gently, as to a chastised child: 'But I am still praying
for you.'

 * * * * * *

David had never been quite so confused. There were plenty of mysteries
in life which nobody tried to understand, mysteries which everybody
took for granted. But this one cried out for an explanation.

Previous rumours of the Carpenter's miracles had not bothered him
too much. It was conceivable that a clever magician could talk a
crowd of simple-minded, credulous people into a foolish interest in
his charlatanry. Had he not seen it happen again and again on the
streets of Athens? Even the Nazarene's alleged works of healing were
understandable. It was a matter of record that bed-ridden paralytics,
finding their house on fire and no one to help them, had risen and run
to safety. Long-time lunatics had been briefly shocked into sanity.
Doubtless the Carpenter's feats of healing could all be accounted for
if anyone would go to the trouble of examining them.

But this thing that had obviously happened to Hannah seemed different.
The behaviour of the neighbours was puzzling. They were not all fools
and the spontaneity of their amazement made it incredible that they had
connived with the Nazarene to create the impression that a miracle had
been performed.

For some time David remained standing outside the fence, watching
the people in the door-yard as they moved about with strained faces
in which there was something of bewildered gratification combined
with forthright terror, most of them mumbling questions which nobody
tried to answer, groups of them falling apart and re-forming again,
some crowding into the congested doorway, some struggling to get out,
shaking their heads when queried. The thing that had happened in there
might have a reasonable explanation, but the people didn't think so.

David felt at a disadvantage standing there, waiting. It certainly did
not comport with his dignity to exhibit so much curiosity. He surveyed
the crowd for a familiar face, someone he might beckon to him, but
nobody glanced his way...Now came the Big Fisherman, around from the
rear of the house, walking hurriedly toward the gate, looking neither
to right nor left. David hoped to attract his attention but Simon's
errand was urgent and he gave no heed. It was evident that he didn't
want to talk to anyone.

Rabbi Elimelech now appeared, the crowd on the stoop making way for
him, and cautiously tottered down the two steps, leaning heavily on his
cane. He glanced about at the staring faces, his own wearing a laboured
smile that he intended to be amiable and paternal, but an inner stress
showed through. He laid a long, lean hand on his beard, perhaps to
compose his chin, which was trembling. David walked round the corner
and waited for him at the gate.

'All--David! I am glad to see you. I hope you are well.' The Rabbi was
trying to be casual.

'Well?' David was brusque; he wasn't going to be put off with trivial
amenities. 'Not at all well! I'm quite upset! What has been going on
here, Rabbi?'

'Walk with me, David,' murmured the old man. 'I cannot stand long. My
legs, you know. I must go home. Take my arm, my friend.'

David promptly complied and found that the lean arm was trembling.
They moved slowly up the street together. For something to say, David
remarked drolly, 'I'm afraid your congregation will think you have
fallen into bad company, Master.'

'It won't matter,' replied Elimelech huskily. 'Nothing matters now.
My people have objected to my interest in the Nazarene; but now--they
don't know what to think--about anything!'

It wasn't as if they were strangers, the Rabbi and this Sadducee. David
had no connections with the Synagogue, never attended its services,
was presumed to hold it in contempt; but he was its chief financial
support. Whenever he sent a contribution, he took pains to explain
that the gift was not meant to imply the slightest interest in the
Synagogue, but only his appreciation of Rabbi Elimelech's kindness to
the poor of Bethsaida. The Regents of the Synagogue always scowled when
they got it, and indignantly talked of refusing it, which they never
did.

Once the good old man had climbed the hill and spent the afternoon with
the Sadducee. And they had enjoyed each other. On leaving, however,
Elimelech had remarked, with some embarrassment: 'I wish we might do
this--often--but--'

'I understand fully, Master,' David had said. 'You have enough to bear
without defending your friendship for a Sadducee.'

Impatient as he was to inspect the old man's mind in regard to the
alleged miracle of Hannah's healing, he refrained from pestering him
with questions while they were on the way. They walked slowly, arm in
arm, with short, shuffling steps, David acquiring the Rabbi's limp.
It seemed a long journey to the commodious old house hard by the
Synagogue. David tenderly assisted Elimelech up the steps and through
the door. Courtesy demanded that the Rabbi invite his friend to sit
down and courtesy compelled the Sadducee to accept.

When Elimelech's breathing was easier, David asked: 'What think you,
Master? Was Hannah's recovery miraculous?'

'That word is often used loosely, David,' replied the old man,
apparently hoping that his candid evasiveness would preclude further
questioning. Noting David's shrug, he elaborated on his irrelevant
remark: 'Frequently a new experience is called miraculous.'

'Let us not trouble ourselves about the careless use of big words,
Master,' said David reproachfully. 'This is a serious matter!'

Elimelech acknowledged his futile attempt to retreat from the main
issue: he closed his eyes and slowly nodded his head.

'You know as much about it as I, David. Hannah was at the point of
death. Gershon said so. Everybody said so...Jesus spent a few minutes
at her side, and she sat up, recognized those who stood by, and
accepted food...If that is a miracle'--the weary old voice faltered and
finished lamely--'it was indeed a miracle.'

'Then the man is divine!' persisted David. 'Is that your opinion, sir?'

'How should I know?' Little beads of perspiration were dotting the
Rabbi's pale forehead, but the Sadducee continued his inquisition.

'If he is divine, might he be the promised Messiah?'

'Many Messiahs have come and gone, my friend. None of them met the
requirements of prophecy.'

'Very true!' assented David. 'And each of them had his loyal following,
and most of them were honest and fearless men of good intent, like this
Jesus. But they all failed of the one great task. According to the
prophets, the Messiah would restore the Kingdom to Israel. No one of
them could do that.'

Elimelech made no comment, and David went on:

'Rabbi, how recently have you visited Caesarea?'

'Never was there in my life. Why do you ask?'

'Well, if this man has any thought of restoring the Kingdom to Israel
he had better set about it with all speed. The Romans are preparing
Caesarea as a port of invasion. It will not be long now...Tell me,
Rabbi. You have heard this Nazarene speak: has he talked about the
Kingdom?'

'He talks of little else, David,' said Elimelech quietly.

'And what does he say?' David leaned forward attentively. 'Does this
penniless Carpenter expect to withstand a Roman invasion?'

'The Romans will not invade his Kingdom, David.'

'I'm afraid I don't understand, Master.'

'No,' sighed the old man, 'you wouldn't understand. This man's Kingdom
is his soul. He teaches that our Kingdom is our soul. The Romans cannot
take it; nor can they destroy its peace...You should hear him talk,
David. Then you might understand.'

With that, David rose to go: he had no mind for further discussion of
this sort. Besides, he had tormented the good old man long enough. He
moved toward the door.

'And come and tell me what you think of him, my friend,' said
Elimelech, over his shoulder. 'The Carpenter may have a surprise in
store for you.'

 * * * * * *

David of the Sadducean House of Zadok had been so stirred to curiosity
about the Nazarene that he resolved to pocket his cynicism and pay the
man a visit forthwith.

It was rumoured that the Carpenter had opened a shop in Capernaum and
during the season of rough weather would be available for employment.
Would the Messiah be likely to do that? None of the other candidates
for Messiahship had worked with his hands. However, reflected David,
it wasn't important that Jesus should pattern his career in imitation
of men who had failed. Perhaps he was showing wisdom in making common
cause with toilers: perhaps calluses on a prophet's hands were more to
his credit than concealed callosities less comfortably achieved...David
chuckled a little at the possibilities of a detestable epigram dealing
with this matter.

The crowd in Hannah's door-yard had thinned somewhat when he passed the
house on his way home. He did not pause to ask questions. He walked
more rapidly than usual, for he intended to visit the Carpenter this
afternoon. In anticipation of the call it would be more seemly, he
thought, to provide himself with a legitimate business errand. To do
this he would first have to go home.

On his latest visit to Athens, six years ago, David had bought an
exquisitely crafted curio-cabinet which, to his great disappointment,
had been badly damaged in transportation. On various occasions he had
invited experienced woodworkers to attempt repairs, but none of them
wanted to undertake it. They hadn't the tools for it, they said. Now he
would take it to the Nazarene.

The servants dusted it with care, loaded it on a cart, and followed
their master to Capernaum--slowly, for the elderly lawyer was prudent
about overtaxing his tired heart. It was mid-afternoon when they
arrived at the old home of Jonas, who, according to a local legend, had
often prayed publicly for the Sadducees in a tone that poorly concealed
his private lack of interest in their welfare.

The Big Fisherman opened the door and showed surprise--and some
embarrassment too, from which he quickly recovered. Ranged around the
walls, sitting on stools and benches, several men silently surveyed the
visitor. They came to their feet as Simon presented them to the eminent
David, each of them bowing respectfully as his name was spoken--one
Nathaniel Bartholomew, a man of apparent intelligence in his sixties; a
light-complexioned, slender man of forty, whose name was Philip--

'A Greek?' inquired David.

'Quite a long time back, sir,' Philip had replied. 'My people fled from
Macedonia a century ago.'

Then Simon pointed out the young brothers, James and John.

'Are you carpenters?' asked David, addressing John in particular.

'Fishermen,' said John, adding, 'but not today.'

A chuckle went round the circle.

'Johnny is not much of a fisherman, sir,' put in Simon, 'even in the
best of weather. We take him along for ballast.'

This was amusing, for Johnny was of slight build and didn't weigh
very much. When the others laughed he smiled obligingly and rubbed a
beardless chin.

Simon, they all felt, was doing very well: Simon had a way with him.
Even the presence of the learned Sadducee had not disconcerted him.

'I think you have met my brother,' said Simon, as Andrew came in from
an adjoining room carrying a comfortable chair obviously intended for
the honoured guest. David politely nodded toward Andrew and they all
sat down. After a little silence, David turned to Simon and said, 'I
came to see the Carpenter, Jesus. I have some work for him.'

'The Master is resting, sir,' said Simon.

David stiffened slightly and arched his eyebrows, as to wonder how a
carpenter could afford to be resting during working hours, but Simon
offered no explanation. Philip, who sat by a front window observing the
cart, inquired, 'Is there anything we can do, sir?'

'Not unless you're a skilled carpenter,' replied David coolly; but he
went to the door and told his servants to bring in the cabinet.

They all gathered in a circle around it, admiring its craftsmanship
and deploring its injuries. Unobserved, Jesus joined the preoccupied
group, standing beside and a little to the rear of David. Their sleeves
lightly touched. Of ponderous dignity and deliberate movement, David
was not one to act impulsively; but at this accidental contact, he
suddenly retreated, turned about, and found himself staring into the
steady eyes of a young man who didn't seem to belong in this company at
all.

Simon, observing, said, 'Master, our guest is David, of the House of
Zadok.'

The Sadducee bowed deferentially, silently, and Jesus said, 'You are
welcome, friend. What may I do for you?'

David pointed toward the cabinet, but Jesus' eyes did not follow the
gesture, as had been expected. His calm look of inquiry seemed friendly
enough, but it was apparent that he had no concern for the cabinet.

'I shall make no attempt to deceive you, sir,' said David. 'The cabinet
does need mending; but, in truth, that was not the object of my call.
I have heard many things of your words and deeds, and I desired to see
you.'

'You have spoken truthfully, David,' said Jesus. 'If that is your
custom you should be able to understand my sayings. Men who love the
truth are my friends...Will you sit down?'

They all found their places and sat, with Jesus in the midst of them.
Stooping over, he picked up a portion of the worn-out lathe, shook his
head, and let it fall with a clatter to the floor.

'Let us talk of redemption,' he said, 'and of salvation.' He pointed
to the broken lathe and then to the cabinet. In a low voice, almost as
if he were talking to himself, he began to speak about the things that
could and could not be reclaimed by mending. Some things were beyond
repair. The life was gone out of them and nothing but newness of life
could redeem them.

'It is useless,' he went on, 'to sew a new patch on an old garment.
The worn-out fabric has no strength to support good cloth. It is of
no profit to pour active new wine into an old, dried, inflexible
wineskin.' Turning toward David, he asked, 'What say you, friend?'

'I fully agree with you, Master,' said David. 'And does it not apply as
well to old systems of thought, old laws, old beliefs?'

A slow, sidelong glance of apprehensive inquiry slipped from man to
man around the wall. Was this shrewd lawyer baiting the Master to some
imprudent criticism of the Government or the Sanhedrin?

But apparently Jesus had no suspicions of the Sadducee's sincerity.
He seemed eager to discuss David's pertinent query...The tendency
of any ancient establishment of laws or doctrines was the gradual
accumulation of signs, symbols, tokens, amulets, sanctified vessels and
enchanted words, until the life of the institution was smothered and
its purposes forgotten...Endless debates dealt with such trivialities
of the law as how many cubits a man might walk on the Sabbath Day,
whether a man might carry a stool across the room, whether a tailor
was breaking the law of the Sabbath if he had a needle in his coat;
but they never defined how much rent a landlord could exact of a
poor tenant or how much interest a money-lender could demand from a
hard-pressed debtor...Solemn conclaves dignifiedly wrangled over the
proper compounding of herbs for incense--precisely how much mint, how
much anise, how much rue--and days were spent in arguing about the
breadth of a phylactery or the depth of a hem on a priest's robe, while
the needy lay starving to death on rich men's doorsteps, and nobody
cared!... The Master's voice rose indignantly as he pictured groups
of hapless, hopeless men huddled together at the very lodge-gates of
well-fed pundits who spent their days splitting the hairs of ritual
and ceremonial. And nobody noticed the plight of these wretched ones
but the homeless dogs who paused to lick their sores. Nor was there
any talk of mercy and brotherly kindness!...Any government so far gone
toward utter futility could never be repaired. It would have to be
reborn.

'Do you think then,' asked David respectfully, 'that the old laws
should be repealed?'

'No, David!' exclaimed Jesus. 'Not repealed--but fulfilled!'

With that he rose and took leave of them, retiring to his bed-chamber.
It was evident that he was very weary. After a moment of indecision,
the Sadducee went to the front door to summon his servants. They had
disappeared. He stood in the doorway, looking down the street; then
impulsively beckoned to the men in the room, and set off with obvious
agitation. They rose and followed quickly. Huge billows of black smoke
puffed toward the sky in the vicinity of the Synagogue. Excited men
were running down the middle of the road. Simon and the others soon
overtook and passed David, all but old Nathaniel Bartholomew, who had a
weak leg and poor wind. The fire angrily spat and crackled and roared
as they neared the Synagogue plaza. Rounding the corner they saw what
it was, the residence of Rabbi Ben-Sholem.

There Simon's steps slowed to a walk. He was quite out of breath from
all the excitement and unusual exertion. He let everybody pass him
and stood for a long moment panting hard. The acrid smoke stung his
nostrils. Apparently there wasn't much to be done for the Rabbi's
house. In any case, it was none of Simon's business. Rabbi Ben-Sholem
had mistreated the Master. Perhaps the haughty old man was being
punished for it. Maybe it was God's will that the Rabbi should lose
his home. If so, who was Simon that he should have the impudence to
interfere?

 * * * * * *

Throughout those cheerless winter days the Big Fisherman learned that
whilst it was highly exciting to be a friend and follower of Jesus
when vast crowds of staring, sweating, importunate people trampled one
another for better standing-ground to see and hear the Carpenter, it
was very dull business when practised privately in the rain.

It seemed that every circumstance of Simon's experience during this
bleak period was part of a diabolical conspiracy to break down his
faith and fortitude.

To begin with, nobody could remember such a protracted siege of bad
weather. It rained relentlessly, a cold, marrow-chilling rain that
soaked the heaviest garments and leaked through into the soul. The
oldsters, who were not required to go out into it very much, counselled
patience. 'This abundance of rain,' they said, 'will bless our land
next summer.' And so it would--and did; but it was tiresome while it
lasted.

As for the fishing, it was utterly profitless. Of course no one ever
expected much of a catch on a stormy day, but it at least provided
subsistence and kept the men out of mischief. Ordinarily the dismal
weather had but little effect upon the spirits of Simon's fleet. The
fishermen joked about their discomforts. This season it was different.
The fishing wasn't worth doing. The men were restless, sullen, and
touchy.

Simon, who was never one to rush in ahead of everybody else to take
the blame for something that had gone amiss, knew who was responsible
for this unhappy state of affairs and knew that his men knew that he
knew...No--it wasn't the Big Fisherman's fault if it rained all day and
all night every day and every night, nor could it be held against him
that the perch wouldn't rise; but the sour and surly attitude of his
dispirited crews was because of the skipper's indifference. He had lost
all interest in his business. And if he didn't care, why should they?

Simon sat alone and had little to say. His heart was heavy. Ever since
he had met Jesus he had been increasingly inattentive to his trade.
It was perhaps inevitable that this should have happened. Once he had
taken his place beside the Master as his foremost friend and assistant,
calmly directing an excitable throng of awe-stricken people and
competently keeping order among frantic suppliants, the old routines
of mending nets and splicing ropes and sluicing the slimy decks of his
fishing-smacks had lost their hold on his imagination; and no longer
had he any pride in his fleet or any joy.

The worst thing about it was the quite apparent disaffection of the
men and boys whose love and loyalty had meant so much to him. It was
plain to see that their devotion to him was in serious disrepair. As
the Big Fisherman, as the noisy, quick-tempered, profane, sacrilegious,
hard-hitting Big Fisherman, they had idolized him. Now that he had been
captivated by the soft-spoken Jesus, Simon was no longer their hero.

Nor was this the only cause of his dejection.

Nobody could have tortured this confession out of him, but Simon wished
he were a little better satisfied with the Master's recent activities
and attitudes. There was his carpentry, for example. Simon had thought
it would be just the right thing for Jesus to engage in some gainful
employment during the brief winter. The little carpenter-shop was
indeed a happy thought. Maybe the influential Jairus would hear of it
and approve. Jairus might even call, some day, and bring a chair to be
mended; and remain to chat a while.

But it hadn't turned out very well. Who could foresee that Jesus would
consent to work on the interior of old Ben-Sholem's house? Not only
was he giving his full time to it every day, but he seemed infatuated
with the job of installing the fine-grained olive-wood panelling on
the walls and ceiling of the Rabbi's library, panelling so perfectly
matched and mortised that its symmetrical pattern appeared to have been
chiselled from one great tree.

Simon hadn't wanted him to do it at all. Surely Jesus was under no
obligation to do a favour for the Rabbi. Moreover the wages were
niggardly. The contractor had had the impudence to say that any man
should consider it a privilege to work on 'a holy house,' even if he
were paid nothing at all. That's the way it was with the synagogues:
they had a bad habit of imposing on people in this manner, asking
skilled craftsmen to donate their time. Why was the Rabbi a mendicant?
He had his share of the tithes, hadn't he?

And that wasn't the whole cause of Simon's petulance. There was
Ben-Sholem's contemptuous attitude toward Jesus, even while the Master
was working for him! One afternoon Simon had dropped in to watch the
progress of Jesus' labours. Presently the Rabbi brought Jairus in to
show him what was going on. Sighting Simon, he testily inquired of the
contractor, 'Is this man employed here?' And when the contractor shook
his head, the Rabbi scowled and said, 'Then perhaps he should be on his
way.'

Flushed with humiliation, Simon had left the house. It seemed to him
that Jesus might have said something in defence of his friend. Had
Simon been in Jesus' place he would have thrown down his tools and
walked off the job. And then let the detestable old man try to find
another carpenter capable of finishing that beautiful room!

Simon earnestly wished that Jesus were made of tougher stuff! With all
that miraculous power at his disposal, why didn't he use some of it
to defend himself and his cause; yes, and his friends, too, who were
giving up everything for his sake?

He recalled what the servants at the palace had said about a strange,
bug-eating hermit who had been jailed for predicting the advent of
an Avenger. There was one coming who would put down the mighty from
their seats and exalt men of low degree. He would carry an axe and a
flail! The unjust would be cut down! Threshed! Abolished! It was clear
enough now that Jesus had no such intentions. Perhaps there was another
Anointed One coming.

That night Simon stealthily approached the unguarded prison by a
circuitous route through the Tetrarch's vineyards; and, at the
window-bars, talked long and seriously with the emaciated prisoner. It
was true, as the servant-girls had reported: this John was confident
that stern judgment was at hand for evil-doers in high places. The
whole world would be shaken! Not only High Priests and Prefects would
be punished: Caesar himself would feel the sting of that lash!

Next morning, the questing eyes of Jesus brought forth a full
confession from Simon of the interview he had had with John in prison.
To his surprise and relief, the Master listened complacently. After a
long silence between them, Jesus said:

'You were talking with one of the most courageous men this world has
ever produced. But John--for all his bravery--does not understand the
workings of the Kingdom--my Kingdom. He would see all evil uprooted by
the punishment of evil-doers. To set things right by violence has been
tried again and again by earnest men, ever since the world began, but
to no avail. My kingdom will overcome evil with good. It is not an easy
way, my friend, but it is the only way!'

'This saying is difficult to understand, Master,' murmured Simon.

Jesus brightened, smiled reassuringly, and said: 'Go and talk with John
again. Tell him what you yourself have seen; how the blind receive
their sight, the deaf hear, cripples walk, and the poor are comforted
with good news...And tell him not to be disappointed in me.'

That afternoon the sun shone and the sky was blue. It seemed that
the long season of the rains was ended. Jesus had completed his work
at Ben-Sholem's house. At his suggestion, Andrew loaded the borrowed
tools on to a cart and returned them to Ebenezer, the Master walking
alongside. At the old carpenter's house, he tarried for a friendly word
and gave Ebenezer half the wages he had received from the Rabbi.

On their way back to the cottage Andrew, who had been moved by Jesus'
generosity and Ebenezer's tearful gratitude, found his voice and
inquired:

'Will you soon be speaking again to the people, Master?'

'Tomorrow,' said Jesus. 'At Hammath. And then we are going on to Cana.'



Chapter XIV


As had been predicted during the long season of the rains, spring--as
if to atone for tardiness--now came forward fast, fragrant, beautiful.

Nobody could remember such an abundance or variety of wild flowers
along the roads and on the hillsides. Indeed gay blossoms bloomed in
desert places and even the most arid areas on the Plains of Esdraelon
offered pasturage.

Not much farm work had begun yet, for the fields were still too wet for
ploughing, but everybody along the western shore of Lake Gennesaret,
except the definitely bedridden, had come out-of-doors rejoicing; and
of all who faced the spring with exultation there was no heart in
Galilee more nearly ready to burst with happiness than Esther's.

So far she had not confided the nature of her ecstasy to anyone but
David, who had pressed her for an explanation. She had wanted to tell
Hannah, and promised herself that some day she would, but it involved
a long, almost incredible story; and at the moment, Hannah's mind was
wholly occupied with the mystery of her own miraculous recall from
death. It was clear enough that Hannah wondered what had come over
Esther: sometimes her soft, brown eyes, resting on the girl's radiant
face, suddenly widened, narrowed, queried--and gave it up. Simon,
too, meeting Esther's luminous eyes, would study them with a puzzled
stare. Andrew suspected that her new radiance had something to do with
Hannah's recovery, though he couldn't guess what the connection might
be, and certainly had no intention of asking. If she wanted him to know
her secret she would tell him. This much he was sure of: she had been
an entirely different person ever since the day of Hannah's healing.

It had not immediately occurred to Esther that she no longer had any
business detaining her in Galilee. Although her hazardous errand of
vengeance had suddenly and conclusively arrived at an end, the new
sensation of freedom had taken full possession of her mind. Nor had she
any misgivings over her abandonment of the vow to which she had been so
long in bondage. Jesus had commanded her to put down the intolerable
weight she had borne, and Jesus was to be obeyed. Whatever he said was
right.

But she was soon going to need some advice about the future. Obviously
Jesus himself was the person she should confide in, but she must wait
for a suitable opportunity. Meantime, she could be helpful to Hannah,
who had not yet recovered her full strength.

On the first fair afternoon, when the rains had ended, Hannah insisted
that Esther should take a walk in the sunshine. She gratefully
complied, taking the road up the slope toward the Zadok mansion. It was
not her intention to call; or, at least, that was what she told herself
as she entered the grounds; but presently she found David sauntering
along a garden path. He seemed very happy to see her, fell into step
beside her, directed her to a rustic seat.

'I have been impatient to talk with you, my child,' he said. 'You were
present, I think, when that strange thing happened to Hannah. I should
be glad to hear your own opinion of it. The neighbours believe there
was a miracle wrought. What say you, Esther?'

'Hannah was dying, sir,' she replied firmly. 'Everybody knew it. No one
who saw her has doubted it.'

'And you think this Jesus, the Carpenter, healed her? Did you see that?
What did he do? What did he say?'

'I am glad you asked me to tell you, sir!' Esther's throaty voice was
vibrant with excitement. 'I saw it. I was the only one he asked to
remain in the room when he healed her. And he healed me, too,' she
added impulsively.

'You!' exclaimed David. 'And what ailed you?' Leaning forward, with
knitted brows, he listened while Esther ventured upon her strange
story. Presently he broke in to inquire, 'You say he called you Fara?'

She nodded slowly.

'He called me Fara, as if he had known me for a long time and was
accustomed to addressing me so.'

'I suppose you think, then, that he knows all about you--and your
errand in Galilee.'

Esther's reply was delayed, while David studied her eyes.

'I think, sir,' she murmured, 'that Jesus knows everything! Everything
about me! Everything about everybody!'

'Proceed, please. I shall not interrupt any more.'

With that encouragement, Esther continued; and, when she had ended, she
searched the old lawyer's narrowed eyes and disappointedly shook her
head.

'I'm afraid you don't believe me,' she said, with a sigh.

'I'm afraid I do, daughter,' confessed David. 'My whole mind cries
out against any credence in such things, but the evidence here is too
strong. Whatever happened to Hannah, it is clear enough that something
has happened to you! It is in your eyes, your voice, your smile! You
are a new creature! Transformed!'

They had been speaking in Aramaic, Esther having wanted to quote the
words of Jesus exactly as they were uttered. She now replied in Greek
to David's unexpected comments on the change that had come over her.
The old man watched her mobile lips with candid pleasure. It was not
often, in these days, that he heard this musical language, and it not
only delighted but amused him to note the new freedom and assurance in
the girl's voice as she went on.

What to do now? That was the question. She confided in him as if he
were a parent. Hannah would not need her much longer. She did not want
to return to the palace. There was nothing for her to do in Galilee.

'But your friend Voldi will soon be returning for you,' suggested
David. 'Perhaps you should go back with him to Arabia.'

Her face clouded.

'I must not do that to Voldi!' she declared.

'Well--it needn't be settled today,' said David reassuringly. 'When in
doubt about what to do, it is usually wise to do nothing and wait for
more light. Perhaps you should talk with Jesus...And stay where you are
until Voldi comes. You have promised him you would do that.'

 * * * * * *

But Voldi, unfortunately, would not be coming.

It had not occurred to him, so courteously had he been treated during
his brief stop in Caesarea, when on his way to Tiberias in Galilee,
that his association with Proconsul Mencius had accounted for the
freedom he had enjoyed there.

Now that he had returned, alone, it was natural that the authorities
should take a fresh interest in his movements. He was cordially
welcomed at The Domus Agrippa and given the best of accommodations;
but when, in reply to their query about the probable length of his
stay, he informed them that he wanted to remain until spring, the
management felt obliged to report; for the Prefect's office had an
active curiosity to learn what manner of business in Caesarea required
the attention of foreign visitors.

Routine inquiries would have been made into the affairs of any Arabian,
however insignificant he might be. But Voldi was conspicuous. He had
the air of a person of privilege, he was well-dressed, he rode a
valuable horse and the horse's trappings were mounted with silver.
He had plenty of money. But he had no business acquaintances--and no
business.

And so it was that on the third day after his arrival, Voldi received
a polite note requesting him to call at the Prefect's office in the
Praetorium. The interview, with no less a personage than Prefect
Sergius himself, began cordially enough but soon settled down to
serious business. The Captain of the Praetorian Guard was called in as
an observer, and a scholarly young amanuensis began taking notes. The
Prefect's queries were courteous enough to befit an examination of a
foreign nobleman, it having been already established that the guest was
the grandson of Mishma, the King of Arabia's Chief Councillor.

It would please the Prefect to know what errand had brought the young
Arabian to Caesarea and whom he had come to see, and anything else that
he wanted to say about his purposes.

Not having expected this inquisition, Voldi had made no preparation for
it, and the story he hastily contrived was not very convincing to the
shrewd old Roman, who had heard--and told--enough lies to be able to
recognize one that had been so casually extemporized.

'So--you went to Tiberias to examine some ancient manuscripts belonging
to the Tetrarch,' said Sergius dryly, 'but you were already aware that
the Tetrarch was not in residence. Now, what led you to believe that
you might be welcome in His Grace's absence?'

Voldi, appropriately embarrassed, explained that he had come a very
long way to see these scrolls, that they really belonged in a museum
available to the general public; adding that Lysias, the steward, had
shown him every courtesy.

The old Prefect sniffed cynically and drawled, 'Your interest in
ancient literature must be profound, sir. No one has ever confided
to me that the men of your country have shown so much concern for
learning. You say these scrolls you went to see are reputed to have
belonged to Aristotle. How many Arabians are conversant with the
writings of Aristotle? I'll wager that even your King Zendi doesn't
know enough Greek to bid the time o' day to the Governor of Petra.'

Voldi grinned and replied, 'Just about that much, I think, sir.'

Sergius chuckled a little at that, but soberly resumed his
interrogations.

'Now my young friend, the whole world knows that Arabia bears a grudge
against Tetrarch Antipas--a very reasonable grudge, too, if I may
say so. How do you happen to be so complacent about the indignity he
wrought upon your Royal Family that you would accept the hospitality
of his palace? Are you sure you weren't there to reconnoitre in
preparation for a later visit? Tell me, please: where are you bound
for--when you leave Caesarea?'

'I am going home, sir,' lied Voldi.

'Very well, then,' growled the Prefect. 'See that nothing interferes
with your plan. You have the freedom of the city. Should you decide
to return to Tiberias, it will be an error of judgment.' He pushed
back his chair and rose. Turning to the Captain of the Guard, he said
gruffly, 'You have your orders, Malus. When this young man leaves us,
he is going back--directly--to his own country.'

After that, while Voldi did not have the uncomfortable feeling that
there were eyes at his keyhole, he found himself acknowledging the
respectful salutes of the Municipal Police wherever he went. They
smiled pleasantly and lifted their spears to their foreheads when he
strolled along the docks. When he exercised Darik, which was almost
every day, he invariably fell in with a mounted patrol.

One bleak morning when he was aimlessly sauntering through the public
rooms of The Domus Agrippa, Voldi came face to face with a handsome,
well-groomed Roman of his own age, who bluntly confronted him with,
'You're the Arabian, aren't you?'

'Well,' drawled Voldi, 'I may not be the Arabian--but I am an Arabian.'

'My name is Felix,' said the youth.

'Oh?' replied Voldi casually. 'Is there anything I can do for you? If
so I shall be glad to undertake it. I am not very busy.'

'My father mentioned you to me. He said you were a stranger in
Caesarea, and might welcome a little attention. Father is the Prefect.'

Voldi grinned.

'It's good of you, Felix,' he said. 'I am a bit lonesome and restless
here, though I must say your father has already provided me with plenty
of attention. I can hardly turn round without stepping on a policeman.'

It was the young Roman's turn to be amused.

'Don't let that bother you! Important aliens in Caesarea always come
in for a lot of oversight. But I'm not a policeman; and, personally, I
don't care a damn where you go or what you are up to...I thought you
might like to take a ride with me into the country, just to kill time.'

'With pleasure!' Voldi brightened at the prospect. 'Perhaps I should
tell you that I'm not supposed to leave the city by any of the
northerly routes.'

Felix nodded in a manner indicating that he knew all about it.

'You're suspected of a hankering to make the acquaintance of the
Tetrarch of Galilee. My father wonders why--and so do I. Antipas is
a cad, you know; a noisy, vain, arrogant old pretender. I'm sure you
wouldn't like him.' The Roman's eyes twinkled through this ironical
speech, inviting the Arab to commit himself, but Voldi made no sign
of understanding. The friendly son of the Prefect might not be a
policeman, but this was no time to risk a confidence.

'Perhaps not,' replied Voldi indifferently. 'One can't be expected to
like everybody.'

Felix chuckled over this forthright evasion.

'You win!' he said. 'Let's go for the ride. It's clearing off a little.
I'll promise not to badger you about Antipas...And when you meet him,
you may slit his throat--with my blessing.'

The Prefect's home was only a short way away. Leading Darik, they
walked to Sergius' commodious stables and a groom brought out a
beautiful young sorrel mare. Felix ran his fingers under the saddle
girths. Voldi liked that. It was commonly believed in Arabia that the
Romans were careless about the comfort of their horses. Felix cared.

'I dare say you've noticed that this filly is an Arabian,' he said.

'Yes,' replied Voldi. 'I know her family. You probably bought her in
Damascus.'

'My father did.' They mounted and rode toward the avenue. 'I'm told
that you Arabians used to market your select stock, on a certain day,
in Jerusalem; but--not any more.'

'We have lately resumed attendance at the camel-auction in
Jerusalem--on the Jewish Day of Pentecost,' explained Voldi. 'But the
horses still go to Damascus.'

'And why is that?' Felix wanted to know.

'Perhaps it's because the Jews aren't so much interested in horses,'
guessed Voldi. 'The Syrians pay a better price.'

They were proceeding southerly on the coast highway, at a leisurely
canter.

'Tell me about this camel-auction,' said Felix.

'I never attended it,' said Voldi. 'I never was in Jerusalem.'

'What is this Pentecost business about?'

'I don't know,' admitted Voldi. 'It's a Jewish feast-day; fifty days
after--after something; I forget what.'

Felix counted on his fingers, and thought it might be fifty days after
the Passover. Voldi nodded uninterestedly and said he supposed that
might be correct. The horses, impatient over their mincing canter,
changed their gait to a brisk trot. After an interval of silence, Felix
slowed his filly to remark:

'The reason I happen to know about this annual Passover business: the
Tetrarch always returns for it in the spring. He winters in Rome,
and turns up with the sparrows about the Ides of March; makes much
ado over his gaudy trip to Jerusalem. You'd think the Emperor had
arrived. He has a toy Embassy over there; holds court for a couple of
weeks; celebrates the Passover; and hurries back to Tiberias for the
summer...But--I suppose you know all about that.'

Voldi showed no interest whatsoever in this discourse and abruptly
changed the conversation by remarking that the stableboys at The
Agrippa had been taking good care of Darik.

'See how his coat shines!'

'They're probably feeding him on eggs,' said Felix. 'You'll be paying
plenty for Darik's shine!...It won't be long now until Antipas appears.
He will arrive on the Emperor's barge. You may have a chance to see
him.'

Voldi showed vexation.

'You're wasting all that on me, Felix,' he declared crossly. 'My errand
in this country does not concern old Herod Antipas. You surmise that
because I am an Arabian I have designs on the Tetrarch. I am here on
another matter.'

'I see you don't want to tell me,' said Felix reproachfully. 'Perhaps I
could have helped you.'

'Perhaps--but perhaps not,' said Voldi. 'We'll see. Meanwhile, let us
have no more talk about Antipas. I have no business with him.'

Felix pretended a childish pout.

'You wouldn't lie to me, would you, Voldi?' he asked petulantly.

'Don't be silly!' snapped Voldi. 'Of course I'd lie to you if there was
any reason for it.'

'Well--you're candid, anyway,' laughed Felix.

'Don't be too sure about that, my son,' warned Voldi dryly.

Felix knew now that he had employed the wrong tactics for the relief
of his curiosity. The Arabian, albeit amiable enough, wasn't going to
have any confidences pried out of him; and his determined reticence
made the son of the Prefect feel years younger than his tight-lipped
acquaintance from the eastern mountains.

Their friendship ripened slowly. Having begun with a verbal
fencing-match in which the Roman youth was much too hasty with his
queries, forcing Voldi to a stubborn defence, they found it difficult
to be at ease with one another. Felix was encouraged to talk about
himself. His father had been appointed to the Prefecture five years
ago, after long service as Captain of the Praetorian Guard in Rome.
Felix had been left behind to finish his course in the Military
Academy, and had come to Caesarea only last summer. He was free to
say that he hated the town and was bored to extinction. His father
had promised that he might return to Rome--'in a year or two'--but
wanted him to acquaint himself with conditions in Caesarea. He did not
say why, but Voldi could guess. The Empire was preparing to complete
the subjugation of Palestine, and Felix would probably be in line for
participation in it.

For something to say, Voldi remarked that life in Caesarea must be
rather dull after living in the excitements of the Empire's capital.

'I'm slowly dying of it, Voldi!' confided Felix, adding, after a
brooding silence, 'That may account for my ruthless invasion of your
private affairs. My instinct tells me that you're tangled up with an
adventure of some sort, and--'

'And you want to be in it,' assisted Voldi.

After that, they seemed to understand each other better. They sheathed
their weapons. Felix continued his daily calls at The Agrippa, making
himself at home in Voldi's apartment. On clear days they rode. It was
an unusual comradeship, based mostly on their loneliness, boredom, and
need of diversion. Felix frankly despised Aramaic and spoke it badly:
he had been ecstatic when Voldi had aired his Greek.

'You're coming to Rome, some day,' Felix said. 'I'll show you the only
city that really matters--in the whole world! Know anybody there?'

'Nicator Mencius,' replied Voldi.

'Indeed! He's one of my father's closest friends. How did you make his
acquaintance?'

Voldi told him briefly, and was privately pleased to learn of this
connection between the Proconsul and the Prefect. It might be to his
advantage, some time, if he got into a scrape.

The long and tiresome winter finally blew itself out and spring came
on. Voldi was beside himself with impatience to contrive some way of
seeing Fara. She would be expecting him now and if he did not soon
appear she would surely conclude that he had given her up and returned
to Arabia.

One sunny afternoon the news was circulated in the lobbies of The
Agrippa that The Augusta had been sighted. Everybody not otherwise
engaged had hurried to the docks to watch the Emperor's beautiful ship
come in. The main point of interest would be the disembarkation of the
Tetrarch and his retinue and the setting forth of their garish parade
for Jerusalem.

Voldi felt that this was something worth seeing. When he joined the
huge crowd at the wharf, The Augusta had already docked and the
important passengers were leaving the ship, the Tetrarch surrounded
by an unusually large company of fellow-travellers who--according to
the low-voiced chatter of spectators--had come from Rome to spend the
summer.

Felix had failed to put in an appearance at The Domus Agrippa
today. Voldi saw him now, sauntering in his direction; but, when he
approached, he gave no sign of recognition. As Felix passed, almost
brushing sleeves with Voldi, he muttered, 'This is no place for you.
Better get out of here!'

The brusque command annoyed Voldi. He didn't like the idea of slinking
away--like a dog that had been ordered home. He stood his ground.
The Romans loved to boss people around: Felix too was learning to
crow, the young cockerel! Voldi was sore; but so fascinated by the
flamboyant pageantry on the wharf that he gave the spectacle his full
attention. The Tetrarch's circus was moving away now and the crowd was
disintegrating. As Voldi slowly advanced with the throng, two tall
Praetorian Guards fell into step on either side of him, and the elder
of them said quietly, 'Proceed, please, to your room at The Agrippa,
and remain there until the Prefect gives you your freedom.'

'May I ask what I have done?' demanded Voldi testily.

'Nothing, sir,' replied the Guard, 'but the Prefect wants you to be
kept under strict observance until Tetrarch Antipas has left the city.'

Voldi shrugged and scowled but did as he was told, feeling like a
warmly spanked little boy who had better swallow his indignation if
he knew what was good for him. As he ambled toward the street, with
the Guards trailing him at a respectful distance, he had to admit to
himself that Sergius had not dealt too severely with him, considering
the circumstances. It had been very indiscreet of him to come here,
and he cursed himself for his imprudence. Quickening his steps, he
proceeded to the tavern and went at once to his suite. A few minutes
afterward, a servant appeared and took his order for dinner.

'I understand you are to be served in your rooms, sir,' he said. 'Is
that correct, sir?...' Voldi said it was correct. There were three
whole days of this polite and luxurious incarceration. Felix did
not appear; though whether he had been ordered to stay away or was
disgusted by his friend's impertinence could not be cleared up at the
moment. On the morning of the fourth day, the dining-room servant who
had been bringing his meals said, as he put down the breakfast tray, 'I
understand, sir, that you are dining downstairs at noon.'

'Yes,' said Voldi, as if he had been notified.

He was still eating his breakfast when Felix came in, glumly nodded,
and flung himself into an easy chair.

'You certainly played hell with yourself by going down to the docks,'
he growled. 'Now every move you make will be watched. And the Prefect
will be annoyed if I am seen in your company. That's the worst part of
it, as far as I am concerned.'

Voldi flushed a little at this rebuke and was on the point of retorting
angrily; but, aware that he had no case, replied, 'It was a mistake,
Felix. For your own protection, perhaps you'd do well to ignore me; at
least until your father forgets about it.'

'My father never forgets anything,' said Felix. 'He has the memory
of an elephant...I'll go now. And if I don't show up for a few days,
you'll know why.' He rose, and at the door, turned to remark, 'I hope
you will be discreet now, Voldi. I'm going to miss you.'

Voldi nodded and smiled his understanding. After the door had closed
slowly and reluctantly, he moodily contemplated the dismaying position
into which he had so heedlessly placed himself. The companionship of
young Felix had meant more to him than he had realized.

The fine spring days were interminably long and empty. Every morning
early, sometimes at the break of dawn, Darik would be mounted for a
fast ride on the coast highway to the south. By breakfast time Voldi
would have returned to The Agrippa. He began to study maps of the
surrounding country. In his desperation to ease Fara's mind about
him and his interest in her, he began to consider a swift ride to
Bethsaida. By getting away early, and urging Darik to his best speed,
he might be able to make the round trip in three days. They would be
out looking for him, no doubt, but he would be back at The Agrippa
before they found him--he hoped!

With the plan for his reckless adventure well organized, he slipped
past the sleepy night-watch while it was still dark, rode at a
leisurely trot until he had passed through the southern outskirts of
the city, pressed Darik to a gallop, and found an unfrequented road
that angled easterly to Antipatris where he turned north on a weedy old
donkey-trail. The day was hot and Darik was not conditioned for such a
journey, but Voldi did not spare him. So far, so good. He had not been
followed.

Late that night he applied for lodging at a filthy inn which befitted
the remembered squalor of Megiddo. After giving the exhausted Darik a
rub-down and a ration of grain, he tumbled down fully clothed in the
straw, and slept.

In the morning, two mounted patrols arrested him as he was leaving the
inn and conducted him back to Caesarea by the shortest route and put
him in prison to await trial for violating the Prefect's orders. He was
not manacled and his quarters were not too uncomfortable. The food was
coarse but edible. The stoutly barred window was too high for him to
see out. He had nothing to read.

When he inquired of the rotund jailor how long it might be before he
was brought to trial, the latter replied, 'You picked a bad time to
get yourself into trouble with the Prefect. He sailed for Rome this
morning, on The Augusta. However,' he added wittily, 'you're still
young; and, besides, you may be better off where you are than where you
might be later. Prefect Sergius, my boy, is not a man to be trifled
with! He has had men beheaded for less than you did!'



Chapter XV


The annual week of the Passover would begin tomorrow; and Antipas,
who had always anticipated its games, processions and ceremonies with
pleasure, was troubled by its arrival. His Roman house-guests at the
Embassy, already bored to forthright rudeness toward their host, would
find it a dull affair.

He now realized that it had been a mistake to invite so many of them.
He might have managed comfortably with two or three, but--ignoring the
warning of Herodias, who was not particularly chummy with any of the
women of the party--he had brought fifteen!

There were Mark and Aurelia Varus and their daughter Faustina, recently
divorced by Consul Narro for spending too much time with Prince Gaius;
Julius and Paula Fronto, lately recalled from the prefecture in Crete;
Senator Manius Cotta; Nerius and Drusilla Hispo; the garrulous Valerie
Flaccus, a friend of Salome's; Proconsul Fabius Tiro, his gossiping
wife Amelia and their restless and flighty young Flavia; Junius
Manilius, a retired Legate and long-time crony of the Tetrarch; Tullius
Fadilla, a wealthy, middle-aged bachelor; and the ageing but kittenish
Julia Drusus, who was driving Fadilla insane with her attentions. Deep
in his cups at a banquet, Antipas had invited everybody within sound of
his voice to accompany him home on The Augusta; and now he was paying
for his indiscretion.

Usually the month of Nisan, spent in Jerusalem, was thoroughly enjoyed
by the Tetrarch. The Galilean Embassy, by grace of the immense sums
Antipas had spent upon it, was one of the most beautiful public
edifices in the city and spacious far beyond its needs. It would have
gratified the Tetrarch if more attention had been accorded it--and him.
He craved popularity. He had even gone to the length of announcing that
the night patrols were welcome to assemble, when off duty, in the huge
carriage-court, and had provided a wood-fire where, in chilly weather,
they might warm themselves. As a further evidence of his hospitality, a
midnight snack was served to the legionaries. But it couldn't be said
that all this generosity ever did the foolish fellow any good. The
soldiers nightly warmed their hands, enjoyed the Tetrarch's cakes and
wine, and flirted with the servant-girls; but the Embassy was--for all
that--a hissing and a byword, even in the opinion of its beneficiaries.

But the great man had pretended not to know where he stood in the
public's estimation. For that one month every spring, he conducted
his Embassy as if it really mattered. He had always taken pride and
pleasure in playing judge. The cases brought before him were rarely
of any importance; and, when they were, the losing litigant always
appealed to Pilate, who, contemptuous of Antipas and his pompous little
tribunal, customarily reversed the decision.

Undaunted by these embarrassments, the Tetrarch made a great thing
of the trivial matters submitted to him, handling with ridiculous
ostentation mere border brawls between the Samaritans and Galileans,
involving such issues as their joint responsibility for the repair of
a wooden bridge on an unfrequented donkey-trail at a cost of fifty
shekels. Indeed the Samaritans and Galileans had often gone to law
for less. They had hated one another for at least five centuries and
relished the occasional opportunity of exchanging elaborately contrived
insults in this atmosphere of ponderous dignity, even if a favourable
decision cost more than it was worth.

During his many winter seasons in Rome, Antipas, when queried about
his official duties as Tetrarch of Galilee, candidly admitted that
his executive responsibilities while in residence at Tiberias were
not onerous. There was, of course, the month he spent annually at the
Embassy. That, he implied, was quite another matter. When pressed for
details he always closed his eyes, shook his head, and waggled his
hand, as if to say that it was too serious to be talked about. And he
had foolishly allowed the growth of a legend to the effect that his
court in Jerusalem dealt out horrible punishments to all manner of
desperate criminals, seditionists and traitors.

Now the silly secret was out. There was no blood-letting to be had at
the Embassy. The Romans had attended court, one morning, and had filed
out presently, their shameless laughter echoing in the high-domed,
mosaic-lined foyer. The Tetrarch's court, they said truthfully, was a
poor show.

Antipas now had had three weeks of these insufferable people. He
hated them all. There was nothing in Jerusalem that they wanted to
do, nothing they wanted to see. Most of them had visited Greece, all
of them had been in Egypt. As for architectural splendours and hoary
antiquities, the Holy City had little to offer to anybody who had seen
the Acropolis or the ruins at Karnak.

The Tetrarch was at his wits' end to find entertainment for his jaded
guests. He had wangled an invitation for them to luncheon at The
Insula, but it was a painful event, Pontius and Calpurnia Pilate making
it plain that their hospitality was an official duty, and no pleasure.
Besides, the very air was drugged with the long-festering animosity of
Pilate and Fronto; and Calpurnia had no use for Herodias, whom she had
publicly snubbed on numerous occasions. The Procurator, brusque enough
when on his best behaviour, went to no bother to brighten the hour.
The most interest he showed in any of them was when, after blinking
solemnly into Fadilla's baggy eyes for a long moment, he muttered,
'Tullius, you're getting paunchy; probably drinking too much. You'll
have a stroke, one of these days.'

And now the Passover was at hand. These pagans couldn't be expected to
take much interest in that. Obviously the most prudent course now was
to get them all out of Jerusalem before they disgraced him with their
flippant comments concerning an ancient rite which--in the opinion
of all Jewry--was no joke. True, it would be an appalling display of
indifference, on his own part, to leave at this moment; but he would
risk it. He tried the idea out on Herodias, who approved it with the
not very reassuring comment, 'You may as well do it: you have nothing
to lose.'

Customarily, at the end of Passover Week, the Tetrarch's family and
retainers were escorted back to Tiberias by the Legion from Capernaum.
It would have been foolhardy to attempt this journey through the
bandit-infested mountains of Samaria without protection. Seeing that
the gala week in Jerusalem was in the nature of a vacation for Julian's
legionaries, it was doubtful whether the Legate would consent to leave
the city on the very eve of the festival, even if Procurator Pilate had
permitted the withdrawal for no better reason than to accommodate a
whim of the Tetrarch's.

However, it was worth trying. Antipas stated his case to Julian, who,
as was to be expected, flatly refused. In desperation the Tetrarch
told the Legate that if he would release one company for this service
every man of them should be paid thirty shekels per day. This was
tempting bait. Julian said he would see. That afternoon he reported
that a company of one hundred legionaries, under the command of a
trusted Centurion, would be on hand early the next morning. And it was
with a deep sigh of relief that Antipas saw his long caravan through
the Damascus Gate and out into the open country. Now his malcontents,
instead of fretting in the tiresome confinement of the Embassy, could
amuse themselves as they liked. They could ride, bathe in the beautiful
pool, tan their hides in the gardens; and, incidentally, relieve him of
the responsibility to find entertainment for them.

But in a few days after their arrival it became apparent that the
Romans were going to be as restless in Tiberias as they had been in
Jerusalem. There were plenty of good horses in the Tetrarch's marble
stables, but the visitors petulantly remarked that there were no
interesting rides to be taken, nowhere to go. The girls inquired why
no use was made of the lovely lake--ideal water for a pleasure barge;
moonlight, music, dancing. It was queer, they said, that the Tetrarch
had never thought of that. Well, it was too late now.

By the end of Nisan everybody was at loggerheads with everybody
else. Salome had had a falling out with Valerie, who, to punish her,
had transferred her attentions to the young Tiro girl, causing an
estrangement between Salome and Flavia. At this juncture Amelia Tiro,
championing her child, remarked--in the presence of half a dozen
loungers beside the famous pool--that Salome was no fit company for a
young girl anyway; and although this comment did not come as a shock
to anybody, it did nothing to improve the climate of a house party,
already at storm.

Julia Drusus, savagely scorned by the exasperated Fadilla, belatedly
showed a comradely interest in Herodias who, resentful of Julia's
earlier aloofness, would have none of her.

Antipas made pretence of busying himself with the planting of a new
vineyard, and coolly despised them all.

Salome, now left to her own devices, sought consolation in the
companionship of her step-father, making their mutual affection so
flagrantly showy that everybody chattered evilly about them--and
Herodias could have killed them both. Indeed, so hard pressed for
attention was the unhappy woman that she took to visiting John the
hermit in his cell, plying him with fruits, flowers, and flattery; and
when it became evident that the grim prophet was too preoccupied with
his own meditations to appraise hers correctly, Herodias threw away the
last shred of her counterfeit decency and drove the hapless ascetic
into a terrifying rage by attempting to caress him. Hot with such
anger as she had never experienced, she slapped him on the mouth and
slammed the cell-door behind her, screaming that he could stay there
for ever--and rot--for all she cared. Her eyes burned with self-piteous
tears as she stumbled along toward the new vineyard, muttering that
things had come to a pretty pass when a shaggy, penniless ragamuffin
from nowhere would dare to yell into her face that she was a common
slut. That the accusation was true did not mitigate the indignity. She
would see to it that the bug-eater was punished.

By the time she reached Antipas, who was complacently viewing the
building of rustic trellises at the far corner of the vineyard,
Herodias had burned out her rage and was almost disposed to be
companionable. Her husband nodded, smiled, and wondered what was on her
mind.

'Really, my dear,' she began, 'something must be done about these
unhappy people of yours.'

Antipas nodded.

'I know,' he said. 'It's getting worse every day.' Presently he
brightened a little. 'How about a dinner party? Something amusing. We
will invite a few prominent citizens in to meet them.'

'Who, for instance?'

'Well, there are Jairus and his pretty wife Adiel. Legate Julian,
of course. Perhaps young Joseph of Arimathaea might come and bring
his sister Tamar. Old David the Sadducee is learned and has been
everywhere. His eminent friend Nicodemus Ben-Gorion, who is retired in
Cana, would be glad to come, I think.'

'It doesn't sound very lively,' mumbled Herodias.

'We can attend to that,' promised Antipas.

Within an hour he had dispatched messengers bearing irresistible,
cash-down invitations to several professional entertainers; a renowned
magician of Caesarea, a troupe of harpists in Jericho, a famous family
of Damascene acrobats, and a crippled girl of Cana who was reputed to
have a remarkable voice. The date set was the twenty-second of Iyar,
the Tetrarch's birthday, now three weeks distant.

Such was their host's enthusiasm over his project that even the Romans
began to show a pallid interest. Fadilla said he would like to talk
with this well-travelled old David the Sadducee. Julia Drusus, still
incorrigibly romantic in spite of many rebuffs, cornered Herodias to
ask eager questions about the rich young Joseph of Arimathaea, to which
her hostess replied dryly, 'Julia, of all the fools I ever met, you are
the silliest.'

When the couriers had returned from their errands it was found that
all the entertainers would be on hand except the singer from Cana, who
wasn't well enough to make the journey.

Replies from invited guests were less satisfactory. Joseph of
Arimathaea and his sister Tamar were sorry (or said they were) that
they could not come. The eminent Nicodemus Ben-Gorion was troubled with
rheumatism and couldn't travel.

Legate Julian, as was to be expected, sent word that he would be
honoured, though Antipas knew this was a lie and that if he ever got
into any serious trouble Julian would let him stew. Jairus and Adiel
were pleased to accept, as was David the Sadducee, though his aged
sister Deborah was not well enough to accompany him. Antipas then
dispatched a surprisingly amiable note to David saying he had been
advised that there was a charming young woman, said to be a ward of the
House of Zadok, who would be warmly welcomed, to which the old lawyer
replied that there was no such person in his household. This brazen
effrontery annoyed the Tetrarch, but he decided not to make an issue
of it. As the time for the party drew near, the very thought of it
wearied him. His Roman pests would be bored by such tepid and dreary
entertainment. Harpists! Acrobats! Jugglers! Bah!

 * * * * * *

Meantime--while Voldi fretted in prison and Antipas was unwittingly
contriving an event that would make his name stink wherever and
whenever it was uttered--all Galilee was astir with the news that the
Carpenter of Nazareth had come forth, with the spring flowers, to
resume his public ministry.

No such excitement had ever choked the highways of any Palestinian
province. Crowds! Confused and confusing crowds, immeasurably larger
than had followed the prophet and wonder-worker last summer. They came
from further distances now: from the hinterlands of Northern Galilee
and Perea; yes, and from Samaria, too, though the Samaritans abominated
the Galileans and only the most urgent business could induce them to
cross the border.

They came on foot, on donkeys, in carts, on cots. Some prudently
brought tents and provisions; some carried only a blanket and slept on
the ground, buying, begging, or stealing their food. Thrifty hucksters
made the most of their opportunity to fleece the hungry, peddling stale
bread, rancid fish, and fly-blown sweets at exorbitant prices. Vagabond
minstrels and shabby outlanders with tame bears and mangy monkeys set
up booths alongside the food vendors. And the crowds increased hourly.

Every foot-path, every lane, every grass-grown donkey-trail for miles
and leagues were tributaries to the highways that intersected at little
Cana, where the resident population--as if ruthlessly shouted out
of a peaceful slumber--stared bewilderedly at the mounting horde of
strangers, and wondered whether the old well in the central plaza would
survive. On Jesus' earlier visits they had welcomed him. It was a bit
different this time. They were still friendly to him, but they wished
they could have him all to themselves.

The amazing news had spread far and wide that the miracle-worker of
Nazareth was healing lepers! This had added the spice of adventure to
these strange doings. Last season, Jesus had healed the blind, the
deaf, the crippled. Such disabilities were deplorable, but they were
not contagious. Leprosy was quite another matter! The leper was not
only doomed, he was dangerous! The very word struck terror! Nobody
was safe from the threat of it, not even the well-to-do, accustomed
to clean living. By no means was it the exclusive monopoly of filthy
ragamuffins. All you needed to do to become infected, was to drink from
a cup that a conscienceless leper had touched, or accidentally tread
upon a discarded bandage.

Oh yes, there were laws, plenty of them, intended to protect the
public. Once a man had contracted the disease, whatever his social
rating, he was for ever outcast, required to associate only with
persons similarly afflicted. When he met anyone on the road he was
expected to withdraw to the wayside bushes and shout 'Unclean!' It was
a living death, destroying the body piecemeal.

When the word went forth that Jesus was curing leprosy it was natural
that he should have plenty of clients eager to avail themselves of
his services. It was their custom, when travelling very far from the
camps provided for them, to move in groups of ten or a dozen, and when
a party of them would show up for healing there was an understandable
consternation in the great throng. When the cry 'Unclean!' was shouted,
at the rear of the crowd, nobody tried to stop them. The legionaries,
on hand to keep order, scampered out of their way; and at whatever
sacrifice of dignity, the multitude cleared a wide path for the
visitors. However bitterly the throng--comprised of all manner of
discordant sects--might disagree about everything else, there was a
complete unanimity in their sudden resolution to make way for a company
of lepers.

The first time it happened, only two men stood their ground and calmly
waited for the hapless crew to draw near. They were Jesus and Simon.
Simon had his jaw set and his big fists clenched to tighten his
courage, but he stayed by Jesus' side. And when the Master had spoken
the words that healed them, Simon grasped the leader of the party by
the hand. After they had turned to go, their faces contorted so you
couldn't rightly say whether they were laughing or weeping, Jesus gave
Simon a comradely smile that made the Big Fisherman's eyes swim. Jesus
hadn't said anything to him, but that approving smile had given him
stature. Andrew, John, James, Philip, and Thaddeus, who had retreated
to a safe distance, gathered about Simon with admiration on their
faces. There was no longer any doubt which one of them deserved to
stand closest beside their Master.

It was a quiet, awe-stricken crowd that slowly closed its broken ranks
and listened again to the interrupted message of Jesus. Making no
reference to the dangerous miracle he had performed, he continued to
speak about the security of a life that is lived by faith. There were,
he said, two habitations from which one might choose one's place of
spiritual residence. One of these houses was built upon the rock of
faith: the rain might pour in torrents and the tempest might rage; but
that house would stand firm, for it was founded upon a rock...'Upon a
petros,' he had added, for the benefit of whatever Greeks might be in
the audience...The other house was built upon the sand; it might be
good for fair weather, but it could not survive a storm.

That evening, after the people had been dismissed to return to their
homes or their encampments, Jesus and his small party of companions
rested after supper in the shelter of a grove on a secluded hillside.
The Master sat a little way apart from the others, for he was very
tired. But he listened to the low voices as they reviewed the
unprecedented events of the day.

Philip, always proud of his Greek ancestry and his own familiarity with
the language, remarked, 'I wonder where he picks up his Greek words.
He uses them frequently. Did you notice how he said "petros" when he
talked about the rock?'

Nobody made any comment on that. They were tired of Philip's Greek.

Then they fell to discussing again the marvellous powers of the Master
and their speculations as to how he had come by these amazing gifts.

'I was listening to one of these conversations in the crowd today,'
remarked Andrew. 'One of the old men from Nain said he believed that
Jesus is the great prophet Elisha returned in the flesh.'

'Why Elisha?' wondered the newest member of the group, one Judas from
the town of Kerioth.

'Perhaps because Elisha once healed a leper,' explained Andrew. 'Don't
you remember? The Scriptures say that Elisha cured Naaman, a great one
of Syria; made him bathe in the Jordan.'

Alpheus chuckled softly at the recollection of this old legend, and
remarked, 'Naaman objected at first, willing to bathe--but not in the
Jordan.'

'You've a good memory, Alpheus,' observed James.

'My father often told us the story,' said Alpheus. 'He thought it was
quite funny.'

'My father,' drawled Andrew, 'never thought that anything found in the
Scriptures could be funny.'

Apparently nobody cared to pursue that subject any further and there
was a long interval of silence before conversation was resumed.

'Almost everyone seems to think,' said John,' that Jesus must be one of
the ancient prophets restored to life.'

At this point in their conversation, held in subdued tones to avoid
disturbing the Master's much needed rest, they were suddenly startled
by his voice, inquiring, 'And you! What do you think of me? Who am I?'

They all shifted their eyes to Simon, whose courageous display of
faith that afternoon had earned him the right to be their spokesman.
After a long, thoughtful pause, the Big Fisherman came to his feet and
declared, in a deep, impressive voice, 'Master--I believe that you are
the son of God!'

A hush fell upon them.

'Simon, son of Jonas,' said Jesus, 'henceforth your name shall be
Peter--Peter the Rock! It is upon your faith that I shall build my
Kingdom!'

 * * * * * *

At the close of the sixth eventful day in Cana, when the excitement
over his words and deeds was at its height, Jesus astounded his
companions by announcing that he must return to Capernaum tomorrow. He
gave no reasons for his impulsive decision, nor did they press him for
an explanation, though it seemed strange to them that he should now
retire from so promising an opportunity for preaching his gospel.

At daybreak the next morning, the little company took to the highway,
leaving the Big Fisherman behind to tell the crowd when it assembled
that the Master was unexpectedly required to go back to Capernaum, but
would rejoin them here within a few days. They could remain or return
to their homes as they pleased. The disappointing news was variously
received. Persons who had brought their sick from afar resolved to
wait. Many disgruntled curiosity-seekers decided to go home. Hundreds
of the younger and more agile members of the crowd, men mostly, started
immediately for Capernaum. Something spectacular might happen there and
they didn't propose to miss it. And throughout the morning scores more
made up their minds to follow; so it was a long, straggling procession
that made the hot and wearisome journey north to the western shore of
Lake Gennesaret.

Peter, well spent by fast walking, overtook the Master and his company
near Hammath. He had hoped that by this time Jesus might have confided
his reasons for this journey, but apparently he had not done so. He
was leading the way, at a swift pace, fully preoccupied by his own
thoughts. The others were too tired to talk.

The further they went, in a silence that seemed ominous, the more the
Big Fisherman worried over the possibilities of trouble in Capernaum.
Without doubt the Master would speak, and there was no telling what
he might say. Already there were enemies awaiting an opportunity to
discredit him. The priests, old and young, were almost unanimously
against him; had held conferences about him; had appealed to the
Sanhedrin; had sent a deputation to the Tetrarch...There was Rabbi
Ben-Sholem! Would he remember, with any gratitude, the skilled service
Jesus had performed in his house? Of course not! Not that stiff-necked,
vain old Pharisee!...And Jairus! The labourers on his estate had
often dropped their hoes and scurried away to join the multitude that
swarmed about the Master, whenever he spoke. Doubtless Jairus had been
glad enough to see Jesus leave the Capernaum area, and would now be
exasperated to find him returned. Jairus, if he wanted to, could have
him silenced.

At the northern outskirts of Bethsaida, the Master's steps shortened
and Peter quickly came abreast of him.

'I shall stop, for a little while, at Hannah's house,' he said. 'You
may proceed with the others. I shall join you at Andrew's cottage.'
With that, he turned off the highway, and walked slowly up the shady
street.

The vanguard of the pursuing crowd, now close on the heels of the
little company, came to a stop and seemed bewildered. The Big Fisherman
turned and shouted, not very pleasantly, that the Master had paused for
a moment's rest at the home of a friend; and they were not to follow
him. This appeared to satisfy most of them, but scores broke from the
procession and ran in the direction Jesus had taken. Shortly afterward
they drifted back, apparently mystified. Somehow they had lost track
of their quarry, as if the ground had opened and swallowed him up.
Men who had not joined them in the chase pressed queries upon them:
What had become of the Carpenter? Where did he go? But they could not
say...And it was never explained...Broad daylight! A clear view in all
directions! It was very strange!

Andrew, frowning thoughtfully, turned to old Bartholomew, who was all
but exhausted by the forced march, and said in an awed undertone, 'What
do you make of that?'

Bartholomew shook his head, clumsily licked his dry lips, and croaked,
huskily, 'Perhaps he didn't want to be followed.'

 * * * * * *

It was true, as Peter had learned, that Jesus had stopped to rest and
have a friendly word with Hannah, whom he had not seen since the day he
had miraculously healed her; but this was not the main reason for his
visit. He wanted to see Esther; and said so, after brief inquiries of
Hannah about her health.

Sensing that her presence was not required or desired, Hannah excused
herself and left the two alone together.

'I have been anxious to talk with you, Master,' said Esther. 'There
is no reason for my remaining here any longer. What shall I do? Where
shall I go? I have no homeland now, no plans, no future.'

He did not answer her importunate queries directly, but began to talk
about the great crowds that had followed him, and would be following
him, day by day, throughout the summer. It was, he went on, a multitude
that stirred one's compassion. So many grievously sick ones were
brought from long distances, through the heat and into the confusion
of a jostling throng. Desperate young mothers from afar carried their
blind and crippled babies in their arms, arriving hungry, dirty, and
exhausted. Something must be done for them...He paused and regarded the
girl with entreating eyes.

'You mean--me?' she faltered.

'Yes, Fara,' he replied quietly. 'I offer you a mission--and a homeland
too.'

'A homeland?' she queried.

'In my Kingdom.'

There was a long moment before she spoke.

'I shall try to do what I can for them, Master; but I wish you had
asked me to do some service for you. I owe you so very much!'

'My child,' said Jesus softly, 'whatever you do for the least of these
needy ones, you will have done it for me.'

 * * * * * *

Within a few hours the swelling crowd had taken Capernaum. The whole
countryside hurried in from the fields and vineyards to double the
throng that knew something important was about to happen.

Early the next morning, Peter, James, and John appeared on the broad
stone steps in front of the Synagogue and stood in an attitude of
expectancy. Already the spacious plaza was half filled with restless
people. At the sight of these men, known to be associates of the
Carpenter, the crowd moved forward, and from the side streets and
near-by lake-shore a multitude poured into the cobble-paved area.

At this juncture Rabbi Ben-Sholem opened the imposing entrance-door of
the Synagogue, came out upon the highest step, and sternly commanded
the crowd to disperse.

Nobody stirred. In some quarters there was impudent laughter. White
and shaken with anger, the Rabbi shouted that they had no right to be
there, that they were defiling a holy place.

A sullen growl of protest rose from the unruly crowd. Hecklers cupped
their mouths with their hands and yelled, 'Since when was this plaza
a holy place?'...'The plaza belongs to the public'...One red-faced,
wine-soaked tramp (probably from Samaria, thought Peter) had the
audacity to shout, 'Go to, Greybeard!'

Ben-Sholem impotently shook an outraged fist, gathered the skirts
of his robe tightly about his thin legs, and retreated, to the
accompaniment of more laughter; jeering laughter.

Peter was sorry and chagrined. He had no reason to be fond of the
Rabbi, but this indignity to the old man and his sacred office was
much too much! It was a pity, he thought, that Jesus could not pick
his audience and exclude all this rough element, this rude riff-raff
from pagan Samaria, these no-account émigrés from Macedonia, these
dirty, half-civilized Damascenes. The Master's message would be wasted
on these rowdies! What was the good of talking to such people about a
Kingdom of love--and good will--and peace?

Now the enraged Ben-Sholem--and surely he had plenty to be angry
about--would call his Regents together and demand that something be
done. And Jairus would be forced to notify Julian, the Commander of
the Fort. And Jesus would be arrested, jailed, no doubt--and flogged,
too...He should have been contented with his successes in Cana.

Presently the Master appeared on the steps of the Synagogue and began
to speak. It was immediately obvious that he had been aware of the
rudeness of the crowd--and deplored it. He had been appointed, he said,
to offer a way of salvation to the world; and that meant everybody.
In a task so great as this, no prudent thought could be taken about
the cost of it or the waste of it. His mission, he said, was to sow
the seed of good will among men in the hope of an eventual harvest of
peace. Much of this seed would be squandered. Some of it would fall
among weeds and brambles, where it would have no chance at all to grow,
but the sower could not pause or look back to lament this extravagance.
Some of the seed would fall upon stony ground where there was very
little soil to nourish it and the tender plants would soon wither and
die; but the sower must not be dismayed. Some of the life-giving grain
would grow! Some of it would find friendly lodging in fertile ground!

The multitude had grown very quiet. Nobody was grinning now. Even
the toughest of them knew what the Carpenter meant when he added
significantly, 'Whoever among you has ears to hear, let him hear.'

There was a sudden stir on the outskirts of the throng. A path
through the densely packed crowd was opening to admit a person of
some importance who was forcing his way to the front. Peter, standing
near Jesus, but on the step immediately below him, craned his neck to
identify if possible the well-dressed, determined man who had assumed
the right to intrude. It was Jairus! Jairus was striding forward
evidently intending to interrupt. His face showed agitation. Peter's
heart raced: now the blow would fall!

Jesus stopped speaking--and waited. If he was apprehensive, he gave no
signs of anxiety. The crowd was silent, expectant, on tiptoe, holding
its breath. Jairus gazed up into the Carpenter's friendly eyes and drew
so close that when he spoke only those close by were able to hear what
he said.

'Master--my little daughter is grievously ill! We fear she is dying. I
implore you to help us!'

Before Jesus could reply, Joseph the butler, who had now arrived, quite
out of breath, huskily murmured into his master's ear, 'She is gone,
sir!'

Jairus' shaking head drooped and his tears were flowing as he turned
away. Jesus laid a hand on his arm and said gently: 'I shall go with
you, Jairus.'

'It is too late, Master,' said Jairus brokenly. 'She is dead!'

'Come!' said Jesus. 'Let us go!'

 * * * * * *

The astounding restoration of Jairus' little daughter was a notable
triumph for Jesus. No one more keenly appreciated this than Peter, who
had doubted the Master's prudence in returning to Capernaum, where, he
feared, there might be serious trouble. Now it appeared that Capernaum,
instead of being a place of danger, was the safest spot in all Galilee
for Jesus to pursue his ministry without molestation.

As for the influential Jairus, his gratitude was boundless. He had made
it clear that he was on Jesus' side, and Jairus' opinion had weight. He
was known for his sagacity and his insistence on justice for all, and
whatever he believed in was good enough for Capernaum.

Ben-Sholem had got himself into an awkward predicament which had
eliminated him--at least for the present--as a hostile critic. Beside
himself with rage over the indignities he had suffered at the hands of
Jesus' audience, he had retreated from the scene of his humiliation,
before Jairus had arrived in the plaza, and had impetuously dispatched
messengers to each of the Synagogue Regents summoning them to an
immediate conference. With the exception of Jairus, they had all come
at full speed, learning on the way that Jesus had performed an amazing
miracle in the home of the Chief Regent.

By the time they were convened in Ben-Sholem's beautiful library,
the Rabbi himself had heard the strange tidings; but, so accustomed
was the old man to having his own will prevail in all matters, that
he proceeded with his demand to have Jesus tried as a heretic and a
disturber of the peace. The Regents, minus their potent spokesman, were
embarrassed and speechless.

Freshly indignant over their apparent lack of interest in taking this
drastic action, the Rabbi impulsively resigned, his resignation to
take effect forthwith. This, he well knew, would bring these dunces to
terms; for it was unthinkable that they would permit such an appalling
disaster to fall upon their Synagogue!

To his consternation, they all sat tongue-tied for a while; and
then, without debate, unhappily mumbled their acceptance. The old
man wept inconsolably while they tiptoed quietly away. After an hour
of lugubrious self-pity, Ben-Sholem dried his eyes in the warmth of
his renewed anger and decided to take his case to a higher tribunal.
Summoning his servants, he set off for Jerusalem.

Old Annas, who had recently retired as High Priest, to be succeeded by
his son-in-law Caiaphas, was one of Ben-Sholem's closest friends. In
the long ago they had been fellow-students in the Rabbinical College.
Indeed, so intimate was their continuing comradeship that on the annual
occasion of Passover Week, Ben-Sholem was the house-guest of his
eminent friend, who, despite his retirement, kept his ageing fingers on
the pulse of the Sanhedrin, composed of elderly men long accustomed to
listening attentively when he spoke.

Annas could be counted on to view Ben-Sholem's intolerable grievances
sympathetically; together they would tell the whole story to Caiaphas.
Then we would see whether a brazen young carpenter from obscure little
Nazareth had a right to ruin the Capernaum Synagogue and incite all
Galilee to flout the faith of their fathers! Yes, and it would take
more than the wealth and popularity of Jairus to save this charlatan
from the righteous wrath of the Sanhedrin!

Peter knew nothing about the abdication of the old Rabbi and his
departure to avenge himself, nor would he have worried very much had he
known, for Jesus' position was secure. He could take care of himself in
any emergency.

Late that afternoon the small group of close friends waited in Andrew's
cottage for Peter to return and report. Arriving at length, full of
excitement over the day's events, the Big Fisherman flung himself into
a chair, scrubbed a perspiring brow with the back of his hand, and
declared, 'You know I didn't want him to come back to Capernaum; but he
knew what he was doing. Never again will I question his wisdom--about
anything! Jesus knows best!'

'High time you found that out!' remarked his brother. 'Now tell us
exactly what happened. There are many stories afloat.'

Peter began at the beginning. They would remember, he said, that Jesus
had beckoned him to follow as Jairus and the butler led the way through
the crowd. Three tall racing camels, in the care of their drivers,
waited on a side-street.

'You mean to say you rode a camel?' exclaimed Johnny.

'Yes,' nodded Peter, 'but I shouldn't want to do it again.'

'And the Master!' wondered Philip, 'he rode a camel? How did he get
along?'

'Very well, I think,' grinned Peter. 'I was too busy with my own
excursion to notice. It was a rough voyage--but we got there...At the
house we heard the clamour of lamentations. A score of professional
mourners, who had been hanging about for hours waiting to be hired,
were huddled on the verandah, with their black hoods over their faces,
howling like dogs. Jesus was vexed by the noise and commanded them to
cease and begone.'

'That's one advantage the poor have over the rich,' put in James. 'When
there's death in the house, you aren't bothered with hired mourners.'

'We went at once to the bed-chamber where the little girl lay,'
continued Peter. 'Jesus led the way, with Jairus and his wife Adiel
closely following. They asked me to come too. The Master sat down on
the edge of the bed and gazed fixedly at the child for a long time. Her
face had the whiteness of death. After a while, the Master said softly,
as if not to awaken her, "She is sleeping."'

'You mean--she wasn't dead?' exclaimed Thaddeus.

'That's in doubt,' said Peter. 'They all thought she was. She certainly
seemed to be dead. He said she was asleep.'

'Perhaps he meant the sleep of death,' observed old Bartholomew.

'Perhaps,' mumbled Peter vaguely. 'Whatever he meant, that was what
he said. Adiel must have thought he believed the child was sleeping,
for she burst out crying and shook her head. "No, Master!" she sobbed.
"My precious Sharon is gone!" With that, he leaned forward, patted the
little girl gently on the cheek, and said, "Come, Sharon, awake!"'

The Big Fisherman's voice was unsteady: he noisily cleared his throat
to control it.

'It was all very touching,' he went on huskily. 'Little Sharon slowly
opened her eyes; and as Adiel flung herself down by the bedside with a
cry of joy, the child smiled sleepily and said, barely above a whisper,
"There were beautiful flowers, everywhere, just as he told us."'

'It was a dream,' thought Andrew.

'Who can say?' murmured Peter. After an interval of silence, he added,
'As for me--I think the child was dead!'

They had sat transfixed through this recital. Now that the strange
story was ended, they stirred.

'What are we supposed to do now?' inquired Philip. 'Did the Master tell
you?'

'He spends the night at the house of Jairus,' said Peter. 'Tomorrow he
will rest here at the cottage. He is very tired. The next day we start
back to Cana, though we are to make camp that night at Hammath.'

'But why does he stop at Hammath,' queried James, 'when so many people
are waiting for him in Cana?'

'Yes--and a great crowd will doubtless follow him from Capernaum and
along the way,' said Philip. 'He will be forced to speak at Hammath,
and that will be wearisome.'

'Well,' said Peter, 'be that as it may. We're stopping at Hammath.'

'I think I shall go back to Bethsaida,' announced Andrew, rising. 'I
should like to see Hannah before we leave.'

'I shouldn't object to sleeping in a bed tonight, myself,' said Peter.
'Tell Hannah to expect me for supper. I shall be over there--in a
couple of hours. I have promised old Manasseh that I would talk with
him. He wants to lease one of the ships--just for the summer, of
course.'

'Not The Abigail!' protested Thaddeus.

The Big Fisherman patted Thad on the shoulder, but did not reply.
The company was breaking up now. At the door, Thomas remarked, to no
one in particular, 'I can't understand why the Master wants to leave
Capernaum, now that Jairus is solidly behind him--and the people are so
anxious to have him stay.'

'Don't forget,' admonished Peter, 'that we couldn't understand why he
wanted to leave Cana and come to Capernaum.'

'That was different,' mumbled Thomas. 'He felt that he was urgently
needed here.'

'Perhaps he feels that he is now needed elsewhere,' observed Andrew;
to which James added, 'I don't believe he cares very much whether we
understand him or not.'

'You're quite right, Jimmie,' rumbled old Bartholomew. 'He's teaching
us to have faith in him.'

'But--can't a man have faith and understanding too?' argued Thomas.

'No!' declared Bartholomew bluntly. 'That's what faith is for, my son.
It's for when we can't understand.'

'That's true!' approved Peter. 'When a man understands, he doesn't need
any faith.'

'I don't like to be kept in the dark,' put in Philip.

'If a man has enough faith,' replied Peter, 'he can find his way in the
dark--with faith as his lamp.'



Chapter XVI


They were finishing a leisurely breakfast. It was the first time the
four of them had eaten a meal together for many weeks.

Peter's place at the square table faced the kitchen door; Hannah sat
opposite him; Andrew was on his right; and, across from Andrew, Esther
dropped down between her frequent excursions to the kitchen, for she
had insisted on doing all the serving.

At appropriate intervals she had brought in the stewed figs, cups of
milk for Hannah, Andrew, and herself, a tall mug of pomegranate juice
for Peter, boiled eggs and wheaten loaves for all.

Every time Esther had risen, the Big Fisherman's eyes had followed her
with such undisguised admiration that Hannah--ever alert to matters
of fresh interest--was amazed and amused. She wondered if Andrew had
noticed, and covertly aimed an inquiring glance in his direction,
but the stolid bachelor did not look up from his plate to share her
curiosity. She had never known anyone so exasperatingly indifferent to
significant events transpiring under his very nose.

Esther, apparently oblivious of Peter's unusual awareness of her, was
wearing a simple white linen house-dress that had belonged to his wife;
but his fascinated expression as he frankly studied the uncontrived
sinuosity of the girl's movements did not reflect a poignant memory of
his all-but-forgotten bereavement. Indeed, the dress, which had hung
limp and shapeless on his frail and ailing Abigail, had so generously
responded to Esther's figure that Peter marvelled at its unsuspected
beauty. The girl was superb! She was altogether lovely! It was as if he
were seeing her for the first time!

He had never tried to get acquainted with her. Their relationship had
got off to a bad start. On the very first day she had irritated him by
coming on to his ship in the guise of 'Joe,' a half-starved, dirty,
ragged camel-boy, presently turning out to be 'Esther,' a mysterious
young woman whose inconsistent accounts of herself seemed to have been
recklessly made up while you waited.

The Big Fisherman had not known what to think about her, and had given
it up. He had had many other things to bother him in those days. He
had thrown away Johnny's friendship; he had scornfully investigated
the Nazarene Carpenter, only to be made captive by the strange man's
unquestionable power. His orderly, uneventful, workaday world had been
turned upside down. Not much wonder that he had had no time or mind for
this Esther person.

If Hannah, alone all day and in dire need of companionship, wanted to
mother this unexplained alien, Peter had no serious objections, but
he had gone to no trouble to conceal his antipathy to the new member
of their household. Whoever the girl was and wherever she had come
from and whatever she was up to seemed to be a secret. Hannah appeared
satisfied that the mysterious waif merited their hospitality; and,
after all, it was Hannah's home. Perhaps the girl was helping Hannah to
recover from the loss of Abigail. Moreover, Peter was obliged to admit
that Esther was earning her keep and that her presence in the household
had never discommoded him in any way. But he rarely had anything to say
to her beyond a perfunctory grunt at breakfast, nor had she made the
slightest effort to improve their acquaintance.

This mutually cool attitude had been altered considerably at the time
of Hannah's grave illness and miraculous recovery. Esther had taken
charge of the house; she had become a member of the family. Also, it
was evident that the Master had taken an interest in her. If Esther had
a secret, he undoubtedly knew what it was; and either in spite of it
or because of it, had invited her to be the sole witness to Hannah's
restoration. Exactly what had happened on that occasion had not been
disclosed, but the event had wrought a change in the girl. Her new
demeanour was difficult to define. It was as if she had been released
from prison.

The Big Fisherman had been required to make a fresh appraisal of their
increasingly interesting guest, even to the extent of bestowing on
her a clumsy friendliness, though he was embarrassed somewhat by her
indifference to his amiable condescensions.

This morning, every time she sat down beside him, Peter had turned
toward her with a pleasant smile, for which she had given him no
receipt, either of surprise or gratification. He had remarked, as she
removed the empty bowl in which his figs were served, that they were
very good, very good indeed, and she had replied casually that Hannah
had cooked them. A few minutes later, he had said that the eggs were
boiled just the way he liked them, and Esther had nodded to Hannah as
if inviting her to take a bow.

Finishing his breakfast and carefully folding his napkin, he had
had the audacity to tell Esther her hair had grown so rapidly that
she could never pass herself off for a boy any more, an observation
accompanied by a reminiscent chuckle. And to this impertinence he added
that the little fringe of curls on her forehead certainly did her no
harm.

She gave him the merest wisp of a smile, as to a small boy who was
talking too much, and turned to Hannah with the irrelevant statement
that, if she might be excused, she would go out into the garden and
gather a basket of tulips, after which she left the table, Hannah
following her as far as the kitchen.

Peter fretfully rubbed his chin and seemed out of sorts.

'What makes this girl think she's so superior to the rest of us?' he
testily inquired of his brother.

'Perhaps she is,' drawled Andrew.

'I'm afraid I treated her like a dog,' admitted Peter, somewhat to
the surprise of both of them, for the Big Fisherman was not adroit in
offering apologies.

Andrew did not immediately abandon his meditations to refute this
statement; and Peter, anticipating something more comforting than his
brother's silence, went on to say, 'But she needn't hold it against
me--for ever!'

'If you're expecting her to come wagging up to lick your hand,'
remarked Andrew, 'you'll have to give her a little more time.'

'I should like to patch it up with her before we leave,' mumbled Peter,
half to himself. 'We will be gone all summer. She might be gone when we
return. There's no telling what she may do next. I might never see her
again.'

'Oh, you'll be seeing her every day, Simon.' Andrew hadn't yet got his
brother's new name firmly fixed in his mind. 'Esther is coming along.'

'What?' barked Peter. 'With us? Impossible! Who told you that?'

'Hannah. Esther is to help look after the sick babies--and their
mothers.'

'But'--spluttered Peter--'we can't permit that! This girl--well, she
isn't a girl any more, Andy. She is a young woman. A very beautiful
and desirable young woman--much too attractive to be exposed to all
manner of indignities! There are some very rough people in these big
crowds! If it's anything like last summer, we shall encounter plenty
of unpleasant incidents--without having Esther on our hands!' After
smouldering for a moment, he inquired, 'Whoever put this foolish idea
into her head?'

'The Master,' said Andrew.

'She asked him if she might go along?'

'No; it was his own idea. He invited her.'

Peter drew a deep, baffled breath that puffed his bearded lips when he
let go of it. He shook his head, uncomprehendingly.

'Our Master does some strange things, Andy.'

His brother nodded.

'We had all noticed that, Simon. But--so far--everything he has done--'

'I know! I know!' broke in Peter, with an impatient toss of his big
hand. 'Everything he does is right!...But--how is it going to look for
this lovely creature to be camped all summer with a dozen men?'

Andrew gave a slow, sly grin and remarked dryly that it would probably
look better than if she were to be camped all summer with any one of
them, a comment which his brother instantly resented with a scowl, a
shrug, and an abrupt departure from the room.

The soft-spoken bachelor, who had intended no disrespect by his
drollery, stared after the retreating figure and chuckled a
little...'Ah--so that's what ails Simon,' he mused. 'Esther has become
important to him. He is getting touchy on the subject. Well, well--who
would have thought it?'

Hannah bustled in from the kitchen now. It had been very quiet out
there for some time. She began clearing the table and making quite an
energetic task of it.

'I wonder if Simon isn't fond of Esther,' she said, busily brushing
crumbs.

'Why not?' rejoined Andrew casually. 'We all are.'

Hannah's lips firmed in a little pout. Then, deciding on a more
promising strategy, she smiled, lowered her voice to a confidential
whisper, and said, coaxingly, 'Surely you know, Andy, that I wouldn't
say anything.'

Andrew soberly nodded his approval.

'That has always been my policy, too,' he said. 'It certainly keeps one
out of trouble, doesn't it?'

Hannah did not pursue the subject any further, though the kitchen door
plainly said 'Humph!' when she closed it behind her.

 * * * * * *

For many generations it had been customary for the reigning Prince of
Arimathaea to observe the fast and attend the festivities of Passover
Week in the Holy City.

This annual event, originally commemorative of the Jews' release from
their intolerable bondage in Egypt, had gradually evolved from a stark
and solemn re-enactment of that miraculous deliverance and had acquired
many irrelevant but attractive characteristics. It was Homecoming Week
for all Jews who were able to return to their Holy City. Hundreds of
them came from great distances and from foreign countries, bringing
with them all manner of merchandise. Long caravans, laden with
exotic foods, spices, jewels, and costly textiles, encamped in the
surrounding hills. Minstrels, magicians, actors, acrobats, soothsayers,
fortune-tellers, vendors of confections and medicinal herbs swarmed
the narrow streets. Passover Night was still solemnly celebrated in
the silence and seclusion of dimly lit Jewish homes, but Passover Week
was a carnival for many more visitors than viewed it as an austere
ceremonial.

Young Prince Joseph of Arimathaea always looked forward with happy
expectancy to this pilgrimage. It belonged to springtime. The country
was beautiful. Had there been no pleasures in prospect at his
destination, Joseph would have felt repaid by the delights of the
journey. He travelled in a style befitting his wealth and position,
attended by a gay group of his young cronies and an impressive retinue
of servants.

Jerusalem, in Joseph's opinion, was an enchanted city. Generations of
his forebears had been conspicuous in the making of its history, as
the inscriptions on their massive tombs in the 'Garden of Sepulchres'
eloquently testified. The day would come when Joseph himself would
join them there. His own tomb, elaborately planned, was even now under
construction and would be completed by the end of the summer. He was in
no hurry to occupy it, for life was good, but it was a comfort to know
that whenever he needed it the sepulchre would be ready to welcome him.

And he had many influential friends in Jerusalem who received him
cordially. Even the gruff and short-tempered Procurator, Pontius
Pilate, served him cakes and wine when he paid respects at the Roman
Insula--and called him Joe.

And he always paid a duty call at the Galilean Embassy, though this was
less to his taste. By custom, all inter-provincial affairs involving
the Principality of Arimathaea were adjudicated by the Tetrarch. Joseph
was glad that the services of Antipas were but rarely invoked; for he
did not like him and did not trust him. Another reason for not wanting
to visit the Embassy: he invariably encountered the brazen, jingling,
over-painted Salome, whom he detested...And once he had been obliged
to spend an unhappy hour with her mother whose reputation was in such
appalling disrepair that to be on friendly terms with her was to invite
a scandal.

Now he was on his way home from Jerusalem. Tonight they would break the
trip, as usual, by camping at the road junction near the village of
Hammath.

Early the next morning, the Prince's encampment was roused by the
unexpected noise of traffic on the highways. A great crowd was
converging on a meadow not more than five hundred yards away. Inquiries
revealed that the Nazarene Carpenter was to appear.

Much annoyed by the intrusion of this rabble, Joseph's companions
importuned him to break camp at once and defer their breakfast until
they had arrived at some quiet spot farther down the road; but he saw
no reason for scurrying away.

'Indeed, I should like to see him again myself,' declared the Prince.
'He must be something more than a mountebank or the people would not
continue to follow him.'

Remembering with embarrassment the cool reception they had had at the
hands of the Carpenter's following a few months earlier, Joseph's
friends so strongly counselled him against risking another rebuff that
he lost his patience and announced his intention of going into the
crowd alone. And with that he set off by himself, on foot, to join the
increasing multitude.

The throng had quieted as the Master mounted the little knoll where
a space had been cleared for him. He began at once to speak in the
effortless, intimate, far-reaching tone that always commanded complete
silence and rapt attention.

Today, he said, he would talk with them about the eternal life.
Citizens of his Kingdom did not have to wait until death to experience
its happiness and its peace. If ever we were to be immortal, we were
immortal now. 'We are God's children,' he went on, 'and while it is not
yet apparent what we may become, we can be sure that when we see Him,
and know Him as He is, we shall find ourselves to be like Him...But--if
we are indeed the children of God we are His children today. To know
this is to be of the Kingdom; for the Kingdom is now, it is here, it is
yours!... Ask--and it shall be given you! Seek it--and you shall find
it! What parent among you, if your child asks bread, will you give him
a stone? And if you--heedless and selfish as you are--give good gifts
to your children, how many more blessings shall our Father in Heaven
bestow upon all who ask Him!...' This, then, was the life eternal;
beginning now, beginning here; for you, for all!

He stepped down from the mound. Peter beckoned to the nearest
cot-bearers. The day's miracles had begun.

Joseph gradually worked his way toward the front. For the most part,
the people moved aside to let him through, perhaps because of his
expensive clothing, his jewels, and his princely bearing. Now he
was within a few feet of the strange business that the Nazarene was
conducting. No--this was not trickery! It was conceivable that the
emaciated fellow who had just risen from his cot, with tears of
gratitude and incoherent little whimpers of amazement, had connived
with the Carpenter to stage this dramatic scene; but it was absurd to
suppose that the baby, in the arms of this dishevelled young woman, had
joined in a conspiracy to deceive the public.

Joseph's heart pounded hard and his mouth was dry. The hot bodies of
his neighbours pressed close against him as they swayed for better
vision, but he was heedless of these contacts, which he would have
found intolerable in any other circumstances. Indeed, far from
resenting this intimacy with the common people, the Prince felt
something almost like comradeship with them. The Carpenter had said
that they were all children of God, and for the moment Joseph believed
it.

The sweat was beading the Carpenter's pale forehead. It was evident
that he was utterly spent. The gigantic Galilean who stood beside
him had halted the approaching procession of suppliants with the
announcement that the Master must rest. With this, the Master and his
small coterie filed out toward the highway. Joseph followed close
behind them.

Reaching the road, the Carpenter turned about and--to Joseph's
surprise--waited for him to approach. His fatigue was such that his
hands were trembling, but he greeted the Prince with a cordial smile.

'Master,' said Joseph, in an unsteady voice, 'what shall _I_ do--to
have this eternal life?'

Peter frowned. He had instantly recognized the Prince of Arimathaea.
Ah, so? The Prince would be wanting eternal life on special terms;
terms provided for Princes.

'You have been brought up to know the laws, my friend,' said Jesus
kindly.

'True, Master,' said Joseph, 'and I have kept the laws since childhood,
loving God with all my heart, mind, and strength.'

'Proceed, friend,' urged Jesus; not smiling now. 'There is another law;
to love your neighbours as you love yourself...You have glimpsed the
Kingdom today, and you would share it. That will be more difficult for
you than for these poor. It is not easy for the rich to inherit the
Kingdom. Their lives are too crowded with Things!'

Joseph bowed his head, reluctantly nodded agreement, and remained
silent.

'If you would be of my Kingdom, friend, unburden yourself of your great
possessions. Dispose of them! Distribute them among the poor!...And
then come--and follow me!'

They all stood for a long moment waiting for the Prince to speak, but
he had nothing to say. With his head still bowed, he walked slowly up
the road. Jesus took a couple of steps, as if he might follow him; but
halted and watched the departing Prince with wistful, regretful eyes.
No one in the little group needed to be told that their Master was
disappointed.

After a while, Jesus turned with a sigh and signed that they would
proceed now to Cana. Peter walked beside him. He was not disappointed,
but he was hurt.

'Master,' he said pensively, 'we have given up all to follow you.'

'Yes, Peter,' replied Jesus wearily. 'I know. And you will be rewarded.'

Old Bartholomew, trudging along behind with Andrew, muttered,
'Andy--that's the first thing the Prince ever wanted that he couldn't
afford; a place in the Master's Kingdom!'

 * * * * * *

Contrary to Peter's expectation, Esther had not joined their company
when they passed through Bethsaida on the way to Hammath.

He had doubted the wisdom of her accompanying them at all; but, now
that she had been invited to do so, he was anxious to see her; and,
as they approached the corner nearest Hannah's house--followed by the
crowd that had assembled again in the plaza at Capernaum--his eyes
searched the street. He did not know that she had received instructions
not to proceed to Cana until the following day.

The next morning, after tenderly embracing Hannah, who had cried a
little at their parting, she started on her journey; but not alone, for
the procession that had filed through sleepy little Bethsaida all day
yesterday continued to trudge along toward the south.

Arriving in the spacious field, half a mile east of Cana, she made no
effort to attach herself to the Master's company, but was content to be
a mere member of the multitude that increased hourly, and immediately
gave her attention to the weary and hungry women who had brought their
sick, blind, and crippled children for healing.

It was not an easy assignment. Esther had often seen poverty in
distress, but never before at such close range; nor had she ever felt
in any way responsible for its alleviation. It had been her supposition
that the poor and needy were sympathetic toward one another; it seemed
reasonable that this should be true. Her present experience quickly
disillusioned her. Whatever might be the traditional indifference of
the rich to the plight of the poor, it was becoming apparent that the
poor had but little respect for their unfortunate neighbours. The women
she tried to befriend were not disposed to co-operate. They wanted food
and shelter and they wanted it now--and they wanted it ahead of the
others. It angered them to be asked to await their turn. Each footsore,
dirty and dishevelled mother thought her case deserved immediate
attention.

At first the girl was indignant. When she asked half a dozen of them
to accompany her into the town, where she told her story to not very
sympathetic housewives and begged a few loaves of bread here and a
coney-skin of goat's milk there and a little basket of sun-cured
figs somewhere else, the women were reluctant to go. And the women
who were asked to look after the absentees' babies thought they were
being imposed on. And when she returned with provisions for them,
most of them quarrelled over the distribution of food. It was quite
discouraging.

With her patience exhausted, she silenced one bickering group by
saying, 'I'm not being paid for helping you, you know! I'm not doing
this because I think it's fun...Stop quarrelling now--and listen to
what the Master is saying!' They scowled, but turned their faces toward
the Carpenter--and made pretence of listening.

Sometimes the sensitive girl marvelled at the complacency of Jesus as
he pleaded for kindness and good will among men and the mutual bearing
of burdens and sharing of benefits, while the impatient audience that
had come to see the working of miracles trampled on toes and jabbed
elbows into ribs and jostled for better vantage.

It was late afternoon on the fourth day of their mission in Cana when
the Big Fisherman unexpectedly came to her rescue, and none too soon,
for Esther was thoroughly disheartened and ready to admit that she had
failed in her task. Only the promise she had made to the Master kept
her from running away.

Peter had resolutely kept his distance from her, quite against his
inclinations, for she was constantly on his mind. Indecisively he had
lingered, today, as the great throng dispersed and the Master with the
others of his company proceeded up the slope toward their sequestered
encampment under a clump of acacias. For a while he sauntered aimlessly
among the cots bearing the sick who had arrived late and would
presently be carried away to shelters for the night. He paused beside
them to speak words of encouragement. Doubtless the Master would take
care of them tomorrow, he said. They must try to be patient.

His heart speeded a little as he neared the cluster of tents that had
been provided for mothers and their sick babies. Apparently they had
had their supper, for none of them was in sight, and Esther, having
attended to their wants, was seated on a camp stool apart from them, in
a posture of fatigue and dejection.

She raised her head as he approached and rose to welcome him with a
pensive smile that unsteadied his voice when he inquired, kindly, how
things were going with her.

'Are these people wearing you out?' he asked.

She shook her head, as though to say that there were no words to
describe her dilemma; and asked, 'Have you time for a little talk with
me, Simon?'

Never before had she addressed him by name, and the implied overture
of friendship stirred him deeply. It pleased him, too, that she called
him Simon. His new name had aged him somewhat, making him more sedate
and discreet, setting him apart from his fellows. At the moment he
felt more comfortable as Simon, temporarily freed from the rigorous
responsibilities incumbent upon a Rock.

'Why not?' he had replied quickly. 'Or--I can take you to the Master if
you are troubled.'

'The Master has enough to bear,' she sighed. 'Let me tell you about it,
Simon. Perhaps you can help me.'

'Come then,' he said, softly. 'Let us go to some place where we may
talk privately.'

They took the winding path up the slope toward Jesus' encampment,
Esther leading the way, for the old, deep-worn foot-path was narrow.
Simon, following with long, slow strides, was fascinated by the
effortless ease and grace of the girl's supple figure. No conversation
was attempted until they reached the flat, level limestone boulder that
jutted from the hillside, overlooking the teeming valley where every
road and lane was filled with plodding pilgrims returning to their
bivouacs in the hills.

Now that he was seated beside this beautiful girl, who had unwittingly
preoccupied his thoughts and disturbed his sleep, the Big Fisherman
was not sure how--or whether--to break the silence. Esther promptly
relieved him of this responsibility.

Turning toward him, she declared impetuously, 'The trouble is, Simon,
it all seems so hopeless, so pitiably hopeless! They are so rude, so
mean to one another.'

'They are indeed,' agreed Simon, 'but I suppose some allowance must be
made for them. A woman who has borne the grief of a blind or crippled
child--and now has a chance to see him made well--is desperate. She
will lie, steal, and fight to be the first in line--for his food--and
his healing. Their conduct is deplorable, but it is understandable.'

'You have great patience, Simon,' murmured Esther.

'No, my dear,' he confessed. 'If I seem to have patience, it is because
of the Master's compassion on them. I'm learning--from him--to hold my
tongue and keep my temper. It isn't easy.'

'Perhaps I too might learn to be more sympathetic if there was
anything--anything good, anything at all--to come of it!'

'He heals their sick, Esther. Surely that is something!'

'I know,' she conceded wearily. 'He opens their babies' poor
little blind eyes so that they can see; and what do they see but
unfriendliness and greed!' The pent-up flood of her indignation was
loosed now, and her passionate words came tumbling recklessly over
one another, while Simon, amazed at the outburst, watched the big
tears gather and slowly trickle down her flushed cheeks. He tried to
interject a gentle protest, but she went on, her husky voice breaking
with emotion.

'There he stands,' she cried, 'day after day, entreating them to be
kind and to love one another, and live at peace with one another--'

'I think some of them try to do that,' said Simon.

'A few, perhaps; but not enough,' persisted Esther. 'My heart bleeds
for him, Simon! He is going to be so dreadfully disappointed! If he
were just an ordinary man, deluded into thinking that he could save
the whole world by teaching people to be merciful and generous, no
attention need be paid to his dreaming; but--Jesus has the power of a
God in his hands. He has proved it--over and over! I truly believe that
he could save the world--or end it, if he chose; but not this way!'

'How then?' asked Simon, soberly.

'I heard John the Baptizer tell of a Great One who would come and wreck
the world--and begin all over again--with better people in control. He
would march across lands and seas, upsetting old temples and thrones,
humbling the rich, freeing the poor, levelling the road for all the
people. Perhaps there's some hope for a plan like that! Jesus has the
power to do it--if he wished...But--how does he expect to save the
world by pleading with these barefooted, half-starved country-people of
Galilee!...Tell me, Simon! You have great faith. They are calling you
"Petros" now. Do you honestly believe that there is any hope for Jesus'
Kingdom of Love?' Her long, wet lashes opened wide as she faced him
with an expression of childlike confidence. 'I will try to believe--if
you say you do!'

It had turned out to be one of the critical moments in the Big
Fisherman's experience. He felt himself gaining stature and dignity as
he gazed into the girl's questing eyes. Whatever had been his foolish
thoughts of her, his infatuation, his desire, Esther had become as a
trusting daughter now.

He laid his big hand over her small one, and said tenderly, 'I believe,
dear child, that Jesus is the Saviour of the world!'

After a little pause he went on, measuring his words.

'As for these poor--not many mighty will be called into the Master's
service. He is not appealing to the mighty, for it is they who have
made the world what it is. He does not expect to change the world into
a garden today, but he is sowing the seed. We must be patient--and have
faith in him.'

Esther rose--and smiled into his eyes.

'Very well, Petros,' she said softly, 'I will be patient--and I will
have faith!...Shall we go now?'

They retraced their steps in silence. At her tent-door, she whispered,
'You have done much for me, tonight, Petros.'

'And you have strengthened me, my child,' said Peter.

The next afternoon, as if to confirm what Peter had said about the
Master's faith in the common people--and their value to him--he told
a story of a king who had planned a wedding-feast for his son, the
prince; and had invited all the great ones of his own and neighbouring
states to be his guests. The nobility offered flimsy excuses. So--the
king sent his servants out into the highways and hedges to find guests
for the banquet.

After the crowd had dispersed for the day, Peter paused at Esther's
tent for a friendly word.

'Did you tell the Master about our conversation last night?' she asked.

Peter shook his head and smiled.

'I think you have in mind his parable about the king's banquet--and the
guests from the highways and hedges...No; I had not told him about our
talk. I didn't need to. He knew of it without being told.'

'Do you mean to say that Jesus knows--without hearing--what we say and
think?' asked Esther mystifiedly.

'I'm afraid so,' said Peter. 'There's abundant proof of it.' He gave
a slow grin, and added, 'I always know when he disapproves of my
thoughts. He does not chide me, but he calls me Simon.'

Esther laughed a little and said she had never heard of anything so
strange.

'And who are you today?' she asked. 'Simon or Peter?'

'I'm Peter--today,' he said, smiling.

 * * * * * *

It was the beginning of a comradeship which was to mean a great deal
to both of them. The Big Fisherman's attitude toward the trusting girl
was strictly paternal and protective, though at times uncomfortably
possessive. He could be as jealous as a lover.

One afternoon--it was the day before they left Cana on their eastern
journey--Philip surprised Esther by asking her to call on his aged
mother. The lonely old lady was confined to her room, he said, and had
few visitors.

'The trouble is,' he explained, 'my mother never learned to speak
Aramaic with any confidence; and because she cannot talk with the
neighbours, they do not come to see her. I think the sight of you would
do her good, even if you find conversation difficult.'

'What language does she speak, Philip?' Esther had inquired as they
neared the cottage.

'We are Macedonians,' he replied.

It appeared that Philip had promised his mother that he would try to
bring Esther to see her, for her widowed daughter who opened the door
for them seemed to be expecting their call. The aged woman, obviously
made ready for company, was sitting up in bed. Esther took the
proffered chair beside her, patted the thin hand, and was rewarded with
welcoming smiles and vigorous noddings of the old grey head.

'I...do...not...speak...your...tongue,' laboured the frail voice.

'Then we will talk in your tongue, Mother,' said Esther, in fluent
Greek. 'I'm never sure of myself in Aramaic either.'

Philip's mother took both of Esther's hands in hers, and cried, 'Bless
you, my child! Bless you!'

His sister laughed happily and drew her chair closer. Philip,
dumbfounded, sat down on the other side of the bed and stared as Esther
and his ecstatic mother chatted companionably.

At the first pause in their conversation, he broke in to ask, 'Why
haven't you told me that you know Greek?'

'You never asked me,' said Esther, which made them all laugh.

'But you're not a Greek,' said Philip, suddenly serious. 'How did you
learn to speak it so well?'

'It's a long story, Philip,' she replied. 'Much too long to tell; and,
besides, we must be going now.'

'Tell me this, Esther,' he said soberly. 'Do you and the Master speak
to each other in Greek? He seems to know the language.'

At that, she rose, and again affectionately patted the wrinkled hand.
Noting that Philip felt somewhat rebuffed, she murmured, as for
him alone, 'Our Master knows everything, Philip. Everything about
everything!'

On their way back to the field, where hundreds of people, aware that
the meetings were ended, were preparing to return to their homes,
Philip was still questioning her, without results, about her origin.
Preoccupied with their conversation as they moved through the throng,
neither took notice that Peter was immediately behind them. Philip was
finishing a remark as they turned to greet him. The Big Fisherman was
frowning darkly.

'Esther speaks Greek!' explained Philip, in a tone that invited Peter
to be pleasantly surprised; but it didn't have that effect on him. He
was annoyed and went to no pains to conceal it.

'Humph!' he grunted. 'Now you should really enjoy yourself, Philip. Our
own language is good enough for me!'

There wasn't much to be said in reply to that. Momentarily stunned by
the Big Fisherman's unexpected rudeness, and looking as if they had
been slapped for no reason at all, Philip and Esther, having exchanged
a bewildered glance, turned to go.

Peter, angrily gnawing at his underlip, followed them for a little
way, saw them separate at Esther's little tent, and slowly trudged up
the hill. At the limestone rock he halted, sat down, ran his fingers
through his shaggy hair and cursed himself bitterly.

Early the next morning they broke camp and took to the road, with
Peter far in advance of the others. John said to James, 'D'you suppose
someone has hurt his feelings?' To which his brother replied, 'More
likely he has hurt somebody else.'

'Let's catch up with him,' suggested John, 'and give him a chance to
air his trouble.'

'You may--if you like,' said James. He turned about and called to
Philip, who was strolling along behind them. 'Phil--do you want to move
on ahead with Johnny and see what ails Peter?'

'Not me,' growled Philip. 'I don't want to know.'

'Let him alone,' advised Andrew. 'He'll get over it, whatever it is. If
he needed any help, the Master would have joined him.'

Instinctively they turned to face the rear. Far behind them they saw
Jesus walking between Esther and old Bartholomew, with young Thaddeus,
somewhat in advance of them, pushing a high-wheeled cart containing
Esther's tents and tackle.

'Where did she dig up those tents?' inquired Philip.

'Simon bought them,' said Andrew, 'with some of the money old Manasseh
paid him for The Rachael. He gave most of it to Hannah.' It was a long
speech for Andrew and they listened attentively. 'My brother has his
odd moments,' he added, 'but he is not mean.'

'Come on, Johnny,' said Philip impulsively. 'Let us overtake him.'

'I'll go with you,' said James.

They lengthened their steps and moved forward.

'They're good boys,' said Andrew.

'Do you know how much he got for The Rachael?' asked Judas.

'Yes,' said Andrew crisply.

They walked along in silence for some time.

'I suppose old Manasseh got it for a song,' said Judas.

'He used to be the cantor at the Synagogue when he was a young man,'
reflected Andrew. 'Excellent voice, too.'

 * * * * * *

By the time the party reached Nain, where they were to tarry for a day,
hundreds of people were following. That evening a large crowd assembled
on the village green intent upon hearing Jesus speak. As he rose to
address them, a lean middle-aged fellow raised his arm for recognition
and shouted, in a rasping tone:

'Good Master, I heard you speak a parable in Cana about the king's
banquet where the rich despised their invitations and the poor were
brought in.' His harsh voice had risen until it had gripped and
silenced the restless crowd. 'I believe you, sir!' he went on. 'It is
high time the poor, who outnumber the greedy rich, should sit at the
banquet-table! I would that you repeat the story for these slaves in
Nain who are toiling their lives away, working for beggarly wages, to
keep old Simeon Ben-Edom in luxury.'

There was a dissenting murmur in the crowd as the revolutionary
diatribe came to an end. It was evident that the people of Nain
considered the impudent fellow as a trouble-maker. They grew quiet now,
wondering what Jesus would say. Peter had stepped forward, glowering at
the self-appointed orator. The Master laid a gently detaining hand on
the huge, flexed forearm; and in a friendly tone obliged his inquisitor
by retelling the parable of the king's banquet, and how the poor were
brought in from the highways and hedges to attend the party.

But the parable had taken on a new chapter since it had been told in
Cana, Jesus continued.

The king, he said, was quite willing to welcome the ragamuffins into
his beautiful banquet-hall, but he wanted them to look and feel and be
as respectable as possible. So he ordered his servants to offer each
guest a clean and suitable garment to wear at the dinner.

But one sulky fellow, wanting to show his contempt for the king--and
the palace--and the feast, refused to accept the robe they gave him to
cover his dirty tatters. 'They asked me to come here just as I was,' he
growled, 'and now they can take me, just as I am--or throw me out...'
So they threw him out.

The crowd was delighted. They laughed and cheered. When the meeting was
over, Peter--who hadn't spoken to Esther since yesterday--turned to her
with a broad smile, and said, '"The meek shall inherit the earth"--but
they'd better be meek!'

 * * * * * *

The news that Jesus was coming to Jericho had raced on ahead of him and
a great audience was awaiting his arrival. It was the largest assembly
he had encountered. Within a fortnight more than fifteen thousand
people--from all over Samaria and Judaea and the contingent following
from Galilee--had converted the open country north of ancient Jericho
into a city. Those were memorable days for the Master's companions.
Sometimes, when the day's trying work was done, Peter had sought Esther
for comfort and companionship. They had become very close friends. One
evening he had asked her, as they sat side by side on the grass at her
tent-door, whether Greek was a difficult language to learn.

'You shouldn't find it hard,' she had replied. 'Want me to teach you a
few words, Petros?'

He had smiled and nodded.

She patted the ground with the palm of her slim hand.

'Ge,' she said. 'The earth...Say it, Peter. Ge.'

He repeated the word after her.

She patted her head. 'Kephale...' She laid her hand upon her heart.
'Kardia.' She touched her girdle. 'Zone.' She pointed aloft at a
brilliant star. 'Astron...Now what is the word for head?' she asked,
after the manner of a pedagogue. Peter couldn't remember--but he did
recall the Greek word for heart, and seemed happy over his progress. He
was learning Greek--and fast...An inquisitive little lizard scampered
across his worn sandal. He pointed to it.

'Sauros,' said Esther.

'What is the word for God?' he asked.

'Which one?' inquired Esther innocently.

'The only one,' he said severely.

'Theos,' she replied, after a little pause.

And that was the way they had spent most of their evenings during the
strenuous weeks in the region round about Jericho. Peter, who had never
known a word of any language save his own--and was far from being a
master of that one--was infatuated with new interest and proud of his
progress. Esther gave him every encouragement. It was not long before
the Big Fisherman was piecing his Greek words into sentences. He had
been jealous of Philip. Now he was cultivating the Macedonian and
vaingloriously talking to him in his own language; though sometimes
Philip laughed a little and offered an amendment.

The summer was advancing. There was an occasional whiff of autumn
in the early morning breeze. Then came the day of Jesus' triumphal
entry into the city of Jericho, the welcoming crowds that lined the
streets, the memorable luncheon at the mansion where Zacchaeus lived
in lonely splendour, despised and feared by his fellow-townsmen. And,
as an outcome of that interview, the rascally Zacchaeus had publicly
announced his intention of restoring, four-fold, the unjust taxes he
had filched from the people.

That night, at their encampment in the hills, Jesus told them the
summer's work was ended. Tomorrow, he said, they would start back to
Capernaum. The twelve were glad, but somewhat surprised; for it might
be a whole month before the rains came on. The Master seemed suddenly
anxious to return to Capernaum. They did not ask him why: they knew
better than to question him any more.



Chapter XVII


The longest week that Voldi had ever spent elapsed before Felix called
at the prison. It seemed doubtful that their friendship would survive.

It was after supper when he came. Twilight was settling. The dim
oil-lamp had been lighted. Voldi was sitting apathetically on his bunk
when he heard an argument in the corridor.

'The Prefect isn't going to like this, you know,' the fat jailor was
whimpering.

'Did you have orders that no one was to see the Arabian?' came the
irritated voice of Felix.

'N-not exactly, sir; no,' admitted the jailor. 'But if your father
learns of it, he'll punish me.'

'Then you'd better not tell him. Open that door now and run along. I
may be here for a couple of hours.'

There was another whine of protest from the jailor, followed by the
screech of the key in the rusty old lock, and Felix entered. Voldi came
to his feet and they embraced each other in silence.

'I can't quite make you out,' said Felix soberly, when they were seated.

'It must have been something very urgent indeed that would justify your
excursion into forbidden territory. Obviously the Tetrarch was not the
object of it, for you knew he had gone to Jerusalem.'

'You deserve to know, Felix,' said Voldi, 'and I'm ready to tell you.
My girl is up there, waiting to hear from me. I had to go, regardless
of consequences. I didn't succeed, but it was worth trying.'

'Your girl, eh?' Felix brightened with interest. 'It was a foolhardy
thing to do, though. She must be something very special. I never met a
girl I would risk going to jail for...So--now--when it's too late for
anything to be done about it, you're going to tell me...Very well: I'm
listening.'

It took Voldi an hour to confide the story. At first he tried to
explain--with many wide-open gaps in the tale--how and why Fara, the
incomparable Jewish-Arabian, had got herself away up into Galilee. But
when he saw that Felix was darkly frowning his dissatisfaction, Voldi
went back to the beginning of his narrative and told it all, every
detail of it: Fara's shockingly rash vow of vengeance; her daring
journey alone and in the flimsiest of disguises; the failure of her
utterly impracticable mission; her refusal to return to Arabia. And
when he had made an end of it, he searched the shrewd Roman eyes in an
entreaty for his friend's sympathetic understanding.

Felix exhaled a deep breath, and said, as from a distance, 'I
wouldn't believe a word of it, Voldi, except that it's much too
fantastic ever to have been made up! Nobody could invent a tale like
that! The daughter of Antipas! Vowed to assassinate the Tetrarch of
Galilee! Single-handed! Sixteen-year-old girl! Still plans on doing
it!...Well--she's either crazy as a hoot-owl--or the bravest creature
alive!'

'You wouldn't think she was crazy if you met her,' said Voldi. 'As
for her bravery, she doesn't value her life very highly. Fara is a
woman without a country, you know. She cares little whether she lives
or dies. The trouble is: she undoubtedly knows now that she cannot
possibly succeed in her undertaking--and she has voluntarily cut
herself off from Arabia...I know she loves me, Felix, and I would
gladly die for her...Is it any wonder that I took a chance?'

Felix sat for some time with his elbows on his knees, digging his
fingers into his close-cropped, curly hair; then he slowly raised his
head to inquire:

'Well--what's to be done, if anything?'

'It's easily to be seen that there's nothing I can do,' said Voldi
dejectedly. 'If I could only get a letter to her, explaining why I
cannot come; but a letter from me would certainly be intercepted and
lead to an investigation of Fara's business in Galilee.'

'I have it!' declared Felix impulsively. 'You write the letter. I'll
take it to her.'

There was a quiet moment before Voldi replied. It was not natural for
either the Arabian or the Roman to show any emotion. Laying a hand on
Felix's knee, Voldi murmured, 'You are indeed a loyal friend, Felix! I
hope this doesn't get you into trouble.'

'It's time I had some trouble. A bit of adventure will be good for
me...And this girl is well worth the risk.'

'What will the Prefect think of you?'

'He will be annoyed, I dare say; but I feel sure that if he were in my
place he would do exactly what I intend to do...The Prefect,' added
Felix proudly, 'is a very sound fellow!'

For the next half-hour they seriously discussed the ways and means.
Felix wondered if some embarrassing curiosity might be stirred in
little Bethsaida by the arrival of a stranger, easily identifiable as a
Roman, to pay a visit to a young woman whose presence there had never
been fully explained. It was finally decided that Felix should take the
letter directly to the canny old Sadducee, David of the House of Zadok.
Voldi confidently believed that David could be trusted to deliver the
message to Fara.

 * * * * * *

A week later, Felix returned from his journey. Voldi searched his
friend's face anxiously as he entered the cell, and was relieved to
note that he bore no evidence of trouble.

Felix had taken the letter to David's house, as they had planned. He
had been much impressed by the old man's sagacity, and wanted to talk
about him and the hospitality he had shown.

'But--what about Fara?' Voldi begged to know.

'She wasn't there,' said Felix. 'Fara is on a tour of the country with
this wonder-working Carpenter and his companions.'

'But--that's impossible!' protested Voldi. 'She had been much impressed
by this young prophet; but I cannot imagine her following him about.
Fara is not a religious person at all!'

'Perhaps not,' conceded Felix, 'but she is infatuated with the
Carpenter. When you were there, this woman, Hannah, with whom she
lodged, was very ill. Some days later, when her life was despaired of,
the Carpenter came and healed her. Fara believed it was a miracle; no
less. She confided the whole story to old David; told him the Carpenter
had healed her, also.'

'Healed Fara? And what was her trouble?'

'A bit of a riddle turns up at this point,' said Felix. 'She told David
that the Carpenter had healed her mind, lifted some intolerable burden.
The good old fellow wouldn't say what the burden was. Perhaps he didn't
know. More likely he knew--but wouldn't tell...My own guess is that the
Carpenter talked her out of her vow.'

'That's probably it,' thought Voldi. 'I hope so!'

'She left a verbal message for you, with David, in case you came while
she was absent. Fara is very anxious for you to return to Arabia. She
intends to stay in Galilee and assist this Jesus, the Carpenter.'

'Assist him? How?'

'David says she is helping to take care of the sick children who are
brought to the Carpenter for healing. He thinks she is paying a debt of
gratitude for the miracle he performed on herself.'

After a long interval, Voldi said, 'That ends it, I suppose. She will
give her life to this Jesus. Well, it might be worse. She never could
have done--the other thing.'

'Oh, it might have been possible,' reflected Felix. 'Fara could have
found employment in the Tetrarch's household easily enough; could have
become a trusted servant; could have killed him. It would have been
suicidal, of course; but--she could have done it.'

'It's a disgrace to Arabia that this fellow is allowed to live!'
muttered Voldi.

'I agree with you,' nodded Felix.

'Perhaps you think it's my job now,' wondered Voldi.

Felix made no reply to that. Rising, he said he would return tomorrow.

'You do think that, don't you?' insisted Voldi, clutching at his
friend's sleeve.

Felix gave an enigmatic grin and dismissed the query with a shake of
his head--which Voldi could interpret any way he liked.

'By the way,' he said, at the door. 'Darik is in fine condition. He
is being exercised every day. When you get out of here, he'll take
you--anywhere!'

 * * * * * *

As Herodias had predicted, the dinner-party was proving to be as dull
as it was lavish and expensive. The Romans, beginning too early with
the birthday celebration by drinking recklessly since mid-afternoon,
were apathetic as they clumsily slumped down on to their couches
round the banquet tables. The magician from Caesarea was half drunk
and impudently vulgar. The acrobats worked furiously for their feeble
applause. As for the harpists, they had not yet appeared. Upon their
arrival, at noon, Salome had taken them in hand, after promising her
stepfather that she--and the musicians--would have an interesting
surprise for him.

There was a deplorable lull in the programme as they waited for the
entertainment to proceed. Senator Cotta yawned prodigiously and
inquired, 'What's next, Your Highness?' Tiro suggested, 'Why doesn't
somebody make a speech?' Mark Varus drawled, 'How about that prophet
you've had penned up, Antipas?'

'That's not a bad idea,' approved Fadilla. 'Bring him in! Let him talk!'

Antipas briefly demurred. He had been drinking more than was his
custom, and was ready to agree with almost any proposal, but this
suggestion, he felt, needed to be deliberated. Turning toward Fadilla,
who sat some little distance away, he said, 'There is an ancient legend
among our people, Tullius, about a prisoner--one Samson--who was
brought up from his dungeon to amuse a party of his captors; and he
pulled the house down over their heads.'

'The Tetrarch is superstitious,' remarked Aurelia Varus.

Antipas frowned, beckoned to a uniformed guard who stood behind him,
and muttered an order. Then, raising his voice as the guard left the
room, he announced, 'We have a prisoner in our jail, a demented fellow
who thinks he is a prophet. We are having him brought in to make a few
remarks. We have no notion what he is likely to say; but let us listen
to him with a show of respect--or he may be unwilling to talk, at all.'

The room grew suddenly quiet as the gaunt, unkempt prisoner was led in,
blinking against the blinding light of the huge stone lamps that lined
the walls. Two tall guards brought him to a stand before the Tetrarch's
table.

'Prophet John,' said Antipas, 'a desire has been expressed to hear you
speak. You may choose your own subject. It may interest you to know
that this is our birthday. Should you wish to take that event as your
text, we will be gratified. Perhaps, if we like your speech, we may set
you free.'

There was a tense hush as they waited for the shaggy hermit to begin.
When he spoke, his deep voice betrayed no agitation or embarrassment,
nor was there any evidence that he resented his role as an object of
ridicule.

'Sire,' he began, 'on Your Majesty's birthday it is fitting to review
Your Majesty's years and deeds. Doubtless this might be accomplished by
any of the great and gifted ones in this presence more eloquently than
by a humble captive; but perhaps no more truthfully.

'Not often, sire, in the history of this unhappy world, has it been
given into the hand of one man to bring about the peace of two great
nations, long at enmity. This task was entrusted to Your Majesty; the
healing of the hatred between Ishmael and Israel.'

The Tetrarch frowned darkly and drummed on the table with his
finger-tips. Hispo whispered to Paula Fronto, 'The man is crazy!'

'It is not for Your Majesty's prisoner,' continued John, 'to conjecture
why our God, in His wisdom, should have called to this important task
a man so vain and selfish as Your Majesty; but His ways are mysterious
and past finding out. Who shall say when again--if ever--it may be one
man's privilege and duty to heal the breach between the Arab and the
Jew!'

'That will do, mad dog!' spluttered Antipas, lurching to his feet. 'Get
you back to your kennel!'

Seizing him, the guards pushed the prisoner roughly toward the door.
Throughout the room indignant murmurs rose, implying an attempt
to reassure the Tetrarch that no attention need be paid to the
hermit's ravings; but the damage had been done, and almost everyone
present--certainly the older ones--knew that the truth had been spoken.
Antipas unwittingly sought David's eyes to learn their view of the
awkward situation, but the old Sadducee soberly stroked his beard and
did not look up.

It was Salome who, quite unaware of what had been going on in the
banquet-hall, now came to the temporary rescue of the stunned and
embarrassed Tetrarch. Trailed by the score of well-rehearsed harpists,
she sailed gracefully into the room, made a deep curtsey to her
stepfather, and, snapping her castanets, pirouetted into a reckless
gambado. She was light as a feather and almost completely unencumbered
by clothing of any sort. Except for a braided chaplet of rubies, an
elaborate design of pearl necklaces, and a fringe of sapphire-strands
across her loins, Salome was nude.

Antipas, suddenly tugged out of his helpless anger by the girl's beauty
and grace, was beside himself with admiration and delight; and when
she had finished, with a flashing smile for him alone, he shouted that
she might ask what she would--and it should be hers! There was much
applause. Salome had saved the day for the Tetrarch, and they were all
glad for him.

Herodias had slipped out into the corridor and was awaiting her
daughter when she emerged from the banquet-hall, beaming over her
plaudits.

'You heard what he said?' queried Salome, still breathing rapidly from
her exertions. 'What shall I ask? A coronet of emeralds?' She had a
better thought. 'I know, I shall ask him for a beautiful pleasure barge
on the lake!'

Herodias scowled.

'No!' she muttered. 'I'll tell you what to ask.' Drawing the girl close
she whispered into her ear. Salome drew back, aghast.

'But--you're mad!' she breathed. 'What pleasure could I have in the
death of that poor fool?'

'This time, my daughter,' stormed Herodias, 'it's not going to be what
you want--but what I want! You've been given enough. And what you
haven't been given, you have stolen. Do now as I command you--or I
shall punish you! I mean that! You say I am mad: well, perhaps I am.
But that will not make your punishment lighter...Go!...Now!'

She was hardly to be recognized as the same girl when she walked slowly
into the room, with uncertain steps and downcast eyes. She stood before
the Tetrarch crestfallen. The place became suddenly quiet.

'Sire,' began Salome huskily, 'I desire, as my gift, the silver
serving-platter that the Empress Julia presented to you.'

'But--of course!' replied Antipas, relieved but bewildered. 'You might
have asked more, my child.'

'Sire--I do ask more.' Salome's voice sank almost to a whisper. 'I
want the head of this John, the prisoner, served to me--on the silver
platter.'

All breathing was suspended. Pale and horrified, Antipas leaned far
back against his cushions, his face contorted.

'But--we--we can't do that!'

'You promised!' declared Salome with sober finality.

Like a tortured animal at bay, Antipas searched the faces about him,
piteously seeking a way out of his dilemma, but finding no sympathy
in the amused eyes of the cynical Romans. After a long moment of
indecision, he beckoned to the Captain of the Guards and mumbled the
revolting order.

Jairus scribbled a hasty note to be passed along to his host. Adiel,
it said, had been taken suddenly ill--and might they be pardoned for
leaving? Without waiting for consent, they made a hurried exit.

Then there ensued a long, painful interval, the silence broken only by
brief and brittle bits of laboured conversation. Herodias had returned
to her place between Manilius and Fadilla. Salome was not in sight.
At length the doors opened. All eyes turned in that direction. The
gruesome gift was carried in and deposited in front of the Tetrarch,
who recoiled at the sight.

Young Flavia Tiro collapsed into the arms of Senator Cotta and was
violently sick. The Senator was wearing a scarlet tunic with a black
spread-eagle embroidered on his left breast. He pushed the sick girl
off him and left the room, savagely damning Mark Varus, who had
chuckled.

Small groups of guests began to file out, reassembling presently on the
couches beside the pool. Now the banquet-hall was empty except for the
Tetrarch and the Sadducee, who was rising to leave. Antipas called to
him.

'Master David,' he croaked unsteadily, 'you are a lawyer. Is it ever
permissible for the Tetrarch to put a man to death?'

'I believe not, Your Highness,' said David. 'I bid you Goodnight.'

 * * * * * *

Without an hour's delay the shocking story fanned out across the
country with incredible swiftness. The palace courtyard had been packed
with servants and soldiers; Jairus' litter-bearers, David's attendants,
and a score of legionaries who had escorted Julian. There were also
the small party of armed guards who had accompanied the magician from
Caesarea, the family of acrobats from Damascus, and the company of
harpists from Jericho. It was a ghastly tale, and they all made the
most of it. A southbound caravan, which had camped for the night near
Capernaum, made off with the news at dawn. Within a week the sordid
scandal had gone north through Perea, had crossed the Jordan in half a
dozen fording places, and was common talk down deep in Judaea. It had
even penetrated the thick walls of the old prison in Caesarea, conveyed
by Felix.

Thousands who had listened apprehensively to the foolhardy hermit's
reckless predictions of an oncoming doom that would blast a wicked
world, toppling greedy temples and gaudy thrones--but had all but
forgotten them, and him--were stirred to sullen anger by the monstrous
crime.

Doubtless the shaggy preacher, who lived in a desert cave and ate
roasted locusts, had been misled: the catastrophe he had so boldly
threatened hadn't come off. But by what right had this pompous ruler
of Galilee murdered his defenceless prisoner for no better reason than
to entertain a handful of pampered Romans? Nobody knew what should or
could be done about it. Pilate, with plenty of troubles on his hands,
had merely shrugged and muttered, 'It's no affair of mine. Let the
Galileans attend to him.'

And so they did, not with violence, which the Tetrarch could easily
have overcome, but with a concerted campaign of inarticulate contempt
for which he had no defensive weapons. A farmer could not be punished
for having his back turned toward the highway when the Tetrarch rode by
on his black stallion, nor could a whole village be tried because every
door was shut and not a soul in sight when their ruler took his daily
exercise.

Early the next morning after the disgraceful birthday banquet, when
the vine-dressers and carpenters arrived for their day's work in the
new vineyard, they learned what had happened; and, refusing to take up
their tools, ominously gathered about the prison where the prophet's
body lay.

The Tetrarch made no move to quell this incipient rebellion. Instead,
he voluntarily ordered the guards to be withdrawn and sent word that if
any of the dead man's friends wished to claim his body they might do so
without hindrance. This unexpected concession was obviously intended
as a peace overture; but the outraged Galileans--by no means the fools
Antipas thought them to be--interpreted this lenience as a sign that
the great man was frightened, if not remorseful.

Jesus, who had just returned to the Capernaum cottage after ten
laborious and exciting weeks of speaking to vast multitudes in Cana,
Ephraim, Bethel, Jericho, and the region round about, was informed of
the tragedy late in the night. Andrew had wakened him with the bad
news. At sunrise, Peter, hurrying in from Bethsaida, drew up a chair
beside Jesus' cot and repeated the story.

'They are burying him this afternoon, Master, in the cemetery at
Bethsaida. The people are aroused. A great crowd will assemble there.
John thinks it would be well for you to speak some words of comfort at
the graveside.'

After a moment's deliberation, Jesus slowly shook his head. That
indignant throng in the Bethsaida burial-ground would be in no mood for
comforting words. Anything he might say to these angry people would
surely be misconstrued. If he deplored the Tetrarch's crime--and how
was the subject to be avoided?--it would amount to a sanction of public
rebellion against their government, in direct contradiction to his
earnest pleas for peaceful submission. Nor was it an occasion when the
multitude would listen, with any patience at all, to calm advice about
loving your enemies and praying for them who despitefully use you and
persecute you. John had indeed paid a high price for his courage in
fearlessly speaking the truth--but--

'But--Master!' broke in Peter impulsively. 'You have told us that the
truth will set men free!'

'Yes,' said Jesus softly, 'and John is free...Come--let us cross the
lake to some quiet place--apart from these resentful people. Tell the
others to meet us at the shore. I have much to say to you.'

Though it was still early in the morning, a great throng, noisily
rebellious, had assembled in the Synagogue plaza. At the sight of
Jesus a shout arose and the crowd surged about him, demanding that he
speak to them, but he proceeded to the lake-shore, where Peter and the
others--who had been quietly summoned--awaited his coming.

Stunned to silence by this unexpected withdrawal of the Carpenter on
whom they had depended for counsel in this critical hour, they watched
the three borrowed dories moving out toward Peter's long-idle fleet,
where their passengers boarded The Sara. The sails were quickly set and
the little ship slowly sidled away from her sister craft.

'I wonder why they took The Sara,' remarked one of the puzzled
onlookers, shading his eyes against the sun.

'They're bound for some shallow cove,' surmised a bystander wearing a
sailor's cap. 'See! They're heading north-east--toward the desert.'

'Let us follow them!' shouted someone. The suggestion met favour.
The crowd moved forward along the shore, unorganized and without
leadership, but bent on finding Jesus.

It was a hard-breathing, shuffling, straggling procession that laboured
through the reeds and weeds and sand for eight long miles. Many of the
more provident ones, knowing what a difficult journey faced them and
aware that no food was to be had in that desolate region, scurried to
their near-by homes and the town's provision stores to stuff their
pockets with smoked fish and wheaten loaves.

Weary, bedraggled, footsore, their sandals ripped and clothing torn
by nettles and briers, five thousand exhausted people found Jesus and
his company at mid-afternoon. There was no shouting now; they were too
utterly spent for shouting, too tired to hate anybody.

The Big Fisherman immediately took command. In his self-confident,
booming voice he directed them to sit as closely together as possible
in semicircular rows facing the dune where the Master and his
companions waited. Not until the last of the stragglers had arrived
did Jesus rise to speak. A hush fell on the expectant multitude as his
gentle voice began its ministry of comfort.

He beheld them, he said, as one great family of brothers and sisters
who, weary and heavy-laden, had come to him for rest. Not strangers
now, but men and women of one blood, all children of their Father in
Heaven; not drawn together by any hot desire for revenge or redress but
related by their mutual compassion...And as the quiet voice continued a
strange miracle was wrought that gave them a heart-warming sensation of
kinship.

By the time his talk had ended, the shadows were lengthening on the
eastern mountains. Released from the spell that had held them silent
and motionless, the crowd straightened its relaxed spine, drew a long
breath, and shifted its posture. What now? Should they go? They were
hungry. On any other occasion, those who had been foresighted enough
to bring their own food would have had no hesitation at all to eat it
in the presence of others as hungry as themselves. But, though many a
man silently inspected his neighbour out of the tail of his eye, nobody
reached in his pocket.

There was a whispered colloquy among the Master's companions. They
called him into conference with them, the expression on their sober
faces indicating that they were troubled. Jesus did not seem worried
over the situation.

'Feed them!' he said.

'With what?' they inquired. 'Even if we had the money to buy that much
food, there is no place out here where it could be had.'

By now the crowd was craning its neck and listening sharply with its
good ear. A small boy, overhearing the discussion, came forward and
handed his small lunch-basket to the Master, who thanked him; and,
holding up the basket, addressed the people.

'We will now have our supper,' he said.

Everybody laughed. It was the first time anyone had laughed today. But
Jesus did not think it was funny. He held up his hand for silence,
bowed his head, and prayed, thanking God for this food and for the kind
heart of the generous child who wanted to share what he had with his
neighbours. Then, breaking up the lad's five little loaves and his two
fishes into tiny morsels, he told his companions to distribute the food
among the people.

With sheepish grins, the men and women who had provided for themselves
tugged their parcels out of their pockets and passed them down the
row...It had turned out to be a day of marvels!

Presently the crowd began to thin out. The afternoon was far advanced
and the northern sky was darkening. The people seemed anxious to be on
their way.

Andrew, turning to Bartholomew, remarked confidentially, 'I think I
know now why the Master brought us over here.'

'You're right, Andy,' said the shrewd old man. 'He knew the crowd would
follow, and he wanted to give those hot-heads a chance to cool off.'

'And think about something else besides their hatred of Antipas,' added
Andrew. 'Well--they were cooled off by the time they got here--no doubt
about that!'

'Yes'--Bartholomew pointed toward the menacing cloud--'and they'll be
cooled off a little more before they reach Capernaum.'

The old man's prediction was correct. It was hard travelling along the
shore-line. And it was the roughest night that anybody could remember
on the lake. The Sara all but capsized.

 * * * * * *

And while all this strange business of feeding five thousand people
out of a little boy's lunch-basket was taking place in the desert, a
mere handful of Bethsaidans quietly buried John's body in the village
cemetery beside his long-departed father and mother. Frail old Rabbi
Elimelech quaveringly intoned an ancient prayer for the peace of the
prophet's soul. Esther, who had returned only yesterday from her
arduous labours in the hungry, thirsty, weary crowds that had followed
Jesus during his eastern journey, tarried with Hannah until the grave
was filled and covered it with garden flowers.

So--there was no revolution in Galilee. But the public's attitude
toward the Tetrarch and his household and his pagan guests, while
lacking in any demonstration of hostility, became quite unendurable.
Without waiting for The Augusta to come for him, a month hence, Antipas
impetuously organized his retinue and made off early one morning for
Caesarea, hoping to be lucky enough to find a vessel presently sailing
for Rome. No spectators lined the streets to gape at the procession as
it passed.

Fortunately for the harried Tetrarch, a dirty and dilapidated old
freight-ship, The Ostia, was--at the moment of his impromptu departure
from Tiberias--discharging the last shovelful of her cargo of Cyprian
copper on one of the new wharves in Caesarea, and would sail home
within a few days.

Among the small group of passengers who had disembarked from The Ostia
was Sergius, the Prefect. Captain Malus, half expecting him to arrive,
was at the wharf and greeted his master with a warm welcome.

'And how is Felix?' the Prefect wanted to know, as they rode together
toward the Praetorium.

'Very well, sir. He will be overjoyed to see you.'

'Lonesome, I dare say,' mused Sergius. 'How has he been spending his
time?'

'He rides, sir,' reported the Captain. 'And he often visits the young
Arabian, Voldi, in prison.'

Sergius scowled.

'I do not like that, Malus. You shouldn't have permitted it! I lock
this fellow up for disobeying orders--and my son visits him. I won't
have it. Suppose all this should reach the ear of the Tetrarch!'

Malus meekly protested that there had been no instructions to forbid
callers at the prison.

'I had no authority, sir, to tell Felix where he might and might not go
in your absence. I can't think that any harm's been done,' he added.
'The Arabian is still in prison...And--by the way--Antipas has just
arrived in town with his large party. They sail for Rome on The Ostia.'

'That dirty old tub?' shouted Sergius. 'The Tetrarch must be in a
hurry.'

'Yes, sir. Antipas made a mistake--all Galilee is buzzing with it, on
the verge of revolt. Apparently it got too hot for him up there.'

The Prefect demanded to know the story, and Malus told him of the
Tetrarch's revolting crime: beheading a harmless fanatic to entertain a
dinner party; having the bloody head brought to the table on a platter.

Sergius grew purple with indignation as the sordid tale unfolded.
Never having had the slightest respect for this pompous Romanized Jew,
the loathsome story disgusted him almost to the point of nausea. The
Prefect had had men beheaded, but not to entertain anybody!

'Gossip has it,' went on Malus, 'that the idea was Herodias'.'

'It would be!' growled Sergius. After smouldering in his anger for
a while, he suddenly blurted out, 'I've had quite enough of that
low-lived Tetrarch! There'll be no pomp and ceremony wasted on him,
this time. I don't intend to see him off. And you needn't make any
ado about protecting him. If he asks to see me, tell him I'm sick
abed--with leprosy!...And, Malus, go down to the prison and turn the
Arabian loose. Take him his horse. Tell him he is free to go wherever
he likes!'

They had drawn up before the Praetorium now, and were stepping out of
the chariot. Felix came running up and warmly embraced his father.

'Greetings, my son!' said Sergius. 'I am glad to see you! Malus tells
me you have been a good boy!'

'Thanks, Malus!' said Felix so fervently that his shrewd old father
grinned.

The three of them fell into step together and moved toward the marble
steps leading to the bronze doors of the Praetorium. Sergius halted
there and regarded his son so soberly that he winced. Good old Malus,
reflected Felix, had let him down, after all.

'My boy,' said the Prefect; and Felix's face fell, for whenever his
parent addressed him as 'My boy,' you wanted to look out. There would
be bad news presently.

'My boy, I assume that in my absence you have continued your friendship
with that rash young Arabian.'

'Yes, father,' admitted Felix contritely. 'I have been seeing
him--almost every day.'

'Quite right!' declared the Prefect. 'Men should be loyal to their
friends, especially when they are in trouble.'

Felix gave a quick intake of breath and blinked a few times before he
gave a tentative smile of relief.

'I have just ordered Captain Malus to set this chap free,' continued
Sergius. 'But Malus is much too busy to attend to it today. Perhaps
you would like to inform your friend that he is at liberty to go his
way, in any direction that suits his fancy.' He brought out a stylus,
scribbled a note to the jailor, and handed it to his son.

'You are very kind, sir,' stammered Felix. 'Thank you, sir!... May I go
now?'

'Why not?' The Prefect and the Captain of the Guard marched up the
steps of the Praetorium. Felix thought he heard a chuckle, but did not
look back as he made off for his horse--and Darik.

At the prison, Voldi was astonished when his half-hysterical friend
hugged the breath out of him. The good news was so incoherently
spluttered that it was some minutes before the amazing tidings were
made clear. They pounded each other on the back and shouted joyously.
Soon the prisoner was out in the sunshine, squinting against the
unaccustomed glare, and affectionately patting Darik on his glossy
shoulder.

'Where to, now?' inquired Felix, suddenly sobering. 'I have been so
happy to see you freed that I've had no time to think about your
leaving. I'm going to miss you, Voldi!'

'And I shall miss you, Felix,' said Voldi, with deep feeling.
'Something tells me I should return to Arabia and report to my King. He
deserves to know what has become of Fara, and the faithful Ione should
be told. And I must see my family.'

'But--you will be coming back, I think,' said Felix.

'Unquestionably,' said Voldi. 'King Zendi will doubtless consent to my
return--on a special mission.'

'Do I know what it is?'

'I'm sure you do.'

'Ticklish job, eh?' reflected Felix.

'It could be that,' agreed Voldi.

They mounted their horses to ride back to The Agrippa for personal
belongings that Voldi had deposited.

'If there is ever anything that I can do--if you should get into
trouble--if you should suddenly need a friend--' Felix was saying.

'There is no one I would rather trust, Felix,' said Voldi. 'But this is
a one-man undertaking--and strictly an Arabian duty...I shall try to be
careful,' he added.

'Careful!' scoffed Felix. 'That sounds funny, coming from you!'



Chapter XVIII


Again the rains came on, earlier than usual this time but gentle and
intermittent, in comforting contrast to the relentless ferocity of last
winter's storms.

Sometimes there would be two or three consecutive days without showers,
though the sky remained obdurately overcast and nobody ventured very
far from home unless his errand was urgent.

Jesus seemed glad to retire to Andrew's cosy cottage in Capernaum and
the old house resumed its service as headquarters for most of the
devoted band that had left everything to follow their Master.

Of the absentees, Judas had returned to Kerioth to look after some
neglected business; Philip had gone home to Cana to visit his aged
mother; Thomas, lacking a lodging-place, had accepted a job carding
flax for Jairus; and Thaddeus, unhappy over the deterioration of the
fishing fleet, was living alone on The Abigail, diligently caulking the
deck-seams with pledgets of pitch and oakum.

The others, unemployed and restless, showed up every day at the cottage
and watched the Carpenter at his work; for the decrepit tools belonging
to Ebenezer, who had passed away in the summer, had been reborrowed
and the improvised shop had all the business it could handle, though
little of it was of any profit. Much discussion was had among them
concerning tentative itineraries for the coming spring: some were for
going back to Hammath or Cana, and some thought they should revisit
Jericho. Jesus was given every encouragement to express an opinion but
he only shook his head and murmured, 'Not now'--an enigmatic response
that sobered them. It seemed clear that he had already determined what
he would do. The fact that he was reluctant to confide caused them much
anxiety. There was no telling what hazards might be in store for them
all...Following Jesus was not easy.

One morning, when a yellowish sun was feebly attempting to shine
through the ragged rents in a grey cloud-bank, John ventured the remark
that a great many idle people might be willing to risk a wetting if it
were announced that the Master would appear in the plaza and speak to
them, but the suggestion was not approved. Noting his young friend's
disappointment, Jesus explained briefly that he didn't care to be
responsible for an epidemic of bad colds.

When, that afternoon, John reported this conversation to Bartholomew,
adding, 'But he could easily cure their colds,' the old man said, 'It
would be much easier to prevent them.' And then he went on to say,
'These miracles of healing, son, make a heavy drain on his strength.
Had you not noticed that?'

'I know,' nodded John. 'That's true. They make him sweat.'

Bartholomew sat thoughtfully stroking his beard for a long moment: then
he said, 'Johnny--sometimes I have felt that every burden he lifts is
taken upon himself. Don't misunderstand me: I do not mean that when
he heals a leper he takes on the man's leprosy: I mean that whenever
he lifts another man's burden he adds the weight of it to his own.
Out Master is carrying a very heavy load...I often think of Esaias'
prophecy that the promised Messiah would be a man of sorrows and
acquainted with grief.'

The enforced inactivity of these inclement days, however irksome for
the others, was especially disquieting to Peter who had been constantly
in the forefront of the summer's excursions and excitements. And how he
had looked forward to this period of rest and recuperation! Now--after
a few days of idleness--he had begun to fret under the weight of little
Bethsaida's apathy; and, much as he enjoyed the company of his Master,
the long afternoons at the cottage in Capernaum, where he sat with
empty hands, were increasingly depressing.

Sometimes during those tumultuous days of sultry Sivan and Tammuz,
the responsibility of directing the great multitudes of desperate
and inconsiderate people had been almost beyond his endurance. Often
when darkness fell and the throng had gone home or into improvised
camps in the neighbouring fields and hills, the Big Fisherman would
fling himself down on the ground, with his shaggy head buried in his
sun-browned arms, too utterly exhausted to eat his supper. Had it not
been for Esther's gentle solicitude and the challenge of her amazing
fortitude, Peter couldn't have borne his burden. And he had been honest
enough to tell her so.

It was a most unusual friendship. A stranger, having made the
acquaintance of both of them, but never having seen them together,
would certainly have thought it incongruous if not impossible that
this huge, blustering, untravelled, uneducated fisherman, and the
sensitive girl who had been brought up in an environment of exceptional
privileges, could have anything in common. By training and temperament
they were leagues apart. Simon Peter had had no use for Esther, nor she
for him, until their boundless devotion and tireless service to Jesus
had made them kin.

They had often talked about this frankly, agreeing that their peculiar
relation was no less than a miracle, Peter declaring his belief that
a close friendship with the Master could provide a bond for all the
people who loved him, no matter how different they might be as to
race, colour, language, disposition or mode of living. If they loved
him, they would love one another. Jesus had said so--and these two
understood what he meant.

Their comradeship, that summer, had invited candid confidences. Esther
had told Peter all about herself, and when they were alone together
he had--at her request--called her Fara. One evening, as they sat for
a little while on either side of the Master, Peter had inadvertently
addressed her as Fara, and Jesus had smiled with pleasure, though he
made no comment.

It was not, however, a selfish friendship. Often a little group
formed about them. Esther was one of the family. She repaired old
Bartholomew's tattered sandal-thongs, bandaged Johnny's thorn-torn
hand, mended Andrew's jacket; even sewed on a button for Judas, whom
she intuitively distrusted and disliked. Thad was always at her
heels, helping with the tents and carrying provisions as devotedly
as a friendly dog. And on their hurried trip back to Galilee, when
Esther lagged a little one afternoon, he wanted her to get into the
high-wheeled cart, already heavily loaded with tents and tackle--and
ride. She had declined the offer; but, walking alongside him, she said
tenderly that if everybody were as kind to everyone else as Thad had
been to her, the world would soon be a beautiful place to live in.

A flush of pleasure, mixed with embarrassment, glowed through the shy
young fellow's tan. After some deliberation he said that he thought the
world was beautiful enough to suit him; and he ventured to give Esther
a worshipful glance.

 * * * * * *

The winter days had dragged drearily. Peter, lodging at home in
Bethsaida, would trudge through the mud every morning to Capernaum and
return in the late afternoon, moody and taciturn. Andrew rarely came
home; but last night he had accompanied his brother, for John and James
had arranged to spend the night with Jesus.

This morning, Hannah's household had assembled about the breakfast
table. It was something of an event, for they were having fried perch,
the first they had had for a long time.

'I heard a meadow-lark a little while ago,' remarked Hannah cheerily,
'and there's a patch of blue in the sky. We may be having some fair
weather soon,' she went on, 'though I'm in no hurry to see it come, for
it means you will all be leaving me again...I do wish you wouldn't go
this time, Esther. It's too hard on you.'

'Well--as for me,' said Peter, splitting open another fish, 'I'll be
glad when it's time to go. I've been penned up too long. And I want
to see the Master get out of that shop. They've been imposing on
him--dreadfully!...Don't you think so, Andy?'

Andy slowly agreed that that was 'one way of looking at it'; and,
turning to Hannah, irrelevantly remarked that he had seen a blue jay
yesterday with a straw in its beak. Esther couldn't help smiling.
Andrew certainly had a gift for changing the subject. But Hannah wasn't
interested in Andy's blue jay.

'How do you mean, they impose on him?' she inquired.

Peter was ready with the particulars. Apparently he had given the
matter considerable thought...Well, first there was all that work on
old Becky's loom.

'It happened just after we had come home,' he went on. 'The people were
all stirred up over the Tetrarch's crime and the hot-heads were keen
on punishing somebody. Antipas had broken the law; and, seeing they
couldn't do anything to him, they decided to make everybody else obey
the laws. This old Rebecca person lived alone in a mere hovel on the
outskirts of Magdala, and was generally disliked. Many people thought
she was a witch--and she looked the part, a very ugly old woman. The
children threw stones at her whenever she appeared on the highway. And
she put a curse on the neighbours' cattle, so that their milk dried up.'

'How ridiculous!' exclaimed Esther. 'You don't believe that!'

'Of course not,' said Peter, 'but what I believe isn't important in
this case. A lot of people did believe it--or said they did...One
charge they had against Becky was that she never attended the
Synagogue. One Sabbath morning they heard her rickety old loom
clacking, and to show how righteous they were a dozen of them stormed
into her hut and smashed the loom to kindling-wood...And the next day
she came to see Jesus about it.'

'Were you there?' wondered Hannah.

'Johnny and I. Becky opened the door and came in, as if she lived
there. She had on a dirty old dress. Her tangled white hair hadn't
been combed and her bare feet were muddy. She came directly to where
Jesus sat and dropped down in a chair beside him, without a word. Her
wrinkled face was twitching and it was plain to see that she was badly
upset. But if the Master saw anything peculiar about her conduct he
gave no sign of it. He turned to her with a friendly smile and said,
'Good morning, daughter. What may I do for you?'

'Her leathery old face softened,' continued Peter, 'and she put her
bony hands over her eyes, and cried. And Jesus said, "What is the
trouble, Rebecca?"'

'And then she did cry, in earnest, I'll wager!' put in Hannah, whose
own eyes were misty.

'Little by little, he got the story out of her,' said Peter; 'and
when she had finished, he said, "You should not have been working on
the Sabbath Day--unless it was necessary to someone's welfare. If a
man's ox should fall into a pit on the Sabbath, he should come to its
rescue...But you say you were weaving a rug--to sell. That was wrong,
as you know. However, your punishment was much too severe...I shall
build you a new loom, Rebecca."'

They listened attentively while Peter went on with his story. The
Master had spent a fortnight making the loom, and when it was finished
and the boys had hauled it to Rebecca's little house, he had gone with
them. Rebecca had cleaned up her room, and herself too. The neighbours
had crowded in. The old woman didn't seem so ugly now. Jesus was her
friend, and her manner suggested that they had better take notice.

'A few days ago,' said Peter, 'old Becky came and presented the Master
with a robe she had woven for him.'

'And that sweet soul will probably wear it,' said Hannah, 'no matter
what it looks like!'

'It looks very well,' said Andrew. 'He likes it.'

'Yes,' nodded Peter. 'He wears it constantly now. I think he's really
proud of it...But--after all--he shouldn't be burdened with hard
labour; not for people like old Becky!'

'I think that is a beautiful story,' said Esther softly. 'He did more
for her than make her a new loom: he made her a new Becky!'

But now Peter had another tale to tell of the way people imposed on
Jesus...Last week, Zebedee's fretful and avaricious Naomi had called at
the cottage to complain that John and James were spending most of their
time at home doing nothing. Their little house was crowded. Poor old
Zebedee hardly had a place to sit down!

'So--what did the Master do but promise Naomi that he would make a new
chair for Zebedee, which he proceeded to do; a beautiful chair, too,
that will make everything else in their house look cheap and shabby.
It took him all week to finish it. Yesterday, Naomi came, we thought,
to thank him, but she had come to complain. The boys, she whimpered,
should have more attention paid to them. They were giving the Master
all of their time, and what were they ever going to get out of it, she
wanted to know!' Peter snorted his disgust.

'Did she say what sort of honours they should have?' queried Hannah.

'She did indeed!' growled Peter. 'She wanted them to have the most
prominent seats in the Master's Kingdom...Yes--and the foolish creature
got that off before the whole roomful of us. Didn't she, Andy? And the
youngsters sat there, red-faced, making no attempt to stop her!'

'Maybe they didn't want to stop her,' reflected Hannah. She glanced at
Andrew, soliciting an opinion.

'I think they were embarrassed,' he said.

'But they made no protest,' Peter went on. 'They just sat there,
looking down their noses and counting their fingers while Naomi
babbled. It was the first time the subject had ever come up, who was
the most important man among us.'

'And what did Jesus say to her?' asked Hannah.

'He said nothing directly to Naomi,' answered Andrew, 'but he did say
something to the rest of us.'

'It must have made Naomi feel very small--and insignificant,' said
Peter. 'Jesus paid no more attention to her than if she hadn't been
there. He looked around the room, and seemed to gather us all into a
confidential little group; and then he said, "Whoever among you would
be great, let him be your servant. And whoever would be the greatest of
all, let him be the servant of all."'

'And then what?' inquired Hannah.

'Well--Naomi left, and nobody could think of anything to say,' replied
Peter. 'John and James looked ashamed, as they should have done. They
were foolish to think that anything they had accomplished should give
them prominence.'

'It was an awkward moment,' contributed Andrew. 'Even my brother'--he
gave Esther a slow wink--'was speechless.'

'Somebody should have changed the subject,' thought Hannah.

'That's what happened,' said Peter. 'The Master did it himself. He
turned toward the Zebedee boys, with a smile, and remarked that it had
been a long time since we had had any fresh fish. And they were quick
enough to take the hint, for they certainly wanted to get out of there.
They got up and left in a hurry. It was the best thing that could have
happened to them--in the circumstances.' Peter seemed about to go on
with the story; but, apparently thinking he had said enough, he tossed
his napkin aside and pushed back his chair.

'There's a little more to it,' drawled Andrew. 'As James and Johnny
went out of the door, Jesus asked Simon if he didn't want to go too.'

Peter gnawed at his bearded underlip, and nodded.

'I suppose that's the reason we have perch for breakfast,' laughed
Hannah.

'It's a good enough reason,' said Andrew. 'There isn't a better
fisherman on the lake than my brother.'

No one seemed inclined to add anything to that. The men rose, pulled
on their caps and heavy jackets, and proceeded to Capernaum. The
carpenter's shop was well filled when they arrived, everyone in
unusually high spirits over the signs of returning spring. The Master
had finished the table he had been making as a gift for Lydia, the
widow of Ebenezer, in appreciation of the tools he had borrowed. It was
evident that he had planned no further work. Perhaps he would tell them
now when and where they would go.

Peter ventured to bring up the subject.

'I suppose we will be leaving presently, Master,' he said, 'now that
fair weather is in sight.'

'Yes,' replied Jesus, 'we will start on the first day of the week, and
attend the Passover in Jerusalem.'

There was a heavy silence, and for a long moment all breathing was
suspended.

'No, Master, no!' entreated Peter. 'Anywhere but Jerusalem! You have
dangerous enemies there. This must not be!'

Jesus gazed steadily and sternly into the Big Fisherman's eyes.

'I must ask you to stand aside, Simon,' he said firmly. 'Your counsel
is not that of a faithful and courageous friend. I am going to
Jerusalem--on business for my Father!'

One by one the dazed Galileans--all but the Big Fisherman, who sat
stunned and disheartened with his shaggy head in his hands--slipped
quietly out of the room and reassembled at the front gate.

Andrew broke the silence.

'Well--he apparently means it. There's no use trying to dissuade him.
He is going to Jerusalem.'

Old Bartholomew cleared his throat and murmured huskily, 'We too will
go--and die with him.'

 * * * * * *

The oncoming winter season, so far, had not amounted to much in
Caesarea; light, frequent showers, but no snow and no cold weather.

It had been Voldi's intention to visit Jerusalem on his way home; but,
once started on the south-bound road, he decided to retrace the course
he had pursued in the company of Mencius.

At Joppa he spent a day touring the docks, surprised at the extensive
operations in progress there, where the Romans were conducting harbour
installations similar to those in Caesarea, though on a less lavish
scale.

That the Empire contemplated an invasion had been plainly evident by
the expensive works in Caesarea; now it appeared that the military
strategists were not putting all their eggs in one basket. Frowsy
old Joppa too was being converted into an available beach-head; and
with such undisguised urgency and earnestness that it seemed the
long-threatened Roman offensive might be imminent. All Palestine,
preoccupied with her internal feuds, pretended not to notice. Perhaps
Jehovah, who had fed the Children of Israel with manna in the
wilderness, would take care of this situation. He'd better, thought
Voldi, or the Promised Land was doomed: yes, and Arabia too, if the
Romans thought it worth the bother of conquest; though they might not
want Arabia, for the Romans had no taste for a nomadic life. They might
be content to levy a high tribute on the Arabs and let them remain
unmolested with their flocks and herds. It was high time, though, that
Arabia considered the danger she faced. Voldi felt that he would have
much to report to his King.

And so on, day after day, with brief, begrudged pauses at night for
rest, he followed the much-travelled highways, through beautiful
Askelon, drowsing in charmingly unseasonable sunshine, to wretched old
Gaza, whose squalor, plagues, stenches, and wickedness no felicity of
climate could forgive; and on and steadily on through ancient Hebron to
parched Engedi and the Dead Sea. He made a half-circle of this dazzling
white brine and turned east again over the blistered crust of the
salt-flats into the Valley of Aisne.

Darik was so tired now that he didn't care who knew it. Instead of
picking up his feet smartly, as was his custom, he was shuffling and
stumbling along like a spiritless pack-ass; but after the Valley of
Aisne had been traversed and the winding road up through the hills
lay before him, the tall black gelding, recognizing his homeland,
renewed his strength. As they gained altitude, snow was encountered
on the northern slopes, and when the shoulder of the high plateau was
reached Voldi was happy to find an endless, undulating blanket of white
that covered the hillsides and valleys as far as he could see in all
directions. This was good! Arabia had the sure promise of a prosperous
spring and summer. There would be fat cattle and sheep. Well-fed camels
would produce strong, sleek foals.

Voldi breathed deeply of the crisp, tonic mountain air, inhaling it
hungrily as if he ate of it. He rose in his stirrups and stirred echoes
in the hilltops with boyish shouts. As never before, he realized how
much Arabia meant to him. And Darik, noisily blowing his nose, tugged
for an easement of the bridle-reins, tossed his head and stretched his
long legs to a lope.

In the late afternoon King Zendi's encampment was sighted and a few
minutes later Voldi dismounted at the main entrance to the extensive
compound, warmly greeted by the amazed sentries. Soon he was surrounded
by a score of excited household servants and hostlers, patting and
stroking the steaming Darik, who slobbered over all of them with
cordial impartiality.

Wrinkled old Kedar now came limping up, elbowing his way through the
pack to Voldi, who affectionately laid a hand on the bent shoulder.

'You have ridden him hard, sir!' growled old Kedar, turning gruff to
hide his emotion.

'It was his own idea, Kedar,' laughed Voldi. 'Once he was on a familiar
road, there was no holding him in...But tell me: how are Their
Majesties?'

'They are well, sir, but very sad today. You have come home none too
soon. Councillor Mishma is ill; very low. The King and Queen are over
there now. You must go--without a moment's delay. I'll get you a fresh
horse.'

Ione, pale, thin, and nervous, crept timidly into the circle. Voldi
threw his arm around her and drew her closely to him. He bent and
whispered into her ear.

'Fara is safe and well, Ione, and sends her best love to you. I shall
tell you everything, when I return. I must go now--to my grandfather.'

In a few minutes he had dashed away to Mishma's encampment, five miles
distant. The commodious paddock was filled with beautiful horses, some
of which Voldi recognized. His unannounced entrance into the Chief
Councillor's spacious bedchamber was greeted with gasps of surprise
and relief by the sober-faced group of old retainers clustered within
the doorway. The tall, dignified members of the King's Council stood
in statuesque silence with Zendi in the midst of them, a distinguished
figure, his hair prematurely greying. It was evident, by the posture
and demeanour of all present, that they were waiting for the end to
come.

Kitra gave a little cry of gladness in her grief and rushed forward to
embrace her son. Taking him by the hand she led him to the bedside;
and, raising her voice, called:

'See, father! Here is Voldi!'

The frail old Titan laboriously opened his eyes and gave a wan smile.
Voldi dropped to his knees and slipped his arm tenderly around the
thin, deep-lined neck. Mishma was trying to speak. With a great effort
he managed to ask huskily:

'Did you find her?'

Voldi's eyes were blind with tears. Unable to speak, he nodded.

'But--she could not do it,' whispered Mishma, between laboured breaths;
and when Voldi had shaken his head, the old man drew a satisfied sigh,
and murmured, 'That is good.'

There was a long interval of silence, after which the fading voice
asked, 'Is she with you?'

'No, sire,' said Voldi regretfully.

'But--you will bring her home--to Arabia,' entreated Mishma.

'I hope to, sire, when I have completed the work she tried to do--for
our country.'

Old Mishma slowly nodded his approval and lapsed into sleep. Zendi had
drawn closer, during this difficult conversation. Voldi, suddenly aware
of the King's nearness, got to his feet--and saluted.

Bending over the bed, and raising his voice so that it startled the
silent watchers, Zendi called:

'Mishma! Open your eyes, Mishma! Harken! Have you a final request to
make of your King? Speak, Mishma!'

The dying statesman tugged himself back to partial consciousness,
clumsily moistened his dry lips, and whispered: 'Voldi.'

The weary old head slowly sank. There was an ineffectual reaching of
the lips for one more breath. Mishma was dead.

Turning about to face the company, Zendi drew himself up to his full
height, and announced: 'I hereby appoint Voldi to fill the vacancy in
the King's Council!'



Chapter XIX


Captain Fulvius, never given to rash predictions, had remarked at
sunset to his most important passenger that if this brisk breeze
continued through the night The Vestris might see Gaza at dawn.

'Good!' exclaimed the Proconsul. 'I shall go down and tell poor old
Brutus.'

'Better take a handful of sugar along,' advised the Captain. 'Your poor
old Brutus is getting mean. Yesterday, when I went down for a friendly
word with the horses, he laid his ears back and bared his teeth. I'm
afraid he is at the end of his patience.'

'I don't blame him,' grumbled Mencius. 'So am I.'

It had been seven weeks since the fleet had sailed from Brindisi, bound
for Cyprus, where a cargo of copper awaited transport to the new docks
at Joppa. The winter had been so mild that Fulvius, hoping to make
time, had risked a lighter ballast than the season justified; and, once
they had rounded the peninsula and headed east, everybody was sick--and
disgruntled, too, for the voyage was to be long and, in the opinion of
the crew, inexplicably roundabout.

Their natural course, if they had business in old Gaza, would have
taken their seven cargo-ships with the copper directly to Joppa, but
The Vestris was under orders to sail first to Gaza, where the Proconsul
had an important errand at the Roman Fort of Minoa, a few miles inland.
The rest of the fleet would proceed to Joppa and stand by until
rejoined by the flagship.

The capable Lieutenant Pincus, with a skeleton crew of experienced men,
would also disembark at Gaza and engage a camel-caravan for the tedious
trip to the salt-fields at Engedi on the Dead Sea.

Then The Vestris, having paid her brief call at Gaza, would sail to
Joppa, join the fleet, dump the copper, and double back to Gaza to pick
up Pincus and his salt. And nobody knew how long they might have to
wait for the return of that plodding caravan. It was doubtful whether
they would be back in Rome before mid-summer.

Mencius had paced the deck and counted the days like a jailbird. He had
been required to make these long voyages to Palestinian ports so often
that they had lost all interest for him. Of course he always enjoyed a
shore-leave at Caesarea, where he found many long-time friends at the
luxurious Agrippa; but he wasn't going to Caesarea this time; only as
far as Joppa, which the Empire might make something of, eventually,
though the mouldy old city offered few attractions at present.

There was only one thing about this whole trip that had stirred the
Proconsul's interest. He had been commissioned to deliver a letter to
the young Legate recently appointed--for his sins--to command the Fort
at Minoa. Mencius had not been informed about the contents of this
letter, and his curiosity had nearly devoured him. All he knew about it
was that the gaudily gilded scroll contained a message of considerable
significance, for it had been written by the Emperor! What the
half-crazy and wholly unpredictable old Tiberius might have to say to
the incorrigible son of Senator Gallio was anybody's guess. The wayward
young Legate, according to a freely circulated rumour, had been sent to
this ill-conditioned outpost for publicly insulting the Regent, Prince
Gaius. And now the Emperor was sending the impudent Marcellus a letter!

Mencius, feeling that he had to talk this over with somebody, had
discussed the probabilities with his canny old friend Fulvius.

'It's unlikely,' he had remarked, 'that these royal tidings are
felicitous. Tiberius wouldn't put himself to much trouble to make
anybody happy; certainly not the roistering son of Gallio, who is ever
denouncing the Government for its extravagances.'

'I'm not so sure about that,' Fulvius had replied. 'As for Senator
Gallio's demand for economy, the Emperor himself is not a wastrel; and
as for the youngster's ridicule of the Prince, the old man hates Gaius.'

'Granted--all that! But can you picture Tiberius writing a pleasant
letter?'

'No, I really can't,' agreed Fulvius, 'and if I were you I should just
hand it to the boy--and run.'

'Maybe the letter is a commission for Marcellus to some better
command,' speculated Mencius.

'Oh, it might be anything!' rumbled Fulvius. 'The old codger's crazy as
a beetle! For all you know, it's a notification to young Gallio that
you have been appointed his successor at Minoa!'

'That's a pleasant thought!' growled Mencius.

They had left it at that. It wouldn't be long now before they might
know the answer to the riddle. Tomorrow they would warp up against the
dock at Gaza.

The morning was bright and clear. The long wharf swarmed with the usual
pack of filthy donkey-boys and villainous camel-drivers. Pincus and his
men were the first to leave the ship, and were promptly swallowed up
in the noisy throng of competitive caravan-owners. More deliberately,
the Proconsul and the Captain came ashore and mounted their stiff and
clumsy horses. It was but a short ride to the fort, and they decided to
dispose of their errand without delay.

'Something seems to have happened here,' remarked Mencius, as the heavy
gates swung open to receive them. 'Marcellus has taught these lazy
louts to act like soldiers!'

'Perhaps the Emperor has heard of it,' thought Fulvius, 'and wants
the Legate to come back and renovate Rome. She could do with a bit of
grooming.'

A bright young centurion appeared, smartly saluted, and asked if he
could be of service. The Proconsul introduced himself and Fulvius. They
bore a letter for the Legate.

'Our Legate Marcellus, sir, left here yesterday with a company of
cavalry to attend the Jewish Passover at Jerusalem.'

'That's odd,' muttered Mencius. 'Since when has Minoa turned Jewish?'

The centurion risked a dry grin.

'It is an annual custom, sir. All our Palestinian forts send
deputations to the Holy City during the Week of the Passover, to keep
the peace.'

'And rattle our armour,' assisted the Proconsul. 'I presume your Legate
is to be found through the Procurator's Insula?'

'Yes, sir.'

'We will have to proceed to Jerusalem, then, and deliver our message.
It is urgent.'

Mencius was turning Brutus about toward the gate when the centurion
invited them to tarry for such hospitality as the fort could offer,
but the Proconsul declined. They must be on their way. At the gate
he turned to say, 'This is a different place from the last time I
saw it, centurion. Apparently your new Legate believes in brooms and
discipline.'

'He does indeed, sir!'

'Tough taskmaster, eh?'

'He keeps the Legion on its toes, sir; but we like it better that way.
The Legate is tough--but he's fair.'

'Fine!' approved Mencius. 'He must be enjoying his command at Minoa.'

'Yes, sir. Probably not, sir. I don't see how he could, sir. Yes, sir!
Thank you, sir!'

The heavy gates closed behind them, and they laughed all the way up the
road.

'The fellow has humour, sir,' chuckled Fulvius, with a fair imitation
of the centurion's stiff drollery. 'He should go far, sir.'

'Yes, sir,' snapped Mencius. 'Probably not, sir.'

In an hour, the crew of The Vestris, unhappy over the brief shore-leave
but with too much sense to protest, gave the old ship all the canvas
she could carry and sailed for Joppa.

'Want to ride with me--to Jerusalem?' asked Mencius.

'Why not, sir?' said Fulvius.

 * * * * * *

Esther had not been forbidden nor had she been invited to accompany the
Master and his twelve close companions on their journey to Jerusalem.

No plans had been made for it and no advance announcement had been
made of it. The portentous decision had come as a stunning surprise.
Jesus, in his prescient wisdom, made no mistakes. How often they had
all agreed that this was true! How often they had had occasion to chide
themselves for questioning his actions! But this time, they all felt,
he was headed--quite unnecessarily--for disaster.

Peter, deeply depressed, heart-sick with foreboding, had brought the
distressing news to the supper table in Bethsaida on a Sabbath evening.
They were leaving early in the morning, he said, travelling fast and
with light equipment.

'Dear old Bartholomew!' murmured Esther. 'What will become of him?'

'He'll probably die of a heart attack,' said Peter, 'but he intends to
come along.'

'And you think I'd better not go?' queried Esther.

'There will be nothing for you to do,' said Peter. 'No meetings along
the way, no healings; just a steady march to the city--and into who
knows how much trouble.'

For an hour they discussed the probabilities. Yes, Peter agreed, there
would be hundreds, perhaps thousands of pilgrims in the city who had
heard Jesus speak, scores and scores who had received marvellous
benefits at his hands; but these friends of the Master were not
organized; they could not be expected to defend him.

'They're country people, mostly,' Peter went on, 'people like Andy and
me, and Johnny and James and Thad, people who lose their confidence and
courage in the confusions of a great city.'

'But--surely,' exclaimed Esther, 'no one would dare to harm the Master
when he is innocent of any wrong-doing!'

With a despairing sigh, the Big Fisherman tried to explain the dangers
that threatened them. Jerusalem was the stronghold of all the mutually
intolerant religious sects and political parties. They were ever on the
alert to silence new voices that spoke the restlessness of the people.

Again and again, remembered Peter, deputations from Jerusalem had
appeared in the Master's audiences asking questions intended to betray
him as a seditionist. The very fact that the populace hung on his words
and found comfort in them was an indictment of his loyalty to the
ancient institutions of Jewry.

On the occasions of the Passover, these stubborn men were particularly
attentive to any indication of a movement among the people in
defence of their common rights. Indeed, it was said that during
Passover Week when the city swarmed with home-coming Jews from the
provinces--habitually ignored and neglected by all officials save only
the tax-collector--the Roman patrols were under orders to disperse even
the little groups that gathered on the street to hear a blind beggar
sing!...Now--Jesus would appear in Jerusalem. There would be hundreds,
perhaps thousands of people in the city who would crowd about him and
entreat him to speak to them; and undoubtedly he would do so...'Oh, why
does he put himself in this danger?'

Soon after supper, Peter had retired to his room, and when the women
awoke in the morning he had already gone. They ate their simple
breakfast in moody silence; and, after the household chores had been
disposed of, Esther slipped out of the house and walked briskly up the
hill to talk with David the Sadducee.

By some means the old lawyer had already learned of Jesus' decision to
attend the Passover in Jerusalem. He greeted Esther soberly, and his
replies to her anxious queries were anything but reassuring. David, of
the ancient House of Zadok, knew more than the Big Fisherman about the
conditions to be faced--by any popular prophet who might appear on the
streets of the Holy City at the time of the Passover.

'Yes, my dear,' said David, 'our friend Simon has good reasons to be
apprehensive. The most influential men in Jerusalem--the bankers, the
lawyers, the rich merchants--cannot take the risk of a scramble on the
part of the people. This Carpenter has talked quite freely, to great
multitudes, about fair dealing, good measure, just weights and balances
in the market-place. He has had much to say about exorbitant rents and
usurious rates of interest. He has told stories of poor men who died of
starvation on rich men's doorsteps.'

'That is true, sire,' put in Esther, 'but he has been equally critical
of the greed and ill-will among the poor themselves. He has not tried
to set the poor against the rich. He only wants everyone to be kind and
charitable to everyone else.'

'Yes, yes, dear child, but the thing that Jerusalem will remember best
is his bold denunciation of fraud and wickedness in high places. Even
the Temple has not escaped his criticism!'

At that, Esther wanted to know how much influence the Temple was
able to exercise, seeing the city was governed by the Romans. David
proceeded to explain. It was a long and involved story.

Yes, he said, the Romans governed all Palestine and their will was
supreme. In any clash with the Sanhedrin, the Insula would have the
last word; that was true theoretically.

'But the Romans,' he went on, 'want no clash with Jewry now. They are
deliberately preparing for the day when they will take full possession
of this country, looting it and enslaving it. They could do it tomorrow
if their armies were not engaged in the recovery of their losses in
Gaul. When they are ready, they will strike. Until then, they want no
friction. Pontius Pilate makes a gaudy show of authority, but he is
under strict instructions to keep the peace of Jerusalem, whatever the
cost to his personal pride. When Caiaphas, the High Priest, speaks,
Pilate listens!'

David seemed to be talking to himself now. After a long, silent
interval, he mumbled, 'Pilate scowls and squirms--but he listens. When
there's any sign of unrest among the people, the merchants confer
with the bankers and the bankers confer with the Sanhedrin, and the
Sanhedrin confers with the Procurator.'

Esther had many questions she wanted to ask, but hesitated to interrupt
the wise old man's monologue. Turning about to face her he asked, 'Did
they tell you about Rabbi Ben-Sholem of Capernaum?' Without waiting
for her response, David continued. 'It seems that some months ago a
great crowd was waiting in the plaza for the Carpenter to speak. The
Rabbi, beside himself with indignation, appeared on the porch of the
Synagogue to denounce the throng, and he was reviled and ridiculed.
His Regents failed to support him, and he has retired to Jerusalem.
Ben-Sholem and the old High Priest were schoolmates...You may draw your
own conclusions, Esther. The Rabbi is not a man to forget or forgive an
affront to his dignity.'

'But that unhappy affair wasn't the Master's fault, sire!' declared
Esther. 'He rebuked the crowd for its discourtesy.'

'Yes--I know, dear child,' said David, 'but that didn't restore
Ben-Sholem's wounded pride. He wanted no favours from the Carpenter.'

The old lawyer sighed deeply and drew his robe about him. It was chilly
in the shade of the trees. Esther rose and they strolled toward the
gates.

'I feel that I should go to Jerusalem,' she said.

'I shouldn't if I were you,' advised David. 'You have had enough
trouble--and there is nothing that you can do.' He bade her good-day
and slowly retraced his steps through the grove.

As Esther neared Hannah's house, she paused to note the little
companies of pilgrims on the highway, setting forth on their annual
journey to the Holy City. In each family group one of the younger men
pushed a cart containing tents and provisions. Some of the larger carts
were drawn by donkeys. The people moved along slowly, for it was a long
trip on foot and they must conserve their strength.

Hannah was cutting an armful of roses. She wept inconsolably when
Esther said she had resolved to go to Jerusalem. Silently they packed a
rucksack with the necessities of the journey; and that afternoon they
parted tearfully at the shady corner where the quiet street met the
broad highway.

'Something tells me,' sobbed Hannah, 'that I shall never see you again!
Never!'

Esther was too moved to make a reply. She kissed Hannah tenderly, and
joined the plodding pilgrims. A friendly young woman told her it was a
beautiful day, and she agreed; but her heart was heavy.

'Are you alone?' asked her new friend.

'Yes,' said Esther. It was true. She had never felt more alone in her
life.

 * * * * * *

It had been Peter's hope rather than his belief, as they set forth from
Capernaum in the early morning of the first day of Nisan, that they
might enter Jerusalem unobtrusively.

The city would be crowded with thousands of pilgrims, all of them
scrambling desperately for a lodging-house within the walls or a
tent-site in the suburbs. They might be so preoccupied with their own
affairs that the arrival of Jesus would attract little attention. After
the first half-hour on the highway, Peter wondered why he had tried
to comfort himself with such a foolish delusion. He might have known
better.

Everybody on the road--and they were all bound for the same
destination--instantly recognized the Master, hailing him with joyous
shouts, crowding about him, begging him to speak to them. It was not
long before he was at the head of a procession that increased by the
hour, by the mile.

James, stepping to the edge of the highway, looked backward and
returned to his place between his brother and Andrew, and said,
'Remember the day in Bethsaida when he suddenly disappeared from the
people who followed him? I wish he would do that now!'

But he didn't disappear, and the pilgrimage grew. Every side road that
met the highway contributed. At night, when Jesus stopped, they all
stopped, and the heavy-laden carts and the older people caught up.
In the morning, when he resumed the journey, they were all ready to
follow. Dozens of the well-to-do, who could afford tall camels, paid
their respects and preceded the pedestrian parade. They would arrive
many hours earlier than Jesus, and would have an amazing story to tell,
no doubt.

When the Master's company broke camp at Ramah, on the morning of the
third day, Peter--who hadn't wanted a crowd along--began to take pride
in this astounding display of public interest...Could it be possible,
he exclaimed to Philip, that Jesus intended to enter Jerusalem in
triumph?

'From the size and temper of this crowd, he could do it!' said Philip.

'Perhaps that has been his plan--from the first!' said Peter in an awed
voice. 'Do you suppose he means to restore the Kingdom to Israel?'

'I don't think he wants to be the King of Israel,' put in Andrew.

'Why not?' demanded Judas sharply. 'Has it not been foretold by the
prophets? Is not the Kingdom to be restored to Israel? Who else has the
power to do it?'

Throughout the Sabbath Day they remained quietly in camp at
Bethphage, with only three miles further to go on the morrow, the
day the Romans called 'Sunday.' The village was suffocated with the
enormous concentration of excited pilgrims. All manner of rumours and
conjectures were in circulation through the camps. It was generally
believed that Jesus of Nazareth was about to proclaim himself the King
of the Jews, the Messiah, the Restorer of Israel!

Some of the older and more pious men remembered that an ancient prophet
had predicted such an event. The King would ride into the city on an
ass. A group of zealots set forth to find one. By good fortune they
discovered a young ass, a beautiful white beast, tied at the gate
of a paddock. He bore no saddle-scars or marks of harness. That was
good; for the old men had said it should be an ass that had never been
ridden. They besought the owner to lend them the beast, and told him
why. Jesus, the wonder-worker of Galilee, would ride into the city as
Israel's King! The man laughed coarsely.

'You may have him--and welcome!' he said. 'And I'll go along with you.
This is something I want to see! Jasper has never been broken to ride.'

'Good!' they exclaimed. 'You say no one has ever tried to ride him
before?'

'Oh yes, indeed!' guffawed the owner. 'It's just that Jasper doesn't
like the idea. You'll see!...No--I don't want any money for the use of
him. I just want to go along!'

Next morning, shortly after dawn, the great multitude swarmed about
the house where Jesus was stopping. It was a noisy, half-hysterical
crowd whose leaders shouted, 'Hail to the King! Hail to the King!' The
turbulent throng took up the chant!

Peter was experienced in handling great masses of people, but this
demonstration was already quite out of anyone's control. The little
band stood close about the Master and tried to protect him from the
fanatical pilgrims. A small company of men pushed through the jostling
pack leading a shaggy white ass. Jesus mounted and the frantic
procession moved forward with his close friends walking on either side
of him, awed and anxious--but ecstatic.

They had left Bethphage now and were entering Bethany, the richest
of the city's suburbs. The street was beautified with stately palms,
which the advance contingents of the crowd ruthlessly pillaged of their
branches, carpeting the highway for the King.

Jerusalem's towers and domes were plainly visible now across the deep
valley that marked the course of the shallow Kedron. A huge multitude
of pilgrims, lodged in the city, had been shouted into action by
couriers from the main body of celebrants; and here they came, hundreds
of them, racing up the long slope of the Mount of Olives. At the brow
of the hill the procession halted, and gradually the triumphal shouts
subsided. A strange silence fell upon them. The King was about to make
an announcement. This was the moment for which they had been waiting!

For a long while he sat in a posture of dejection, gazing down upon
the ancient stronghold of his people. Then the transfixed thousands
who stood silently waiting witnessed an incredible sight. The King was
in tears. He extended both arms in an embracing gesture, and cried, 'O
Jerusalem! Jerusalem! How often would I have gathered you--as a hen
gathers her chickens under her wings--but you would not!'

For a moment the people were stunned and unbelieving. The Nazarene
had thrown away a Kingdom! The crowd began to disintegrate. Everyone
was scurrying down the hill. The pilgrims had lost their King, but
they still had Jerusalem. The man who owned Jasper came and led him
away. Jesus' companions were speechless. Peter gnawed his underlip.
Andrew looked sober. John and James consulted each other's clouded eyes
and shook their heads. Philip's face was pale. Old Bartholomew had
edged to the side of the street and was sitting on the curb, mopping
his forehead. Thad was standing beside him, holding the old man's
pack...Judas had gone on down the hill.

 * * * * * *

The little company, with Jesus in the midst of them, proceeded slowly
toward the city. Straggling groups of pilgrims overtook and passed
them, staring into the Master's face with various expressions of
sympathy, entreaty, disappointment and reproach. Many were in tears.

Little was said, for there was little to say, as they trudged along,
each man busy with his own thoughts. Although it was dismayingly
certain now that the spontaneous public clamour to recognize Jesus as
the promised Messiah had been silenced beyond any possibility of its
renewal, the disciples--albeit distressed over the whole affair--were
breathing easier than yesterday. Then they had feared that a great
crowd of Jesus' admirers, surging about him in the streets of
Jerusalem, would evoke the attention of the patrols, and the Master
would be arrested--and punished as a disturber of the peace.

As it had turned out, Jesus had dealt with that situation before it
had become acute. He was safer now than he might have been if this
demonstration had not occurred. It was unlikely, they thought, that
the authorities would take action against a movement which the Master
himself had dissolved.

When they came to the East Gate and were about to enter the city, Jesus
turned to say that they would go at once to the Temple. Peter smiled
his gratification. Surely the authorities could find no fault with
that. Had Jesus decided to ignore the Temple it might have aroused
criticism. But, like any other pious pilgrim, he would pay his respects
to the hallowed shrine of Jewry. The moody silence that had gripped
them was eased somewhat and they conversed in voices that tried to
sound casual. 'There's the Pool of Siloam, Johnny,' remarked James.
'That's where Nehemiah began the rebuilding of the wall.' 'See--there's
Herod's Tower,' said Andrew. 'Looks new,' observed Philip, 'compared to
the rest of the buildings.'

The Temple was having a busy day. Everybody had brought a sacrificial
offering, each according to his means. The beautiful court of the
Temple, lined and walled with exquisite designs in mosaic, was crammed
with the gifts of pilgrims: fat calves and lambs and large slatted pens
full of doves. The air was heavy with animal stench and raucous with
the bellowings of the cattle and the bleating of the sheep; and over
all this racket shrilled the strident voices of the money-changers who
were there to serve the donors. For very frequently a lamb was found to
be blemished, and the astonished pilgrim, who had thought his offering
was entirely sound, would be told that they could provide him with an
unblemished lamb in exchange for a small cash difference. The pilgrim
would glumly produce the money; but in many cases it was coinage of the
provinces and countries even more remote. He had to present himself
at the desks of the exchangers, who could ill afford to conduct this
service free of charge. It was a sordid scene, especially to anyone
from the open country, unused to such haggling within consecrated
walls. Even if it had been entirely honest, which it wasn't, this was
not the place for it!

The Master's indignation suddenly flared. Above the babel of voices and
bellows, he shouted, 'My Father's House is a place of worship! You have
made it a place of merchandise!'

Seizing a drover's whip, he began to drive the animals out of the
Temple Court. They stampeded toward the street, the crowd scurrying to
give them room. The cages of the doves were thrown open and the birds
were soon all over the building. Then the unscrupulous exchangers came
in for their share of the rebuke. Jesus charged on them, upsetting
their tables and money-tills.

The grim-faced companions of the Master retreated to the outer wall,
astounded by his action. 'This,' muttered Peter, 'will settle it! They
will never forgive him!'

Nor did they.

 * * * * * *

Esther's journey to Jerusalem was much more pleasant than she had
had any right to expect. After her sad leave-taking of Hannah, whose
intuition informed her--and quite correctly, too--that they would never
meet again, she immediately realized her good fortune in falling in
with this friendly party from Capernaum.

There were a dozen of them, all related, and they seemed eager to
welcome her into their company. The pretty girl Myra, instantly
divining that the stranger was facing the trip unhappily, had been
quick to confide that she herself hadn't wanted to come along because
all the others were so much older 'and so tiresomely pious.' And now
that she had found a friend of her own age she was going to have a good
time, after all.

This warm-hearted proffer of comradeship was irresistible, and Esther
surprised herself by the promptness with which she accepted it. The
peculiar circumstances which had surrounded her--and almost suffocated
her--ever since her early childhood had permitted but few youthful
acquaintances. Since leaving Arabia she had had no girl friends at all.
Myra was charming.

Having nothing to conceal, the girl from Capernaum opened the way for
mutual confidences by chatting freely about her family. Wizened and
wiry Grandfather Asher, with the patriarchal beard, no teeth and two
canes, was, by right of seniority, the leader and mentor of the party.
Myra's father, Gideon, lean, sober, and untalkative, walked beside the
old man. Her mother, with a timid smile, followed with the other older
women.

'My grandfather,' she said, 'is a great one for religion. He thinks of
nothing but the Synagogue--and the Temple at the Holy City. He will be
talking to you presently, and you'd better show him you're interested,
or he'll be annoyed.'

They agreed that old people were funny and should be humoured. With her
family accounted for, Myra talked about herself, her friends, her harp,
her weaving, her sheep-dog, and--demurely, with lowered voice--about
handsome young Joel, Jairus' chief vintner, adding in a whisper that
her parents, and particularly her grandfather, did not approve of him.

'But you do, I think,' said Esther, which brought a pink flush to the
girl's cheeks.

'Now let's talk about you, Esther,' she said.

This wasn't going to be so easy as it had been for Myra. Esther was
an orphan, vaguely related to a family in Bethsaida with whom she had
been living recently; but she was so indefinite about her origin that
she soon began to seem somewhat illegitimate. Myra came to her rescue
by asking if she lived with the woman who had accompanied her to the
highway.

'Yes,' replied Esther. 'Her name is Hannah.'

'There was a Bethsaidan woman named Hannah who was supposed to have
been healed by that Carpenter when she was at death's door,' said Myra
in a tone of incredulity.

Esther nodded. 'That was my Hannah,' she said. 'And it was a miracle. I
was there. I saw it.'

Myra laid her hand lightly on Esther's arm, and murmured, 'Don't let my
grandfather hear you say that. He gets very angry. That's what he has
against Joel.'

They gradually improved their pace, putting a little distance between
themselves and the others. Myra wanted to pursue their talk about the
Carpenter.

'I never heard him speak; never saw him,' she went on. 'I wasn't
allowed to. But I don't like him because he has come between me and
Joel.'

'Joel believes in him, then,' said Esther.

'He not only believes in him,' said Myra. 'He has left his job, for
days on end, to follow him about! He was gone so often that Jairus
discharged him. And my grandfather was glad of it and said it served
him right...And then, when it was told that the Carpenter had cured the
sickness of little Sharon, Jairus' child, Joel was taken back and his
wages were raised. We all thought my grandfather would have a fit.'

'Did your grandfather ever see Jesus?' Esther inquired.

'Not he!' rasped Myra. 'Grandfather's got it into his head that this
Jesus person is down on the Synagogue, and encourages people to break
the Sabbath, and consorts with publicans and sinners. You should hear
him!...I hate religion,' she added angrily. 'Any kind of religion!'

'I don't believe you would hate Jesus, if you knew him,' said Esther
quietly.

'Well--I'll never know him,' snapped Myra. 'My family will see to
that...Come--let us talk about something pleasant.'

So they talked about Joel.

That night they camped at Hammath. The next morning they passed through
Cana. Grandfather Asher, learning that this was Esther's first trip
to Jerusalem, took her in hand and pointed out memorable landmarks.
She listened attentively, but asked no questions that might betray her
ignorance of Jewish history. As they passed through Samaria, the old
man gathered his flock around Jacob's Well and told them all about it.
It was the first time Esther had ever heard of the hallowed well--or of
Jacob; but she managed to show a becoming reverence. Indeed, she was
much more deeply affected by the story than Myra, who patted a yawn and
gazed at an excited dog that had chased a cat up a tree.

That afternoon, Asher hobbled forward, grasped Esther's arm and pointed
to a distant mountain-peak.

'It was up there,' he declaimed impressively, 'that the great prophet
Elijah lived! Right up there where you see that notch!'

'Indeed!' murmured Esther.

The old man fell back to inform the others and Myra moved in close
beside her friend.

'Tell me more about this wonderful man Elijah,' said Esther.

'He lived centuries ago,' drawled Myra, 'lived alone, and important
people came to him for advice. He was very poor. Once he was so hard up
that the ravens brought food to him.'

'How did they know he was hungry?' inquired Esther.

Myra chuckled, a bit irreverently.

'Because he ate what they thought was good, I suppose. A man would have
to be pretty hungry to enjoy a raven's choice of victuals.'

'You're incorrigible, Myra!' laughed Esther. 'It's a good thing your
grandfather didn't hear you say that.'

'Yes,' agreed Myra. 'He wouldn't like it. He dotes on all these old
miracle-yarns, handed down from long ago...And Joel can talk of little
else than the miracles of his wonderful Carpenter...Me?--I don't
believe in any of it! I hate the whole business of miracles!'

At noon on the day the Romans called 'Monday' they entered the Holy
City through the ancient Damascus Gate and proceeded directly to the
Temple, as was the custom of pilgrims to the Passover. Having paid
their respects there, the party from Capernaum would go, as usual, to
the home of wealthy Uncle Boaz in Bethany. Myra, with the full approval
of the family, had invited Esther to be their guest. That would be
quite agreeable, they all said, to their hospitable Uncle Boaz.

Jerusalem was very old and showed many battle-scars. The thoroughfare
they travelled was a bewildering hodge-podge of dilapidated antiquities
built of sun-baked brick, dwarfed by magnificent modern structures in
marble. The cobbled street was crowded with all manner of traffic, on
foot and on wheels. Camel-caravans and heavily laden donkey-trains
pushed the pedestrians to the narrow sidewalks. Beggars whined and
thrust out their basins. 'Make way there!' barked the mounted patrols
in their gaudy Roman uniforms as they cleared a corridor for some
haughty procession of black robes. It was very confusing to people from
the country.

Myra, who had been here several times before and was able to identify
the most prominent buildings, walked arm-in-arm with Esther...There
was the Procurator's Insula, a breath-taking achievement in Roman
architecture...A little farther on, Myra pointed out the palace of the
High Priest, Caiaphas, a massive old weather-beaten pile of marble.
It was grim as a fort. The shutters at the high windows were tightly
closed. A dozen sentries strutted slowly to and fro on the broad
terrace.

'Not very homelike,' commented Esther, for something to say.

'It has quite an interesting history,' said Myra. 'It was formerly the
palace of King Herod the Great.'

Esther tugged them to a stop for a longer look, wondering what Myra
might say if she told her that this was her birthplace.

At length they sighted the Temple. It was the most beautiful building
that Esther had ever seen. She stood fascinated, slowly shaking her
head in wonderment. Their further progress was at a snail's pace, for
the street was packed to suffocation. After many long delays they
reached the exquisitely sculptured entrance to the Temple Court. Old
Asher had found an acquaintance of his own years with whom he was
exchanging affectionate hugs and excited greetings. Presently the other
old man was whispering some important news into Asher's ear. His eyes
widened as he listened. He nodded vigorously. His friend moved on.

It was easily to be seen that old Asher was bursting to tell what he
had heard. Gathering his family about him he announced dramatically:

'Galilee will be troubled no more by this Carpenter who has scorned
the faith of our fathers! He came to the Temple yesterday and created
a disturbance--drove the people's sacrificial offerings into the
street; upset the tables of the exchangers who were here to assist the
pilgrims! Now the authorities intend to deal with him as he deserves!'
Asher scrubbed his thin hands together and grinned happily. 'This
time,' he shouted, 'the Carpenter will pay for his disrespect to
Israel!'

Esther leaned heavily on Myra's arm and felt her knees giving way.

'You're ill!' muttered Myra, supporting her. 'Hold on tight--and we'll
get out of here!'

'What's the matter with her?' demanded old Asher crossly.

'She is fainting,' said Myra. 'It's so stuffy and hot in here. I'll
take her outside...Help me, father!'

Gideon obediently took the other arm and they half-carried Esther
through the jostling pack and out on to the pavement, where she revived
enough to murmur that she was ashamed to have caused them so much
bother.

'We must find a place where you can sit down,' said Myra. 'I'll take
care of her, father. You go back and join the others. We will meet you
in Bethany. I know the way.'

Gideon hesitated.

'Your grandfather will be put out, Myra, by your leaving.'

'You tell him I'm sorry,' she said. 'Esther can't go back in there, the
way she feels. And I don't want to, myself. It's stifling! It stinks!'

'That,' said Gideon reproachfully, 'is not the way to speak about the
House of God.'

'Forgive me, father,' said Myra contritely. 'I didn't mean to hurt your
feelings.'

Gideon clumsily patted her arm.

'It is rather close in there,' he conceded, as he turned away. 'Don't
get lost. We will see you at Uncle Boaz's house.'

'Your father is so gentle--and kind,' said Esther.

'Yes,' said Myra; 'when my grandfather isn't looking, my father can be
quite a darling. Sometimes I wish I knew what he really thinks--about
our religion.'

They were walking slowly south in the direction of the old Sheep Gate.
Although the whole Temple area for many blocks was densely packed, it
was so much more quiet here that by comparison the street seemed almost
deserted. Esther had recovered from her sudden weakness, but was silent
and depressed.

'Tell me, Esther,' said Myra confidentially, 'was it really the bad air
in the Temple that affected you--or what my grandfather said about the
Carpenter getting into trouble?'

'It was a shock, Myra. We were all afraid to have him come here. I hope
they don't hurt him.'

'If he can do miracles, as they say, maybe he can defend himself.'

'I'm sure he could, if he wanted to; but he seems unconcerned about his
own safety. He will go to any lengths to help other people, but--'

'Perhaps he has left the city,' thought Myra; but Esther doubted it.

'He wouldn't run away,' she declared.

They were nearing the twin-towered Sheep Gate now. Hard by, at the
end of the street, loomed a grimy old edifice, bearing a peculiar
star-shaped roof supported by massive stone columns. On all of its five
façades it was open, without walls. Esther inquired what it was, and
Myra obliged her with an amazing story.

The queer old pavilion sheltered a pool. It was commonly believed that
an eccentric angel occasionally touched the water, and whoever dived in
immediately was cured of whatever disease he had.

'Surely you don't believe that!' said Esther.

'Me? Of course not! But plenty of sick people do; and they lie here all
day on the flagging, waiting for this angel. It's quite pitiful! What
an angel! Swooping in here once in a while, to help just one person,
and letting the rest suffer!'

They paused on the well-worn steps that led into the cavernous old
structure, Esther remarking that apparently the institution wasn't
operating today.

'It's usually crowded,' said Myra. 'I suppose they're all up around the
Temple, begging...I see one man over there.'

Suddenly Esther clutched Myra's arm and uttered a little cry of
surprise. A small group of men sauntered into the building through an
opposite entrance.

'Look, Myra!' she whispered excitedly. 'There is Jesus! It seems so
strange to see him without a great crowd following.'

'It's not strange at all,' said Myra, 'if he's in trouble. People
aren't going to risk being seen with him.'

'Come!' said Esther. 'I must speak to him!' She took Myra by the hand
and tugged her forward. Jesus, somewhat in advance of his little
company, was strolling beside the pool, gazing down into the water.
He halted now before an emaciated invalid, lying motionless on a mat,
and engaged him in conversation. The disciples had gathered around to
listen. Esther and Myra, unnoticed, crept in close behind them.

'The trouble is, sir,' the sick man was saying feebly, 'whenever the
angel comes, those who have very little ailing them, and are more
nimble, leap into the pool...My people have been bringing me here, sir,
day after day for many years, to be healed of the palsy; but always
another reaches the water before me.'

'Come, friend,' said Jesus gently. 'You have waited long enough. You
may get up now--and go home.'

Myra suddenly tightened her grasp on Esther's hand and drew a quick,
audible breath like a child's sob. The paralytic was slowly rising to
his feet! He was weeping, and incoherently mumbling his thanks.

Peter, turning aside with wet eyes, recognized Esther and came to greet
her.

'This is Myra,' she said. 'I came to Jerusalem with her family. Her
father is Gideon, of Capernaum.'

'I used to know him well,' said Peter. 'Your father is an upright
man...And your grandfather is Asher,' he went on, a little frown
creasing his forehead. 'Did he come with you?' And when Myra had
nodded, rather diffidently, he said, 'You have just witnessed a
miracle, Myra. Is that not true?'

'Yes, sir!' declared Myra. 'That is true!'

'Your grandfather, Asher, is hostile to our Master,' said Peter. 'Will
you tell him what you have seen here today?'

'He would not believe me,' said Myra.

'But you will tell him?' entreated Peter.

'I--I don't know, sir,' stammered Myra. 'It would only make him angry
with me.'

While this colloquy was in progress, Jesus had sauntered on through the
pavilion and was descending into the street, his company following at a
little distance.

'I'm sorry we weren't able to speak to him,' said Esther, as they moved
out into the sunshine. Myra made no reply.

At the corner of the street, they came face to face with him. He smiled
and extended his hands to them, saying, 'Peace to you, my daughters.'
Esther warmly clasped one of his outstretched hands and murmured,
'Master!'

Myra, visibly perturbed and with eyes averted, nervously toyed with the
fringes of her cape. Then, tentatively, her eyes ventured to meet his.
They widened and swam with tears. Impulsively she reached for his hand
with both of hers, and whispered brokenly, 'Will you be my Master, too?'



Chapter XX


Fully an hour before sunset on the fourteenth day of Nisan Jerusalem
began to go into retirement. It was as if the shadow of some spectral
hand had moved across the Holy City invoking silence.

The bazaars and food-markets, seemingly responsive to a prearranged
signal, were closing their shutters. Vehicular traffic was rapidly
clearing from the streets. The pedestrian throngs were melting away.
Only the Roman patrols remained.

Residents and their Jewish relatives and guests from afar were quietly
assembling behind closed doors. Even the Gentiles, who had come to
Jerusalem on business and were under no obligation to do honour to
Jewry's solemn observance, had tethered their camels and were lounging
in their tents.

On such a springtime night as this, fifteen centuries ago, the
Israelites had escaped from their intolerable bondage in Egypt. On that
occasion, according to their sacred Scriptures, the Angel of Death had
passed over the Land of the Pharaohs, striking down the first-born son
of every Egyptian home; and that the avenging Angel might identify
the houses to be spared, the Children of Israel had been instructed
to sprinkle the blood of a lamb upon their door-posts. And while they
waited for the summons to depart they stood in silence round their
tables, equipped for their adventure, and solemnly ate the sacrificial
lamb.

That was the 'Passover,' and it was still annually commemorated.
Perhaps the dramatic event might have been long since forgotten--such
is the inconsistency of human nature--had the daring flight to freedom
led the fugitives to a permanent peace and prosperity in their
'Promised Land.' They had not found peace and prosperity. Through the
ages they had worn the yokes and chains of many oppressors; but in
spite of their enslavements, or because of them, they dutifully ate the
paschal lamb, emblematic of a freedom unachieved but still to come. The
Jew was a melancholy optimist. He shed tears over a tragic past, but he
had never lost his faith in a triumphant future.

Tonight he was further from freedom than he had been for at least a
century. Even while he devoutly ate the lamb he could hear the ominous
jangling of the Roman Empire's armour on the street outside his
blood-smeared door.

Grandfather, at the head of the family table, bent with the burden of
his years, piously read from the well-worn scroll in his trembling
hands, 'O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice! Say
to the cities of Judah, "The Lord will come with a strong hand."'

And while Grandfather read the comforting words, the young Centurion
on the street was harshly measuring, in clipped syllables, the
well-disciplined foot-beats of his marching legionaries.

'Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation; a tabernacle that
shall never be taken down!' intoned Grandfather.

'Un'!...Du'!...Tres!...Quat'!' barked the Centurion.

 * * * * * *

On a hillside in the country, halfway between Bethphage and Bethany,
with no shelter but the spreading branches of an ancient cypress, a
company of forlorn men from Galilee sat silently watching the sun go
down.

They had made no preparations for a celebration of The Passover, and it
was too late now to do anything about it, even if the facilities had
been available. They had no lamb, no house, no door-posts to anoint
with blood, no roasting-oven, no table.

It wouldn't have mattered--certainly not to the Big Fisherman--had
they faced this predicament at home in Capernaum. The Passover had
meant nothing to him for many years, not since he was a youngster in
his pious father's home; and even then he had regarded the depressing
ceremonies with glum indifference. But here, on the outskirts of the
Holy City, where the commemoration was so universally and reverently
observed, the Jew in Simon the son of Jonas felt lonely, lost,
expatriated.

'Andy,' he remarked to his sober-faced brother, seated on the ground
beside him, 'Andy, down there in the city are hundreds, perhaps
thousands, from all the provinces, who would feel honoured to have the
Master eat the Passover with them; but are afraid to admit that they
are his friends.'

Andrew nodded slowly, but made no reply, and Peter continued
reminiscently:

'Last summer, when they brought their sick ones to him for healing,
and were deeply moved by his words of comfort, they wished they might
invite him home with them to be their guest. Now that he is in danger--'

Peter's low-voiced soliloquy was interrupted by a little stir
immediately behind them. Jesus, who had been sitting quite apart from
the silent men, had come forward and reseated himself between John and
James. All eyes slowly drifted in that direction.

'We will observe the Passover,' he said. 'You two brothers will arrange
for it. Go now to the highway and proceed through Bethany until you
overtake a man who will be entering his home with a pitcher of water on
his shoulder. There is an unused upper room in his house. Tell him to
prepare it for your Master and his company.'

They rose to do his bidding.

'Shall we try to find a sacrificial lamb?' asked John.

Jesus closed his eyes and shook his head.

'The master of the house will provide you with wheaten bread and a
flagon of wine,' he said. 'That will suffice.'

'Will we be returning here for the night, Master?' asked James.

'No. Take your blankets with you. After supper we will rest in the
Garden of Gethsemane.'

'Have you money to pay this man for the use of his room?' inquired
Judas, jingling the coin-pouch.

The brothers turned inquiring eyes toward Jesus and he waved them on
their way, making no reply to Judas, who, realizing that he had spoken
out of turn, shrugged and resumed his seat. Young Thad, sitting nearest
him, presently got to his feet and strolled over to drape his jacket
about old Bartholomew's shoulders; for the sun was setting and the air
was chilly.

 * * * * * *

It was a most depressing feast. The fear that had haunted them for many
days was now confirmed. The Master told them that the end was near.
This, he said, would be their last supper together.

He had preceded them on the road, and when their intuition told them
he preferred to walk alone they slowed their steps as he retraced last
Sunday morning's journey, when he had been attended by the shouting
thousands who thought they wanted him to be their King. Under the
bright moonlight could be seen the withered palm-branches which the
disappointed crowd had flung into the gutters. Peter was blind with
tears; and when Philip pointed to the palms, he could only shake his
head. There were no words for his grief.

When they arrived at the house where John and James were standing at
the gate they found that Jesus had already entered and was waiting
for them at the doorway of the upper room. He had provided himself
with towels and a basin of water. It was customary, when guests were
expected, to station a servant at the door to wash the visitors' dusty
feet. The disciples were appalled to find that the Master intended to
perform this menial service. Peter, when his turn came, stoutly refused
to consent; but yielded reluctantly when Jesus insisted.

They quietly took their places about the table. The supper was not
after the manner of the traditional Passover feast. This, Jesus
explained, was the inauguration of a new festival. In the days to come,
he said, whenever they--and the others who would believe in him--sat
together, and the cup was passed among them, they were to remember him
as the sacrifice for men's salvation. He would die that all those who
believed in him might live.

The words were spoken softly. The disciples were heartsick. Judas
slipped quietly out of the room. They were all relieved to see him go.
Johnny, sitting beside the Master, now broke down completely and cried
like a lost child. Jesus put his arm around him tenderly and drew him
close. They were all weeping.

'Let not your heart be troubled,' the Master was saying. 'In my
Father's house are many mansions. I go to prepare a place for you, that
where I am you may be also.'

 * * * * * *

It was close to midnight when Jesus rose from the table and announced
that they would now depart. The evening, despite its sadness, had
passed quickly; for the disciples, now awake to the fact that they were
presently to be left without his guidance, had many questions to ask of
their Master.

And the questions were of a surprising nature. Even in the face of
all the instructions they had received concerning a Kingdom-to-come,
their last-minute entreaties for reassurance showed how vaguely they
had understood. So long as they had had him by their side, walking and
talking with him, the future seemed far off, something to be dealt with
when they got to it. Now that they had got to it, the future demanded a
fresh examination.

Jesus had just finished saying, 'You all know where I am going. Though
you cannot come with me now, you know the way.'

Thomas had spoken up promptly: 'But, Master, we do not know where you
are going: how can we know the way?'

'I am the way,' said Jesus patiently. 'I go to our Father.'

'Tell us about the Father,' begged Philip, as if he had never heard a
word on the subject.

'The Father is in me,' said Jesus. 'The words that I have spoken are
His words. The deeds that I have done are His deeds.'

They all nodded their belief that this was true, but their apparent
understanding did so little to assuage their feeling of utter
desolation that the Master continued, tenderly:

'I shall not leave you comfortless. I shall come to you.'

At length they descended the stairs and came out into the moonlight,
Jesus pausing to offer a gracious word of thanks to their host, who
followed them to the gate as if reluctant to see them leave his house.

It was only a short distance to the brow of the hill that overlooked
the silent city. Jesus tarried there for a long moment before turning
off the highway to the hard-beaten path that wound through the grove of
aged olive-trees.

Peter, James, and John had followed closely, the others trailing at
some distance, not sure what was expected of them. Deep in the shadows
of the grove, Jesus turned to the three and asked them to wait there.
He went on a little way and knelt in the shadow of a rock. After a
while the watchers' eyes grew heavy. For the past few nights they had
been too gravely troubled to take their accustomed rest, and this
evening's drain on their emotions had left them exhausted. Soon they
were stretched on the ground with their heads pillowed in the crooks of
their arms, fast asleep.

After an hour of anguished prayer, Jesus returned to them. The little
group of men who had known him best and loved him most were unprepared
to support him with assurances of their sympathy and affection. He was
alone now, without a friend in the world.

 * * * * * *

The arrest was quite obviously unauthorized and singularly lacking
in dignity. It was not conducted by the Roman patrols, but by an
unofficial rabble under the leadership of the High Priest's butler,
Malchus, a Roman.

Malchus, with an ear accustomed to lingering at keyholes, had learned
of his eminent employer's decision to hale the Galilean into court;
and, thinking to improve his rating in the esteem of Caiaphas, had
taken it upon himself to make the capture, which was the last thing
that the High Priest desired on the solemn night of the Passover.

There was quite a crowd of them, armed with sticks and stones, as if
they were out to hunt down a mad dog and beat it to death. Judas had
been shameless enough to come along with the riff-raff that comprised
the mob. Malchus needed him to identify the victim.

Peter lunged forward and surprised the butler with a savage blow on the
head, but Jesus cautioned him against further resistance. He would go
with them quietly. Seeing that their captive intended no defence, the
crowd became boldly courageous, bound his hands, tugged him roughly
down the long hill and through the darkened streets to the palace of
the High Priest.

Although it was long past old Annas' bedtime, he was still up. With a
dozen or more dignitaries of the Rabbinical College and the Sanhedrin,
he had accepted the invitation of Caiaphas to celebrate the Passover
with him in his council-chamber. Deep in a discussion of the most
feasible procedure to dispose of the Nazarene with a minimum of protest
from his adherents, the pundits were suddenly startled by an unseemly
clamour in the corridor.

Malchus, exuberant over his conquest and confident of a warm welcome,
burst in upon the conclave with his quarry, pushing his dishevelled
prisoner into the midst of them and presenting him with a proud
flourish. 'Ecce homo!' announced Malchus dramatically.

The wise men were stunned to speechlessness. This was not the place and
certainly not the time to prefer charges against this man; but here he
was, and they must do something about him.

'So--you are this Jesus of Nazareth!' snarled Caiaphas contemptuously.

Jesus said he was; and, after an awkward pause, Caiaphas asked, 'What
have you been teaching?'

'You might inquire of those who have heard me,' said Jesus.

Malchus, standing close beside him, slapped him in the face and
shouted, 'You should not speak so to the High Priest!'

Ignoring the blow, Jesus continued, 'I have not taught in secret, but
openly.' His eyes swept the group and came to rest on the face of
Rabbi Ben-Sholem, who seemed annoyed by this searching scrutiny. 'Many
people,' Jesus went on, 'could testify as to my sayings.'

'The rabble!' squeaked Ben-Sholem shrilly. 'Outlanders! Damascenes!
Samaritans! Camel-boys!'

Jesus made no reply to that. A few more questions were asked, but the
inquisition lacked spirit. They were all aware that there wasn't much
that they could do, and they surmised that Jesus knew it. It had been
their intention to bring him to trial before the regularly constituted
authorities. This present company could badger him and insult him as
long as they liked, and nothing would come of it except damage to their
own dignity. It was difficult to decide what to do with him.

Caiaphas ordered Malchus to take the prisoner outside and await further
instructions. The command was growled so crossly that the butler,
disappointed over the apparent failure of his effort to ingratiate
himself with these learned men, jostled and jerked the captive out of
the room to make him share his own inglorious exit. A servant slipped
quietly into the room and up-ended the tall hour-glass on the table at
the High Priest's elbow. It was two o'clock.

After a considerable silence, each man hoping that someone else might
come forward with a promising idea, Obadiah, Chief of the Scribes,
cleared his throat.

'Why not send him directly to Pilate?'

'What?' snorted Caiaphas. 'At this hour?'

'He'll still be up,' muttered old Nathan, the High Priest's legal
adviser.

'He'll be drinking and telling bawdy stories all night with the
visiting Legates.'

'He might even be pleased with some diversion,' chortled old Annas.
'Write him a note, Caiaphas. Tell him we want him to try this
fellow--forthwith!'

'Good!' exclaimed Ben-Sholem. 'The whole thing might be over and done
with before the city awakes in the morning!'

'No--it's not that good!' grumbled Caiaphas. 'All this business on
Passover night! What will he think of us? If such a note is to go to
Pilate, Father Annas, you may write it!'

'I'm not the High Priest,' rumbled the old man. 'And what does that
Roman know or care about the Passover!'

'And why should we care what he thinks?' added Nathan. 'He will do what
he's told to do.'

They all seemed agreed on this. Nathan got out his stylus and wrote the
note, Caiaphas signed it, and Malchus was given his orders. The mob
hurried their prisoner to the Insula.

The Procurator was not only awake but, as Nathan had predicted, was
having a party for the visiting Legates and a Prefect or two who had
accompanied the legions from forts related to their cities.

It was a beautiful night, warm enough to be comfortable out-of-doors,
and the Procurator was entertaining his long-time friends on the
spacious porch of the Insula.

'What now?' he growled, as the mob swarmed up the marble steps. He
scowled at the note that Malchus handed him and stared hard at the
prisoner.

'What evil have you been up to,' he demanded, 'on a night when you're
supposed to be attending to your religious duties? You are a Jew,
aren't you?'

It was not a question that could be answered in a word, and Jesus was
tardy with a reply. The butler jabbed him in the ribs with his elbow
and shouted, 'Speak up, fellow!'

Pilate's lip curled.

'And who are you?' he demanded scornfully.

'My name is Malchus. I am of the High Priest's household.'

'Well, you're no credit to it, I must say. Malchus, eh? That doesn't
sound Jewish.'

'I'm a Roman, sir!' said the butler, with a little more confidence.

'That's unfortunate,' snapped Pilate. 'Take your hands off the prisoner
and stand aside!' He held the note at arm's length and scanned it
distastefully. 'Now, then, Jesus, what's all this about? You're said
to be a disturber of the peace. In the name of all the Gods, where--in
this quarrelsome country--have you found any peace to disturb?'

The crowd was getting restless, a few of them suspecting--and not
without warrant--that the Procurator was more interested in amusing his
grinning guests than attending to his business as judge. The muttering
in the rear of the pack grew urgent. Somebody shouted, 'Away with the
Galilean!'

Pilate caught at it.

'Are you a Galilean?' he inquired, and slowly turning his head toward
Legate Julian of Capernaum, he winked impishly.

Jesus said that he was a Galilean.

'Then you don't belong here at all,' declared
Pilate...'You--Malchus--or whatever your name is. Take him to the
Galilean Embassy and tell your troubles to Herod Antipas.'

There were many angry shouts of 'No!' But the Procurator hurled an
overhand gesture of dismissal at the crowd--and ordered some more wine.
The Chief of the city patrols stepped forward and whispered, 'Shall
I send a deputation over there to keep order, sire?' To which Pilate
replied indifferently, 'No--let the Tetrarch attend to that; unless,'
he added, 'there is disorderly conduct in the streets.'

And so, bitterly disappointed and noisily disgruntled, they led Jesus
to the Embassy, the crowd increasing as they proceeded. The disciples
had fallen far behind the shouting mob, and trudged along, silent,
helpless, frightened.

They hammered at the imposing bronze doors of the Embassy until they
were admitted, and stormed into the beautiful, high-domed courtroom,
yelling impudently for Antipas. All of the disciples edged themselves
into the lobby, all but Peter. For a while he stood irresolute and
alone on the pavement outside, tugging nervously at his underlip. Then
he ambled over to the wide-open gate to the carriage-court and looked
in.

There was a pleasant fire burning in the middle of it and a few
tall, gaudily uniformed patrols were warming their hands. Peter felt
chilly and advanced toward the fire. The urbane legionaries saw him
coming--and grinned. He knew they were amused at his provincial garb.
For a moment he had a notion to retreat; but, presuming that the
soldiers would laugh scornfully if he did so, he shambled on, feeling
himself very much out of place; for the first time in his life an
object of derision.

 * * * * * *

The Vestris had done very well on the voyage up from Gaza; had berthed
at one of the new wharves in Joppa shortly after dawn on Thursday. The
sister-ships of the fleet had discharged their cargo and were swinging
lazily at anchor in the roadstead waiting orders to sail.

Proconsul Mencius and Captain Fulvius limbered up their horses and
started on their thirty-mile journey to Jerusalem, intending to
break the trip at Ashnah; but after a bad supper and a glance at the
guest-rooms of the only inn, they decided to press on. Their horses
were fresh and the moon was bright, and the highway, all but deserted
of traffic, was free of dust. It was half-past two when they reached
the city.

They were going to put up at Levi's Inn, known to be the best tavern
in Jerusalem. It was a little way outside the east gate, on the slope
leading up the long hill toward Bethany. As they passed the front
of the large, high-walled compound adjacent to the Insula, Mencius
wondered whether they might not find better accommodation for the
horses in the barracks-stables. It might be worth inquiring about.

Fulvius was too tired to take any interest in this suggestion. He had
no taste for a long walk. He wanted to get to bed. Mencius decided to
stop at the Insula's stables. Fulvius, with the Proconsul's saddlebags,
was to go on and make a reservation for him at the tavern. He would be
up later and see him at breakfast.

They were quite deferential at the military stables; but, 'as you can
see for yourself, sir, we haven't a stall. Everything full up. But I
feel sure there is room in the stables at the Galilean Embassy. It's
only a little way--just around the next corner to the right. You can't
miss it, sir. Some kind of a brawl going on over there.'

'I don't want to get into a brawl,' said Mencius.

'It isn't among the horses, sir. Everything will be quiet in the
stables.'

'What's the racket about?' asked Mencius.

'Oh, they're trying some country preacher for teaching the wrong
doctrine,' drawled the old hostler. 'The horses aren't in it. They've
too much sense to get mixed up with a thing like that, sir.'

The Proconsul handed the old fellow a couple of shekels, remounted
Brutus, and followed directions.

There stood the costly and superfluous Embassy that Herod's rich
and worthless son had built to satisfy his vanity. The main part of
the imposing structure, fronting the street, was brightly lighted
and noisily doing business. From the tone of the excited voices
that shrilled through the open windows the litigants were angry.
The Proconsul chuckled. You'd never hear such a bedlam as that in
a Roman court. No, indeed! A Roman court wasn't always fair, but
it was always orderly...A country preacher--being tried for his
heresies--at three o'clock in the morning--when everybody was supposed
to be sequestered because of the Passover. It was incredible!...A
country preacher, eh?...Could it be possible that this was Voldi's
'Torchbearer'?...Mencius rode on a short way further and found the
stables. They were of an architecture consistent with the Embassy,
ostentatious to the point of absurdity if not vulgarity; quite
appropriate for the official seat of an Ambassador, but too foolishly
grand for his horses.

The white marble stables were scrupulously clean, but Brutus had a
sharp nose and he was very tired. He needed no urging to turn in. A
middle-aged man, whose tunic bore the Embassy's crest, came to the
door. The Proconsul dismounted, identified himself, and made his
request, which was cheerfully granted.

'My name is Aulus, sir. You've a fine horse there! He deserves the
best. The Tetrarch will be pleased to have him here. His Highness is a
great one for beautiful horses.' Aulus had tugged off Brutus' trappings
and was leading him into a roomy box-stall, Mencius following along.
'You see that tall, black Arabian in the next box, sir?' chattered
Aulus. 'He's the latest one. The Tetrarch bought him--for a song--only
the day before yesterday.'

Brutus had stretched his neck and was nuzzling the oak stanchions that
separated the stalls. The black horse moved closer to the partition and
nickered softly.

'By Jupiter!' laughed Aulus. 'They act as if they were acquainted!'

Mencius walked over to the waist-high door of the adjacent box. Darik
turned his head in that direction; and, sauntering to the door, sniffed
the visitor's extended hand.

'He's making up with you, sir, better than he has with me,' remarked
Aulus. 'He's not a friendly horse--sort of a one-man horse, as we say.'

'The Tetrarch bought him cheap, eh?' Mencius tried to sound casual.
'How did that come about? He is a very valuable animal.'

Aulus became confidential.

'If you ask me, sir, I think he was stolen. The young Arab who brought
him here was in rags and tatters; had no business owning a horse like
this. Wanted only three hundred shekels for him. His Highness was quick
enough to take him.'

'It's a wonder the Tetrarch did not suspect that he was buying a stolen
horse.'

'Maybe he did.' Aulus' crafty chuckle did not improve his royal
employer's reputation. 'The ragged young Arab is still hanging around.
We gave him a job. He's handy with horses. All Arabs are, I guess.
That's about all they know--horses. It's a funny thing now about this
gelding. He follows the fellow around like a dog. Maybe he did belong
to him, though it doesn't sound reasonable.'

'Is the Arabian on duty?'

'Just daytime, sir...Thank you, sir. We'll take good care of your
horse. Yes, sir!'

The Proconsul was turning toward the door. Aulus, happy over the
half-dozen sesterces clinking in his hand, called after him:

'If you stop in the carriage-court, sir, the kitchen-girls will gladly
bring you a bowl of hot broth. Might taste good after your long ride.'

Mencius told him he was going directly to Levi's Inn and would have
his breakfast there...He walked north and halted before the open doors
of the noisy Embassy. In the street a score of Roman patrols leaned
casually against their long lances, apparently under orders to give no
attention to the clamour within the building.

Mencius ascended the steps. The spacious foyer was filled with
unpleasantly scented men who apparently had been unable to gain
entrance to the courtroom. Mencius joined them. They seemed to be
inquisitive spectators rather than partisans, all of them shabbily
dressed, probably tramps. The Proconsul wore no distinctive uniform;
his credentials were in his pocket; but the loafers inferred from his
bearing that he was accustomed to being treated with deference, and
made way for him as he moved toward the door into the high-ceilinged
auditorium.

The place was full of restless, clamorous civilians who seemed to have
little in common but their exasperation over the proceedings of the
court. A pompous, distinguished-looking man of fifty, in a black robe,
presided; or, more correctly, was seated behind the massive table up in
front where the magistrate would naturally be found. This puzzled man,
with the frozen grin, was obviously the Tetrarch, and it was equally
obvious that the trial had got completely out of hand. The affair had
degenerated into a repulsive travesty.

The defendant was seated in a high-armed, tall-backed, throne-like
chair, facing the audience, clad in a scarlet robe absurdly
inappropriate to the man's pale, dejected face and slumped posture. A
thorn-bush, wound to imitate a crown, had been so roughly forced upon
his head that slender streams of blood were coursing his cheeks and
spattering the embroidered collar of his royal robe.

It was not difficult to guess what this undignified play-acting was
about. The hapless captive was being mocked as a pretender to the
throne. But what throne? Mencius could hardly believe his own eyes.
Surely this supine young man, with the bearing of a teacher and
the long, slim hand of an artist, could have no kingly ambitions.
Apparently he had no following. Nobody championed his cause. Whose
throne would he attempt to usurp, even if he had ten thousand troops
behind him? Caesar's? Nonsense! Could he have been plotting to supplant
Pilate? Ridiculous!

But now the light broke for Mencius! The noisy persecutors who
passed before the prisoner, with exaggerated bows of reverence, were
satirically hailing him as the King of the Jews! That was it! The young
prophet must have identified himself as the 'Messiah' who would restore
the Kingdom to Israel.

The unhappy Tetrarch appeared now to have had more than enough of the
farce. He rose and demanded order. Gradually the racket died down. The
crowd seemed expectant of a judicial decision. It was high time, they
grumbled.

'Whip him--and let him go!' shouted Antipas.

A storm of protest rose. One enraged zealot mounted a chair and
screamed, 'To death with him! Nothing less!' The crowd yelled its
approval. Antipas held up a hand for silence, and the place grew
suddenly quiet again.

'It is not in the province of this court,' he exclaimed, 'to put any
man to death.'

'Yaa!' shouted the man on the chair. 'You sentenced the Baptizer
to death--for no reason at all!' The noise was deafening now...The
Tetrarch, clearly frightened, wheeled about and disappeared through the
small door behind him. The prisoner was roughly jerked from his mimic
throne and a thick-set brute with a bull-whip began lashing him cruelly.

The Proconsul's impulse was to leave the disgusting spectacle, but
the exit was already blocked and he stood aside to wait. Pandemonium
had broken loose in the vicinity of the magistrate's elaborately
carved bar. The august tribunal was being wrecked. The Tetrarch would
presently learn his rating in the opinion of Jerusalem's unwashed and
irresponsible. Costly tapestries were being torn down, broadswords
were thrust through the upholstery of the furniture, pikes were gouged
into the exquisite mosaic portraits. Even the haughty face of Emperor
Tiberius had lost an eye (not that the Proconsul cared a damn).

Pressing into the rioting pack that funnelled through the door, Mencius
struggled out into the street. A score of the more audacious were
attempting to tear down the hoarding and scaffolding from a building
under repair across the street; and the legionaries, feeling that
enough was enough, were cracking heads and making arrests. The rioters
had been free to do what they liked to the inside of the Embassy, but
they were not at liberty to set the building on fire.

With no taste for getting himself involved in the brawl, Mencius
walked hurriedly north to the avenue of the Insula and turned to the
right. Once away from the sight and sound of the frenzied mob, his
thoughts turned toward the doomed Galilean. He wished he might have
heard the man speak. He had never seen anyone quite like him. Not much
wonder that Voldi had been impressed. It was a face that puzzled you,
difficult to assign to any category. A profound student? A dreamer?
What manner of man was he? A 'Torchbearer'? No; Voldi had been clearly
mistaken about that. A Torchbearer, with the mind and will of a Plato,
a Socrates, or an Aristotle, would never have got himself into such an
appalling predicament. He might be a teacher, but that didn't mean that
he was a Torchbearer. Whatever light he had thrown upon the path of a
few people of the Palestinian provinces would be snuffed out before
another sunset. Whose lamp--in backward little Galilee--would shed a
reflected glow beyond the borders of his own community?

Anyhow, mused Mencius bitterly, as he moved wearily up the long slope
toward Levi's Inn, the human race didn't want any light; it didn't
deserve any light; and it would never be granted any light--certainly
not in his time!...The world was a disgrace to its maker, whoever
he was; or to its makers, whoever they were! It was a wonder it had
survived so long in its brutalities. Brutalities? That was not the
right word for it. The brutes carried themselves with some dignity!



Chapter XXI


As Peter neared the glowing fire he walked more slowly and diffidently,
realizing that he had made a mistake to enter the courtyard.

The half-dozen tall patrols, self-confident in their brightly polished
helmets and scarlet-and-black uniforms, were awaiting his approach with
an embarrassing interest. Yet, when he stood among them, taller and
heavier than they, he was relieved to see something of friendliness in
their faces.

'A chilly morning,' remarked the eldest, stepping aside to make
room for the massive stranger. Peter agreed that it was, and warmed
his hands. 'The kitchen-girls will be bringing some mulled wine,
presently,' said another. 'Here they come--now.'

And here they came, the girls he had joked with when delivering fish at
the Tetrarch's palace in Tiberias in the almost forgotten days before
he had left all to follow Jesus. He recognized them instantly, with
a sinking heart; the tough little Roman, Claudia; Murza, the cynical
Arimathaean; Anna and Leah, the Jewesses.

While still at some distance, Claudia, tripping along with a loaded
tray, shouted to the others:

'But look! Murza! Leah! Do you see what I see? It is the Big
Fisherman--no less!' They put down their flagons and mugs and
honey-cakes on the serving table and swarmed about him with excited
little cries. 'The Big Fisherman!' Claudia tried to span both hands
round his heavily muscled arm, as she had been accustomed to do. The
patrols gathered closely about, enjoying the reunion.

'You girls seem to know this Hercules,' chaffed the grey-haired soldier.

'Know him!' echoed Claudia. 'But of course! And a bad influence he
was, too, what with his making sport of all the gods! A quite terrible
fellow; no?'

'And what brings you to Jerusalem?' inquired Anna. 'I'll warrant it
wasn't to eat the Passover!'

Peter hadn't had a chance to put in a word. He stood there grinning
foolishly; tugging at his underlip.

'Maybe he's here with this Carpenter,' teased Leah, 'this man who
thinks he's the Messiah.'

'That's it!' shrilled Claudia. 'The Big Fisherman's gone religious!'
They all laughed.

'You know better than that!' growled Peter. 'I don't hold with such
nonsense!'

'Well--seriously,' said Anna, 'what do you think of this Jesus?'

'I have no opinion at all,' answered Peter huskily. 'Never met him!'

'They're trying him over there--for blasphemy and treason!' said Murza.

'Indeed?' grunted Peter. 'Well, he's no friend of mine.'

The patrols were tiring of this conversation and had edged toward the
serving-table, the girls following along. Peter suddenly turned to
leave.

'Wait!' cried Claudia. 'Have some wine!'

But the Big Fisherman did not wait and he did not reply. Unsteadily,
for he felt sick and his legs were shaky, he made for the gate.
Outside, he leaned against the wall, panting and swallowing hard. He
walked with uncertain steps, bracing a hand on the wall for support,
toward the entrance to the Embassy. Now he could hear the clamour of
angry voices. He stopped. The noise subsided. Now came the sound of
lashes. They were whipping his Master! He turned about and staggered
down the street, still with a groping hand on the wall. His legs were
weak and his knees buckled under him at every step. Now he began to
cry, the whimpering, retching cry of a badly hurt little boy.



Chapter XXII


Notwithstanding his weariness, Mencius was unable to sleep. Obsequious
old Levi had waited up to conduct the Proconsul to what he asserted was
the most comfortable bed in the house; the tavern was quiet, nobody
astir; there was no vehicular traffic on the cobbled street. But
Mencius lay wide awake, still listening to the bull-whip cutting into
the bleeding shoulders of the defenceless Galilean.

It was not because he was unused to the sight and sound of cruel
floggings. Roman discipline was harsh and punishments were severe.
Three-quarters of the Empire's population were slaves. To treat
their infractions of the law with any lenience at all was to invite
conspiracy and rebellion. Every free-born Roman lived dangerously,
alert to the merest hint of insubordination. Corporal punishment,
administered in public, was the best medicine for disobedience, far
more effective than imprisonment. The brutal scourging of the young
Galilean, therefore, would have been--for the Proconsul--just another
brutal scourging added to all the brutal scourgings he had witnessed on
land and sea throughout the Empire, but for the fact that the victim
was a man of mystery, a man to be treated with dignity; imprisoned,
perhaps; beheaded, perhaps; but not flogged.

Mencius readjusted his pillow and resolved to stop thinking about it.
It wasn't his problem, he told himself. It was none of his business.
He would go to sleep now. But that whole affair at the Galilean
Embassy needed explanation. The noisy prosecution was in the hands of
a mob that had no respect for the court, although the baffled judge
had utterly disgraced himself to humour the screaming riff-raff, who
apparently had no warrant for the captive's arrest, no formal charges
preferred by any recognized authority, and, in short, represented
nobody but themselves, which was the same as saying that they
represented nobody at all.

It was evident that Pilate, who couldn't help knowing of this shocking
abrogation of justice, had decided to keep out of it. But that didn't
tally with what Mencius had heard of Pontius Pilate's reputation as a
self-respecting Prefect. No Provincial Governor could afford to ignore
such an impudent flouting of the law. It would require some very potent
behind-the-scenes pressure to persuade the gruff Procurator of Judaea
that he must keep his hands off and let the riot run wild. That course,
for any Roman ruler, was a direct road to ruin.

Pre-dawn light was breaking now. With an exasperated apostrophe to all
the gods, for none of whom he had more than an antiquarian's respect,
Mencius rose, dressed, and went softly downstairs to the small patio
hedged at the rear of the quadrangle by a rose-garden which extended
almost to the high wall that enclosed the area. The roses were softly
lighted by the oncoming sun. Mencius strolled toward the garden. A
few yards ahead of him, and moving slowly with a furtive glance over
his shoulder, was a tall, lean, ragged young fellow, who, instead of
stepping aside, turned and waited at the wall, thrusting out a dirty
hand for alms. Mencius chuckled.

'You might have fooled me with your tatters,' he said, 'but I knew you
were in the city. What's all this about, Voldi, selling your horse to
the Tetrarch and working as a hostler in his stables?'

'Let's step behind these rose-bushes,' said Voldi soberly. 'We mustn't
be seen together. I've only a moment to stay.'

'Very well. Talk fast. I'll listen. What's up?'

Voldi proceeded rapidly with his story.

'Aulus told me where you were, Mencius.'

'I was expecting you.'

'You know what happened in the night at the Embassy. The mob all but
wrecked the building. Antipas is badly frightened, as he need be, and
expects to leave within the hour for Tiberias. He has engaged a small
detachment of cavalry from the Capernaum Fort to accompany the caravan.
He will ride his own horse. I am to ride Darik.'

'But you aren't going all the way to Tiberias, I think,' put in
Mencius, with a knowing grin.

'Probably not. There are bandits in the Samaritan mountains. They may
attack us. Our force is small. Someone may get hurt...I may be looking
for some place to go--in a hurry. What are your travel-plans, Mencius?'

'I'm here to deliver an important letter to one of the visiting
Legates. I shall do that this morning. Then I ride to Joppa, where my
ship is ready to sail. We will wait there until you come.'

'Have you room in your hold for Darik?'

'Of course!...But I thought you had sold Darik to the Tetrarch?'

'He may not need a horse--after tomorrow night.' Voldi was getting
restless to be on his way.

'Good luck!' said Mencius earnestly. 'We'll be on the lookout for you.
It's The Vestris. New pier number seven.'

'If I'm not there by noon Sunday, don't wait any longer; for I'll not
be coming...By the way, what's your next port?'

'Gaza--and then home. Will you come with us, all the way?'

'It depends. I don't know. I must go now!'

Mencius clutched his sleeve.

'Your "Torchbearer" seems to be doomed. Any news about that?'

'Aulus says they carried him off to the Sanhedrin, hoping for authority
to try him before Pilate. If they succeed, the trial may be held this
morning...Did you see him?'

'Yes--but I didn't hear him speak. I saw him scourged. It's a strange
case. I'm full of curiosity about the man. Perhaps I'll go down to the
Insula--and see what happens.'

'It's all up with him, I'm afraid.'

'Doubtless. If Pilate consents to hear the case at all, he will
probably accommodate them with a decision. If the Sanhedrin's at the
back of it--'

'That's the trouble. They're in the driver's seat.'

'Still think he's the "Torchbearer"?'

'Perhaps; I don't know.'

'Think a Torchbearer would let himself be condemned to death?'

'It's possible. Socrates did. I'll see you on Sunday--I hope.'

 * * * * * *

After a brief breakfast alone, Mencius left a note for Fulvius, before
setting forth to the Insula.

'I am leaving early,' he wrote, 'to attend a trial of peculiar interest
in Pilate's Court, the case of that young Galilean who has had the
whole country by the ears and is now indicted for blasphemy, treason,
and the Gods only know what else. I must see it. You have the Emperor's
letter in your baggage and I do not wish to disturb you. Keep it
locked. I shall probably return within a couple of hours.'

The broad, marble-paved terraces leading to the imposing portico of the
Insula were already packed with a scurrying crowd when Mencius arrived.
Way was made for him as he advanced to the highest level, where the
prosecutors waited impatiently with their haggard prisoner, still
arrayed in the scarlet finery that had mocked his phantom kingship last
night at the Embassy.

Apparently it was the Procurator's custom to hold open-air court from
the spacious porch, for it seemed to be the focus of interest, although
still unoccupied. A huge desk served as the bar of justice; behind it
stood a tall, throne-like chair, flanked on either side with orderly
rows of less conspicuous seats.

On any ordinary occasion Mencius would have felt free--indeed he would
have felt obliged--to enter the Insula and present himself. It would
have been no presumption for a Proconsul to express fraternal greetings
to a Prefect with the assurance of a cordial welcome. In terms of
protocol they were of much the same rating. And should Pontius Pilate
learn that Nicator Mencius had attended a session of his court without
making himself known, he could consider it a breach of etiquette. But
the extraordinary affair confronting the Procurator of Judaea would be
sufficiently embarrassing, thought Mencius, without adding any more
witnesses to Pilate's discomfiture than were already available.

He surveyed the group of principals that clustered closely about the
captive. There was quite a delegation of scribes, ostentatiously
busying themselves with their papyrus rolls--a detestable breed of
prigs and snobs wherever you found them, in any country. There was a
sprinkling of priests, young ones mostly, none of them distinguished
in appearance. Evidently the real prosecutors were represented only by
proxies. Perhaps they had conveyed their wishes--and demands--by letter.

Presently a shout went up as the great bronze doors swung open and the
impressive procession of dignitaries filed out into the portico, Pilate
leading in his official robes, followed by a dozen Legates, Prefects,
and other bigwigs. Mencius recognized only a few: there was Julian, who
had been his instructor in tactics at the Military Academy in Rome;
Julian was getting to be an old man, cropped hair white as a rat,
wrinkled face brown as a boot; yes--and there was dapper old Menelaus,
Governor of Petra; Mencius had sailed with him once...And of all
things--there was Prefect Sergius of Caesarea, though why, in the name
of every unpredictable God, Sergius should be in Jerusalem at Passover
time, was beyond imagination. Mencius searched the faces for a youngish
Legate who might pass for the obstreperous son of Senator Gallio, but
couldn't find anybody with the probable measurements...The court sat.
The crowd quieted. Pilate, frowning darkly, puffed his lips as he
studied the document which bragged of its importance with a clatter of
dangling waxen seals. He pounded on the massive desk and looked down
sternly at the prisoner. At length he spoke, in a tone so low that it
was obvious he didn't care whether the crowd heard him or not.

'It says here that you have made pretence of being a King,' and then
he added, with fine irony, for the benefit of his Roman guests,
'though the Sanhedrin'--Pilate tapped the ornate document with his
finger--'assures this court that it will recognize no King but Caesar.
Doubtless Emperor Tiberius, when he learns of this, will be pleasantly
surprised.' The distinguished guests grinned appreciatively. 'Now,
young man,' continued the Procurator, 'you do not look much like a
King, in spite of your royal garb. Has it been your custom to go about
in this ridiculous costume?'

The prisoner shook his head without looking up.

'Has the prosecution anything to say about that?' demanded Pilate.

After some hesitation a young priest admitted sheepishly, 'It was put
on him at the Embassy, sire.'

'Then you will restore his clothing to him immediately,' growled
Pilate. 'This court, probably lacking in humour, is in no mood for
buffoonery.'

There was some delay before the defendant's brown homespun robe was
found. His back, when they bared it, bore deep lash-wounds, still
bleeding. Pilate's sharp eye may have seen the prisoner wince, may have
seen the people stare, for he commanded the Galilean to turn round.

'It would appear,' he said, 'that the prisoner has been already tried,
convicted, and punished. By what process of law has he now been brought
into this court? Has he then committed some fresh crime since his case
was judged?'

Nobody volunteered to answer this question, but an ominous rumble of
dissatisfaction rose from the densely packed throng. Pilate glanced
again, with distaste but something of anxiety, at the indictment.
Mencius, studying the Procurator's expression, gathered that the
document worried him. Putting down the papyrus on the desk and leaning
forward on his folded arms, Pilate asked: 'Are you, then, a king?'

'I am!'

It was the first time that Mencius had heard the Galilean speak and the
tone of his voice produced a peculiar sensation. The words were crazy
enough, but the man who spoke them was not crazy. The voice was calm,
respectful but self-confident. Evidently Pilate had been similarly
affected, for his face remained soberly attentive. The murmuring in the
crowd had ceased.

'Tell us about your Kingdom,' said Pilate. 'Where is it?'

'My Kingdom,' replied the Galilean, 'is not of this world.'

He paused. Pilate listened. The multitude was silent.

'Proceed,' said Pilate. 'Your Kingdom is not in this world, you say.
Where, then, is it?'

'My Kingdom is not of this world, but it is in this world for all who
seek truth. They who love truth hear my voice--and understand what I
say.'

The words were not spoken in the strident tone of a demagogue. Mencius
had a feeling that the Galilean was talking to him personally. Perhaps
Pilate felt the same way. The Romans who sat on either side of the
Procurator were leaning forward. Nobody was smiling.

'Truth,' mused Pilate, half to himself. 'What is truth?'

There was no reply to that. The Galilean faced the Procurator squarely
for a moment and then averted his eyes, closed them, smiled briefly,
and shook his head, as if to say that this was not the time or the
place to explain truth.

The spell that had gripped the crowd suddenly lifted now, and impatient
voices rose in angry demand for a decision. Pilate pounded for order
and didn't get it. He rose and shouted for silence in the court and
there was a momentary cessation of the tumult.

The defendant, he said, was apparently innocent of any wrongdoing.
There was no evidence that he had committed a crime. He had already
been severely punished...But the crowd would have none of it. 'Away
with him!' they yelled. 'To death with him! Crucify him!' The fanatic
shouting rose to a concerted roar! 'Crucify! Crucify!'

Pilate sat down heavily. His hand shook as he beckoned to one of
the guards, and flung an order over his shoulder. Presently the
guard returned with a silver basin of water. Pilate turned back
his sleeves...That settles it, thought Mencius. The Procurator is
helpless--and has given in. He will wash his hands of the whole affair.
After all--Pilate wasn't there to quarrel with Jewry, but to keep the
peace or at least the semblance of it. He could save the Galilean only
at the risk of his position, already precarious enough. Pilate dipped
his hands in the water, and the crowd cheered...Mencius had seen enough
now, and wanted to get out of the snarling pack. He turned about and
worked his way to the street, intending to return at once to Levi's Inn
and deliver the Emperor's message to the Legate from Minoa.

On the corner, across the street, stood a little group of forlorn and
frightened men, garbed in simple country dress. Mencius guessed that
these despairing people might be the helpless friends of the doomed
man from Galilee. He crossed over and joined them. They were too
preoccupied with their grief to notice his presence among them. One
huge, middle-aged man, towering over the others, with streaming eyes
and a contorted face, stood beating an open palm with a clenched fist,
breathing in audible gasps like an exhausted runner.

There were a few weeping women in the company, two of them quite young
and attractive in spite of their red and swollen eyes.

Now the crowd at the Insula was breaking up, coming apart, and a
platoon of Roman legionaries marched through and down the terraced
steps. The Commander, with the insignia of a Legate, was a handsome
young fellow with an exaggerated military bearing which Mencius
surmised was not quite natural for him. No--he was tipsy, that was the
trouble; and doing his best to walk straight. A few paces in advance of
him strutted a grizzled veteran bearing a banner. Mencius recognized
it as a duplicate of the old rag that used to hang limp and listless
over the big gate at the Fort at Minoa. So--it was young Gallio, then,
who had been given this disgraceful job...Now came the prisoner, towed
by a rope, and not gently, for the legionaries were marching with long
strides. The rabble pressed closely. There was very little shouting
now. They had got what the Sanhedrin wanted. Everybody would be
satisfied now--the moneylenders, the landlords, the grafters; yes, and
the Temple that couldn't afford to offend anybody with property.

As the captive was tugged past his weeping friends, he turned his
face toward them compassionately. They slowly followed the crowd with
irresolute steps as if they were uncertain what to do; all but the
gigantic fellow, who turned the other way and began to walk rapidly,
lurchingly toward the west. Apparently he had no mind for attending
the execution. Mencius followed him with his eyes, trying to contrive
a story that might explain the man's conduct. Was he, for all his
physical strength, a coward? Or had the condemnation of his hero driven
him to utter stampede?...Now a youngish chap, who had been in the
company of the Galilean's friends, hurried past in the direction taken
by the big man. Mencius expected the young fellow to overtake him, but
he made no effort to do so. He continued to follow at a distance.

There was no occasion now for any hurry in the delivery of the
Emperor's message to Marcellus Gallio, whose day's work had been cut
out for him. It would take hours to complete it. Mencius had never seen
a crucifixion and didn't intend to see one.

He walked the short distance to the Embassy stables. The place was
practically deserted. A hostler saddled Brutus and led him out.
Mencius mounted and started for the inn. The usual traffic clattered
in the street. Jerusalem had resumed her customary activities. The
food-markets were crowded with shrilly bargaining shoppers. Somewhere,
in an out-of-the-way place, nails were being driven through the hands
and feet of a man whose only offence was his confessed devotion to
the truth. The quarrelling markets, with their short measures, short
weights, short change, and short tempers, were still doing business in
the old way, the merchants trying to sell bad produce and the customers
trying to pay for it with bad coinage; and had any one of them adhered
to the truth--either as a buyer or seller--he would soon have nothing
left but his impracticable idea. The truth was a luxury that nobody
could afford. Mencius himself--he had to admit--couldn't afford it:
a Proconsul must be diplomatic. Pontius Pilate couldn't afford it: a
resolve on his part to abide by the truth would have meant his prompt
recall from his Prefecture. And had old Tiberius decided to tell the
truth he would have lost his Empire. It was that kind of a world.

The brave Galilean, reflected Mencius, had accomplished nothing. He
had thrown away his life to no purpose at all. The world wasn't ready
to hear his voice. There never had been a time, in human history, when
the world would have listened to his voice. And--there never would
be such a time. It was too much to expect. Humanity had no capacity
for moral grandeur. This Jesus had misjudged the world. By sunset,
this evening, he would be dead and buried. And by next week he would
have been forgotten, except by a little handful of little people in a
poverty-cursed little hinterland.

 * * * * * *

It was mid-forenoon. The sun was hot. Esther and Myra were slowly
plodding up the long hill to Bethany. They walked in silence, for they
were physically and emotionally exhausted: they had wept until they
could weep no more.

As for Myra, however deeply she grieved over the soul-sickening
tragedy, she still had her family to go back to--and Joel. She was
definitely on Joel's side now, whatever her grandfather might say...For
Esther, everything was lost. The Master, for all his superhuman power,
had been led away to die. He had saved others, but he had been unable
to save himself. Not a friend had come to his aid. Even Peter had run
away.

In a day or two, Myra would return to her home and friends in Galilee.
Esther had no home. There would be no reason for her returning to
Galilee. Hannah didn't need her. And she wasn't sure that she wanted
ever to see Peter again.

As a guest in suburban Bethany, Esther might have known nothing of the
dreadful night and tragic morning that had befallen Jesus until it was
all over, had not an expected friend of Myra's Uncle Boaz--who had met
with a delaying misadventure on his long journey from Askelon--arrived
at daybreak with the appalling news.

Grandfather Asher's high-pitched voice had roused the house. Habitually
an early riser, Asher had been the first to hear the report. The
Sanhedrin was sending the Nazarene blasphemer to Pilate's court this
morning to be tried for treason. And that, shouted the old man, would
finish him! And it was about time!

Uncle Boaz hadn't been much stirred by the announcement, and when his
excited father declared he was going to the Insula to hear the trial he
had cautioned him against it. 'It's a long trip. It will be a hot day.
There will be much confusion.'

'But I cannot miss this, my son! I want to see this trouble-maker
finally disposed of! A day to remember! An historic occasion!'

Esther listened with a sinking heart. She felt she must go. Myra had
tried to dissuade her; and, failing of it, decided reluctantly to
go too. They did not wait for Grandfather Asher, but left the house
through the patio and the garden gate. They sped through Bethany,
down the hill, into the awakening city--and on to the Insula. A great
crowd of clamorous men had massed there at the entrance. The girls did
not venture into the angry throng, but crossed the street and waited.
Huddled together at the corner were the disciples. But why were they
not beside the Master? There was Peter, wide-eyed, haggard, gnawing
at his lip. Surely Peter could have been depended on to stand by the
Master, even at the risk of his life! Esther could not believe her own
eyes.

Terrible things, incredible things were happening now. A savage voice
had screamed, 'Crucify him!' The mob instantly echoed it, 'Crucify him!
Crucify him!' The words mounted into a horrifying chant, 'Crucify!
Crucify! Crucify!...' There was a sudden silence; then a wild cry
of victory! The mob spilled over the terraces and cascaded into the
street. A company of Roman soldiers marched rapidly down the steps,
tugging Jesus by a rope. The crowd closed in behind them. Now the
bewildered disciples followed; all but Peter, who was running away!
Young Thad had followed after him.

Myra cried that she could bear no more, and entreated Esther to return
with her to Bethany. There was nothing they could do. But Esther caught
her by the hand and pulled her along into the procession. At the next
corner, a dozen men came in from a side street bearing a heavy piece of
timber about twelve feet long with a cross-bar near the top. The parade
halted. Esther, still dragging Myra by the hand, forced her way toward
the front. The rough-hewn cross had been laid on the Master's shoulder.
He staggered under its weight and sank to his knees.

A burly lieutenant, sighting a tall, heavily built man standing among
the spectators, shouted, 'You, there! Put a shoulder under this cross
and help the man carry it!'

'That I will not!' boldly boomed the big man. 'I am a free-born Roman
citizen! And this is no affair of mine!'

'We'll see about that!' shouted the young Commander. 'What's your name,
fellow? And where do you come from?'

By this time the crowd had grown quiet, expectant. It was not customary
to talk back to a Roman officer.

'My name, sir, is Simon. I live in Cyrene, a ten days' fast journey
from here, in North Africa. I am in Jerusalem on business, with a
caravan of herbs and spices. I protest that you have no right to
impress me into this degrading service.'

In spite of his tragic predicament, Jesus was listening sympathetically
to the Cyrenian's courageous self-defence. He gave the big man a
friendly look of compassion...Then, to the surprise of the soldiers,
the blustering Cyrenian stepped forward and shouldered the cross. Jesus
smiled his gratitude and made a feeble attempt to help.

'No,' said Simon kindly. 'I will carry it. You have quite enough to
bear today.'

The procession moved on. Esther and Myra stood, for a little while,
watching. Then they turned and silently went their way. Near the top of
the long hill they sat down to rest under an ancient olive tree.

'I have just now decided what I shall do, Myra,' said Esther. 'I am
going back to find my old nurse, Ione. She is in the southern mountains
of Arabia. If she still lives, perhaps I can do something for her.'

'You mean--you would go alone all that long way?'

'It would be safe enough, I think. I would keep to the main
highways--and stop at night in the homes of farmers.' Esther elaborated
her plan. She would provide herself with some inexpensive trinkets--and
be a peddler...Yes--and she would try to find a tame little donkey to
carry her pack. Proceeding from village to village in the daytime, no
harm would befall her.

'You will need money,' cautioned Myra.

'I have money,' said Esther. 'Not much--but enough.'

Myra remembered having seen a sign on a paddock gate a little farther
up the road, announcing a donkey for sale. Esther came to her feet,
eager to find the place. They stopped before the gate and a middle-aged
man came toward them. Was it true, Esther inquired, that he had a
donkey for sale?

'What do you want with a donkey?' he asked, suspiciously. 'Do you live
hereabouts?'

'No,' said Esther, 'I want a donkey to carry a light pack for me on a
journey--many miles away.'

'When are you going?'

'Early tomorrow morning.'

'Very well, you may have him--for ten shekels--if you take him at
once!' The man went into the stable and led out a little white donkey.

'What's the matter with him,' asked Esther, 'that you are selling him
for ten shekels?'

'There's nothing the matter with him,' said the man, 'except that I
don't want to be involved in any trouble. If you're going away, you
won't be bothered. But I lent him to a man a few days ago who is
accused of treason; and I don't care to be mixed up in it. And you'd
better not go through the city when you leave!'

Esther produced the money and the man handed her the halter-strap. The
little donkey sniffed at her hands.

'His name is Jasper,' said the man, as he turned toward the house.

 * * * * * *

Mencius tied Brutus to a hitching-rack in the stable-yard of Levi's Inn
and found Captain Fulvius lounging in his room. Briefly he recounted
the events of the morning, Fulvius listening attentively. When he had
made an end of it, the Captain, who had been fascinated by the story of
Voldi's dangerous errand, inquired, 'But suppose the youngster sees a
chance to do his work while they are in camp tonight? In that case he
would flee at once, and arrive in Joppa many hours before the time he
had set. They would have no authority to take him aboard The Vestris;
and there he would be, without protection; possibly pursued.'

'You are right!' said Mencius. 'I had not thought of that. Perhaps I
had better leave at once for Joppa and make sure he doesn't get into
trouble.'

'How about the Emperor's message?' queried Fulvius. 'This young Legate
Marcellus will be occupied most of the day.'

'Do me a great favour, Captain,' entreated Mencius. 'Take charge of
the letter. See that it gets into the Legate's hands as soon as he has
returned to the Insula.'

Fulvius consented, without enthusiasm, and the Proconsul set out on
his journey. Once out of the city's congested streets, Brutus was
encouraged to a brisk canter. At the village of Emmaus, twelve miles to
the west, he drew up before a tidy-looking inn for something to eat.
The place was doing a thriving business today. In the paddock a dozen
or more beautiful horses were tied, all of them a glossy black, their
saddle-blankets bearing the familiar Roman device, the fasces.

In the centre of the dining-room there was a long table surrounded by
a dozen fine-looking patrols, impressive in their black-and-scarlet
tunics. By a front window, Prefect Sergius sat alone. He rose with a
welcoming smile, an action that brought his stalwart guards instantly
to their feet.

'By all the Gods, Mencius!' he exclaimed. 'So it was you then, and
not your ghost, that I saw in Pilate's loathsome congregation this
morning!...Do sit down and we will find you something to eat.'

The old inn-keeper shuffled up and put a bowl of steaming lentil soup
and a plate of small barley loaves before the new guest.

'Yes, I was there, Sergius,' said Mencius soberly. 'It was a
disgraceful affair, was it not?'

'Shocking!' agreed Sergius. 'A sad tragedy for the young fellow from
Galilee, but worse for the Procurator. By this time the hapless
Galilean will be dead and out of his trouble, while Pilate's disaster
is still to come. The canny old men of the Sanhedrin now know that they
have him saddled, bridled, and ready to ride whenever they like.'

'Didn't they know that before?'

'Not so definitely. Pilate has been walking his tight-rope with
something like dignity. Today he lost his balance. They had no case at
all against that inoffensive young dreamer, and they knew it. And they
knew that Pilate knew it. Everybody knew it. They demanded that the
Procurator commit a murder, and he did it...What I can't understand,
Mencius, is the terrific volume of malice hurled at that defenceless
Galilean...A king? Absurd! Imagine that supine young philosopher--or
fool--or whatever you like--attempting to lead a revolution! Imagine
him on a horse! Imagine him directing a charge of ten thousand bowmen!'
The Prefect waved it all away with his spoon. 'The Sanhedrin has too
much sense to believe that this country preacher threatened their
prestige.'

'Better not be too sure about that,' cautioned Mencius. 'All you saw
of the Galilean this morning was an utterly exhausted, blood-smeared
young idealist on his way to execution. The fact is: this man has
demonstrated supernormal power. Thousands have followed him about
through the provinces. There is plenty of good evidence that he has
healed the sick, the blind, the crippled.'

'Pouf!' railed the Prefect. 'I don't believe these tales and neither do
you! Such things don't happen...Who told you?'

'I was informed by the last man in the world who could be taken in by a
trickster...Do you remember that rich young Arabian who came with me to
Caesarea, after he had saved my life in a fight?'

'Do I?' Sergius laughed aloud. 'I had to lock the youngster up to make
sure he wouldn't murder our precious Tetrarch.'

'And turned him loose, later, to go wherever he pleased, and do what he
liked, with your blessing,' grinned Mencius.

'Well, Antipas isn't fit to live,' mumbled Sergius, defensively, 'but I
couldn't have him assassinated while under my protection. When he was
out of my custody, I didn't care what happened to him...By the way,
what became of your handsome cut-throat? Did he return to Arabia?'

Mencius nodded, and for a moment Sergius thought there might be further
information on that subject, but the Proconsul was attentive to his
food.

'I'm rather surprised that your Voldi hasn't tried to settle Arabia's
claim on Antipas. The boy seemed not lacking in courage. My Felix
became greatly attached to him.'

'What's Felix doing?' inquired Mencius.

'He's in Rome, attending the Military Academy.'

'Good! I'll look him up when I get home...Reverting to this mysterious
Galilean, Sergius, I'm no more gullible on the subject of miracles than
you are--or my cynical young Arab, who isn't interested in anything
but fine horses, sharp steel, and good sportsmanship. But there can be
no doubt that this Jesus performed some remarkable deeds, quite beyond
human understanding.'

'Very well! Very well!' barked the Prefect impatiently. 'Have it your
own way! For the sake of argument, let us say that these wonder-tales
were true. Let's concede that the Galilean gave sight to the blind,
ears to the deaf, new legs to the cripples. Let's say he cured leprosy
and raised the dead! Where does that leave you? Why didn't he try to
help himself today? Either he had superhuman power or he hadn't! If
he had it, he could have exercised it! Instead of standing there,
helpless, roped like an animal on the way to slaughter, he could have
pointed a finger at Pilate and stiffened him into a cataleptic fit!'

'There you are!' Mencius brought his fist down hard on the table.
'That's where the mystery mounts! Let us say that the man was no
ordinary creature; that he did possess superhuman power; that he had a
commission to improve the world's way of living. Let us conjecture that
he performed these miracles of healing solely to attract an audience,
and give the public a valid reason for believing that he spoke with
divine authority! All he asked of them was that they treat one another
with kindness. That, he said, would cure the world of its afflictions.'
Mencius paused.

'Well--go on!' prodded Sergius. 'You haven't answered my question yet.'

'We're coming to that--now. Let us say that it finally dawned on this
Torchbearer that the world wasn't ready to receive the light. Men
were too selfish and greedy to make the experiment. Everybody wanted
peace and prosperity; nobody would do anything to earn it. Next-door
neighbours quarrelled and fought, blood-relatives hated one another,
the religious sects were contemptuous of other beliefs.

'He looked about him and found that every institution in the world
was at enmity to his proposed kingdom of truth, and good-will, and
peace. No Government wants peace, Sergius! Which one of us would have
a job if good-will became popular? Can you imagine the Empire taking
steps toward peace?...Why, a wave of decency among men would wreck the
Empire!...What would become of the temples, the shrines, and the Gods
themselves if humanity suddenly decided to be honest and merciful? No
man would need to howl for somebody to save his soul from hell if he
lived a life of rectitude!... But--it was a lost cause!...And so,'
concluded Mencius, 'the messenger gave it up as a hopeless job!'

'That's certainly a fantastic theory,' commented Sergius.

'It's better than none,' said Mencius.

'Let me ask you'--the Prefect regarded the Proconsul with a sly
grin--'would you yourself have adopted this soft and silly programme of
patting everybody on the back--slaves and all--and being kind?'

'Of course not!' declared Mencius. 'I couldn't afford it. I'd soon be
on the street in rags, begging my bread.'

'Then--the Galilean's theory is no good?'

'Apparently not. And that's why he gave it up. You wondered why he
didn't stand up for himself, this morning. My solution is that he saw
it was no use. The world wasn't ready for it.'

'Do you think it ever will be, Mencius?' The Prefect was pushing back
his chair.

'Frankly, no! One would think that whoever devised the world might have
something better in store for it than hunger, slavery, and bloodshed,
but--'

'But--meantime,' grinned Sergius, 'you will continue to bring copper
for our invasion wharves, so that we may raise all hell with these poor
Jews...You're quietly losing your mind, Mencius. You think too much.
You'd better accept things as they are. The world's a pretty grim show,
but it's the only world we've got...Shall we go now?'

They preceded the patrols to the paddock, mounted their horses, and
rode for some distance in silence.

'You haven't told me what brought you to Jerusalem,' said Sergius.

Mencius told him briefly about the Emperor's message to Marcellus,
which Captain Fulvius would deliver before the day was over.

'What do you suppose it was about?' wondered Sergius.

Mencius had no idea, but surmised it might be a recall to Rome.

'The old man probably wouldn't order Marcellus to go and hang himself,'
he said.

'He's crazy enough to do that,' remarked Sergius. 'It was a dirty
assignment that Pilate gave the boy,' he added, wincing. 'But it's
doubtful if the Legate will have much to do with it personally. Those
tough rascals from Minoa will know how. Marcellus was tight as a
drum...I was to have stayed for the banquet tonight, but begged off.
Pilate will not have a very happy time, I'm thinking. He'll have a load
on his mind.'

They were nearing the fork in the highway, the road to the right
leading to Caesarea, straight ahead to Joppa. Their horses were slowed
to a walk.

'Give my regards to my boy,' said Sergius.

'I will do that--with pleasure,' said Mencius.

'When do you expect to be home?'

'In seven weeks, if all goes well.'

'Well, good luck--and fair weather.'

They rose in their stirrups and exchanged a formal salute, for the
benefit of the observant patrols. Spurs were put to the horses and the
distance between them rapidly widened. Mencius was glad to be on his
way. He had had a most distressing experience in Jerusalem and hoped
he would never have an occasion to visit the Holy City again. In seven
weeks he would be at home with his family...It would have appalled
him if he had known that in seven weeks he would be back in Jerusalem
again, on an errand of such mystery that even he himself did not know
who had summoned him--or why.

 * * * * * *

All that afternoon, Thad followed Peter, making no effort to catch up
with him, but keeping him in sight. It wasn't like Peter to be running
away. Perhaps his grief over the Master's plight had gone to his head.

Well, whatever it was that ailed Peter, he needed someone to look after
him. There was nothing more that could be done for Jesus.

Peter had walked fast, with long, lurching strides, until the Damascus
Gate was reached. Then he began to run. It was not easy for Thad to
keep up with him. Sometimes Peter would fling himself down by the
roadside, with his head buried in his arms; then he would wearily drag
himself to his feet and hurry on.

At the village of Lebonah, Thad bought half a dozen small wheaten
loaves and a few smoked perch. Peter was out of sight when he took to
the road again, and it was a mile further before he overtook him. It
was mid-afternoon now. Peter was lying, face downward, under a cypress
tree. Thad approached quietly and sat down on the ground a few feet
away.

After a long time, the Big Fisherman sat up. His eyes were swollen and
bloodshot. Thad silently opened his knapsack and offered the food he
had brought. Peter shook his head.

'You shouldn't have followed me, Thad,' he said hoarsely. 'Don't touch
me! I am unclean!'

'You mean--you're--a--leper?' mumbled Thad.

'Oh, my boy--if that were all!' moaned Peter.

'What's the trouble, sir?' begged Thad.

Tears were streaming down Peter's cheeks.

'I denied my Master!' he cried. 'They asked me if I was his friend--and
I said, No!...Go back, Thad! Join the others. I'm no fit company for
you. Go back, I tell you!' And, with that, Peter rose, and staggered on
toward Galilee.

And Thad, bewildered, heartbroken, continued to follow him.

 * * * * * *

Shortly after noon, Joseph of Arimathaea called at the Insula and asked
to see Pilate. He was informed that the Procurator was resting and must
not be disturbed. Joseph insisted that the matter was urgent. After a
considerable delay, he was shown into the council-chamber, where Pilate
sat at his desk, blear-eyed and sullen.

'Well, Joe,' muttered the unhappy Procurator gruffly, 'what is it?'

'I want permission, sire, to bury the Galilean--when he is dead.'

'Friend of yours, Joe?'

Joseph nodded slowly.

'At a distance, sire,' he said. 'I was not a follower. I did not have
the courage. But--I want to put him away...in my own tomb.'

'Perhaps you think the Galilean was unjustly convicted,' rasped Pilate
crossly.

'I am not here to criticize,' murmured Joseph.

'But you think the man was innocent,' said Pilate. After a pause, he
added impulsively, 'So do I, Joe!...But--what could I do?'

'May I have his body, sire?'

The Procurator picked up his stylus and wrote a brief order.

'Give that to the Legate from Minoa.'

The door was quietly opened, and the Captain of the Insula Guard
approached the desk.

'A small delegation is here, sire, sent by the Sanhedrin,' he said.

'Very well,' muttered Pilate wearily, 'bring them in.'

The spokesman, a youngish priest, bowed deeply, and said:

'The writing, sire, that we requested, is misleading.'

'What writing?' demanded Pilate irascibly.

'That we nailed at the top of the cross, sire. You wrote, "This is the
King of the Jews." It is misunderstood. We would like you to write, "He
said he was the King of the Jews."'

'Do your own writing!' shouted Pilate angrily. 'I have written enough!
Quite enough! Let me hear no more of it!' He beat the desk with both
fists. 'No more of it--I tell you!'

The delegation bowed itself out. Joseph rose to go.

'Farewell, sire,' he said, 'and thank you!'

Pilate, glumly preoccupied, nodded, but made no reply.



Chapter XXIII


Hard on the heels of the shocking news that Jesus had been crucified
bounded the incredible story that he was alive again.

The provinces couldn't believe their ears. In areas where he had spoken
and healed the sick all work was suspended. Nothing else was talked
about; nothing else mattered.

Nor was this excitement contained within the confines of Jewry.
The mysterious Galilean had for so long been a popular topic of
conversation that his fame had filtered into all the surrounding
countries. His sayings and doings had been discussed not only all the
way from Damascus to Petra and from the Jordan to the Sea, but up in
far-away Cappadocia and down in farther-away Ethiopia.

It was not true, as Proconsul Mencius had surmised, that the
extraordinary career of the wonder-working Carpenter was a localized
phenomenon observed only by the farmers, vine-dressers, and fishermen
of Israel's hinterland. Mencius was to discover presently that the
slaves who tugged at the heavy oars in his cargo-ships had heard of
Jesus and his forecast of a Kingdom in which all men of good-will would
be free.

The stunning news of Jesus' death and restoration to life had got
off to a swift start. Ordinarily the long caravans that regularly
plodded to and fro between the interior and the ports were the common
carriers of current doings. They were notorious gossips, in a class
with the wandering minstrels in respect to their reliability. And had
the astounding story of Jesus' resurrection been caravan-borne, it may
be doubted whether many sensible people would have believed it. But
this news had outsped the caravans. At the end of Passover Week all
the highways and their tributaries were full of travellers and all the
travellers were full of talk.

First on the roads were the Gentile merchants from distant places who
had no compunction about beginning a journey on the Sabbath Day. They
told of the crucifixion. Next came the Jewish pilgrims who had set
off for home at daylight on Sunday. They sadly confirmed the earlier
reports of the Gentiles. Then, later in the forenoon, the confounding
stories of the resurrection started on their journeys, moving forward
at various speeds, hour by hour and day by day, on foot, on horseback,
on camelback, in donkey-carts, in litters, in chariots, in ferry-boats
and deep-water ships, until everybody for a thousand miles in all
directions had heard that the crucified Galilean wonder-worker had come
alive!

It was the first time in anyone's experience that good news was
startling; the first time that good news was news at all. Life was
uncertain for every man, but death was not. When men died they were
permanently dead. Nobody was exempt; not even the Caesars, who claimed
to be divine. Now it appeared that a penniless carpenter had overcome
death. He had more power than the Emperor. Not everyone believed the
story, but everyone talked about it. Even those who shook their heads
wished they could believe it; hoped it was true.

There were various versions of the story. Reduced to its simplest form:
certain women, devoted followers of the Master, had gone out at dawn on
Sunday to the beautiful Garden of Sepulchres to anoint the mangled body
with myrrh. They had found the tomb open and empty. Then they had seen
him, strolling among the flowers. After a tender moment of ecstatic
recognition the women were told to notify 'my disciples--and Peter.'

 * * * * * *

Proconsul Mencius was restlessly pacing the wharf when Captain Fulvius
arrived at twilight on Saturday evening accompanied by the Legate from
Minoa, his slave, and half a dozen cavalrymen.

'We are taking Legate Marcellus Gallio with us to Rome,' explained
Fulvius as he wearily dismounted. Lowering his voice, he added, 'Don't
expect too much of this boy. He's out of his head.'

Introductions were attempted unsuccessfully. Young Gallio, pale,
haggard, and bewildered, made no effort to be gracious.

'The Legate is ill, sir,' interposed Fulvius. 'I will show him to
his quarters at once.' He beckoned to the slave, who collected their
luggage and followed his badly befuddled master. Mencius reflected that
he had never seen a more perfect specimen of physical manhood than this
handsome Greek. In a few moments Fulvius reappeared on deck and took
the Proconsul aside.

'What a day!' The Captain mopped his perspiring brow. 'First chance
I had to deliver the Emperor's letter was at Pilate's banquet, last
night, for the visiting officers.'

'And Marcellus read it--and lost his balance?' wondered Mencius.

'He had already lost his balance. He was dazed, dead on his feet,
utterly indifferent to the Emperor's message ordering his return to
Rome. He inquired when we were sailing and asked if he might go with
us.' Fulvius shook his head. 'It's beyond me. I tried to talk to him
today. All he would say was, "Were you out there?"'

'Maybe the crucifixion was too much for him,' suggested Mencius.

'He's used to the sight of bloodshed.'

'The slave seems intelligent. Think he knows what ails the Legate?'

'Perhaps. He is worried about him. I told the Greek we weren't sailing
directly to Rome and he replied, "There's no hurry."'

'He probably wants the Legate to have time to recover his senses before
he meets the Emperor,' thought Mencius.

Fulvius chuckled.

'Old Tiberius may like him better if he is a bit crazy...By the way,
you haven't heard anything from your Arab?'

'It's hardly time yet.'

'Looks like an interesting voyage,' drawled Fulvius, 'with a crazy man
in one cabin and a fugitive in another.'

 * * * * * *

Late in the forenoon on Sunday, Voldi cantered up the wharf to the
ship's side. Somewhere along the line he had abandoned his rags and
tatters, and was well clad in riding clothes and boots. He was in good
spirits.

'It was just as I expected,' he explained. 'At dusk, last night, our
caravan was set upon by bandits. There was some hard fighting, but we
drove them off. We lost a few men, among them the Tetrarch himself.
Somebody killed him with his own dagger.'

'Perhaps you'd better go aboard,' advised Mencius, soberly.

'It's a good idea,' agreed Fulvius.

In a few minutes The Vestris was inching away from the dock and her
sails were creeping up the tall masts. Darik and Brutus, in adjoining
stalls, were rubbing noses. The other ships of the fleet were winching
up their anchors and hauling up canvas.

Voldi rejoined his Roman friends on deck. A slave brought them their
luncheon. Mencius grinned mischievously and remarked, 'You stole the
Tetrarch's horse.'

'Not at all!' protested Voldi. 'I stuffed the coin-pouch, containing
the three hundred shekels, into the Tetrarch's pocket.'

'And so,' said Fulvius solemnly, 'you and the Tetrarch are square.'

'Right!' declared Voldi. 'And the Tetrarch and Arabia are square!'

 * * * * * *

It was Wednesday morning. For the past hour the Big Fisherman had been
down on his knees, industriously caulking the open seams on the deck
of The Abigail. He had found that this monotonous manual labour, if
he gave himself to it with diligence, temporarily eased his wounded
spirit. There was something, too, about being on one's knees. That
helped a little.

Thad had gone ashore for some provisions. The loyal youngster had
hardly left Simon's side since their abrupt departure from Jerusalem
until their arrival Sunday evening. As they hurried through Capernaum,
Thad had entreated the unhappy skipper to go home and get some proper
food and a good night's rest, but Simon wasn't ready to face Hannah.
No; he would wait until Andrew had had time to come home. Andrew could
tell her.

'I'll sleep on The Abigail,' he had said. 'But I want you to go home
tonight, Thad. It's no more than fair to your parents. You row me
out--and then you go home.'

'But that would leave you without a boat, sir.'

'That's the way I want it,' Simon had declared grimly. 'If there's a
dory tied up to the ship, it will mean that somebody's aboard. And I
want to be alone.'

Thad had remonstrated, but Simon had been obdurate; and after the
little boat had pulled away into the thickening gloom, The Abigail,
instead of offering a welcome, seemed aloof and reproachful. The
long-unused blankets in the little forecastle were damp and mouldy.
Simon had dipped up a bucket of water and washed his dusty feet, trying
to pretend that he was back again on familiar ground and repeating
accustomed habits, but nothing was quite real. He flung himself down
on the cot, hoping his exhaustion would compel sleep; and presently
he dozed, only to waken with a start, and the awful thing that had
happened to him would engulf him, bringing out the sweat on his
forehead. The silence was profound, terrifying. It had been a mistake
to let Thad go.

The long, wretched night had eventually ended and a pink dawn came
up rapidly from behind the eastern mountains, giving promise of a
beautiful early summer day. It was an hour that had always stirred
Simon deeply, but this morning his spirit did not rise to sense the
oncoming glory. He strolled aft and stood at the rail, dully facing the
pageant, and there recurred to his mind a remark of the Master's--not
fully understood at the time, 'You are the salt of the earth; but if
the salt lose its savour...' That was the trouble. From now on, as long
as he lived, Simon's life, he felt, would be tasteless.

To his immeasurable relief, he saw the dory coming now. Thad pulled
up under The Abigail's bow. Simon lowered a basket and drew it up,
well filled with supplies, bread, smoked perch, and sun-cured figs.
He leaned far over the rail and grasped one end of the cot that Thad
had brought from home, and hauled in a great roll of bedding. It was a
comfort to know that he would have company now.

All that day they had worked side by side, and mostly in silence, on
the long neglected deck. Occasionally Thad ventured some brief comment,
but received little co-operation. Once, when he addressed the taciturn
skipper as 'Peter,' the Big Fisherman had said sadly, 'My name is
Simon. Please remember that.' On Tuesday, Thad rowed in for one of
the tents Esther had used last summer. If it should rain in the night
he would be protected. His eyes were bright with excitement when he
returned.

'They're saying in the village,' he reported, 'that the Tetrarch's
caravan was set upon--and he was killed!'

But even this shocking news failed to lift Simon's apathy. He was
silent for a while and then remarked, 'That will close the palace.'
After another interval, he added, 'They will not need any more fish.'

And now it was Wednesday morning. Thad had gone ashore on an errand.
Simon's knees were lame from his unaccustomed exercise, and after
an hour of it he got wearily to his feet and walked the length of
the deck, wondering what had detained the boy. Three dories were
on the water, and moving rapidly, their oars flashing in the sun.
With narrowed eyes, shaded by his cupped hands, Simon identified the
occupants of the boats. Thad was bringing Andrew. James and John were
in the second dory, which had overtaken and was now passing Thad's.
Lagging behind came Philip with Thomas and old Bartholomew.

Simon's heart was in his throat. How could he face these men? They were
drawing closer now, near enough for him to see their animation. They
seemed happy! Whatever could have happened? He tossed a rope to the
first dory and Johnny scrambled up, flung a leg over the rail and threw
his arms around the bewildered skipper.

'You haven't heard!' he shouted exultantly. 'You don't know! Listen!
Jesus lives!...I tell you--he is alive again!'

James had grasped Simon's arm.

'We have seen him, Peter! He came to us--Sunday night--at Ben-Josef's
house!'

They had all swarmed over the rail now, all but Bartholomew, who was
being tugged on board by Thad. Simon stood there dazed, his lips
quivering, the tears running down his cheeks.

'He told us to make haste and go home,' said Philip. 'He was anxious
for you to know.'

'That's what he said,' put in Johnny. 'He said, "Go and tell Peter!"'

'Are you sure he said "Peter"?' asked the Big Fisherman huskily.

'Aye! That he did!' declared Bartholomew. '"Go--quickly--and tell
Peter!"'

'Where is he now?' entreated Peter. 'I must go to him!'

'We're to wait here,' said Andrew. 'He is coming to us.'

They slowly drifted to the afterdeck and sat in a circle around Peter.
If anyone remembered his unaccountable apostasy and flight on the
morning of the great tragedy, it was not apparent. They were too full
of joy to remember anything but their Master's conquest. They were all
talking at once. Peter's brightened eyes darted from one to another as
he tried to follow their fragmentary narratives. Then he began asking
questions: 'Was Jesus the same--with the same body?'

'Absolutely the same,' declared Thomas. 'A bit pale, perhaps. There
were deep black thorn-cuts on his forehead and purple nail-wounds in
his hands and feet, and the gash of a sword-thrust in his side; but he
was real!'

'Not just a spirit, then,' concluded Peter, 'but flesh and blood.'

At that, they suddenly fell silent. Old Bartholomew cleared his throat.

'There was a little difference, Peter,' he admitted. 'It is true, as
Thomas says, that he appeared in his real body--'

'And he ate, too, a bit of fish and some honey in the comb,' interposed
Philip.

'We don't know that--for sure,' put in James. 'The only light in there
was a small candle, for we were in hiding.'

'Well--he took the plate,' persisted Philip. 'He could have eaten.'

Peter turned his attention to the old man.

'What was it you started to say, Bartholomew?'

They all listened, their eyes lowered as if they knew what was coming.

'Only this, Peter,' replied Bartholomew. 'There was a little
difference. When he came into the room, he didn't bother to open the
door.'

Peter's eyes widened. The others did not look up.

'You mean--he walked through it!'

'I suppose so,' said Bartholomew lamely. 'The door did not open; and
then--he was standing there.'

'And when he left you,' pursued Peter, 'did he open the door? And do
you know where he went?'

'That was mysterious, too,' rejoined Bartholomew. 'He was standing
there among us, as I say, talking earnestly with us; and, as James has
told you, the room was but dimly lighted; and, presently, he was gone.'

'Didn't go out through the door?'

'Didn't go near the door! Didn't move!...He just vanished!'

Johnny broke the ensuing silence to say, 'It was reported that two men
met him on the highway near Emmaus, that evening at supper time. Both
of them were firm believers in the Master; had often seen him and had
heard him talk. They were discussing the report of the resurrection
when he overtook them and joined in the conversation. They invited him
to have supper with them at the Emmaus inn. He sat with them for a time
at the table--'

'But ate nothing,' put in James.

'And vanished!' ended John.

'The queer thing about it was that he talked with these men at Emmaus
about the same time that he appeared to us at Ben-Josef's house,'
contributed Thomas.

'And it's a good three-hour walk from Emmaus to Jerusalem,' said Philip.

Nothing more was said for a while. Peter sat thoughtfully stroking his
jaw. Andrew observed that there was a mixture of white in his brother's
black beard. Yes--and there was a patch of silver in his forelock that
had not been there before. It must have taken a deal of suffering to do
that to Peter.

Thad had now caught Johnny's eye and wiggled a beckoning finger. The
two arose quietly and strolled arm in arm toward the little galley,
presumably to prepare food for the party.

'What it all comes to, Peter,' summed up old Bartholomew soberly, 'is
that our Master, having overcome death, is set free to go wherever he
pleases, whenever he pleases! He is independent of miles--and hours!'

'He might even be here--on The Abigail--now!' mused Andrew.

Peter gave a startled look over his shoulder, and then stared into his
brother's eyes.

'Does that affright you, Andy?' he asked.

'No; it does not affright me,' replied Andrew. 'But--from now on--so
long as I live--I'm going to be more careful--about what I say--and
do...One never knows when he may be standing there.'

 * * * * * *

Early the next morning--it was the twentieth day of Nisan--they were
all reassembled on The Abigail. There was plenty of work to be done in
reconditioning the neglected ship and her sister craft, The Sara, but
no one had any keen interest in it. They were restless, inattentive,
and preoccupied by their expectancy of a visitation. Every little while
some one of them would make a tour of the deck, scanning the horizon.
The animated discussions of yesterday had reviewed the story, over and
over again, until nothing was left to be said.

'Think he will come today?' one would ask, aware that the question had
no answer. The strain of waiting was beginning to tell: waiting and
watching and listening was hard work. Late in the afternoon Andrew,
customarily so frugal with suggestions, startled them by calling out to
his brother who for the past hour had been sitting on the tiller-seat,
gazing across the shimmering water, 'Let us go fishing tomorrow! I
think he would rather find us working--when he comes.' The proposal
brought general relief. The rest of the day was spent in putting the
nets and sailing tackle in order. The tension was relaxed. A frayed
rope at the end of the mainmast's boom broke with Johnny and dumped him
into the lake. They hauled him out dripping and everybody laughed. How
good it seemed to be able to laugh again, especially at Johnny, whose
agility in scampering all over the rigging had made him amiably envied.

Next day they fished off a cove on the north shore and with
considerable success; came back to anchorage in the evening, stocked
the big live-box, half submerged at their wharf, and carried home
well-filled baskets of perch. Peter thought of returning that night
to Bethsaida, but when the time came to leave the ship he decided to
remain. All the others went home, including Thad, who was ordered to
take some fish home to his family. At twilight the dories were all gone
and Peter was alone, but with a tranquil mind. And that night he slept.

At the first grey-blue light before dawn, the Big Fisherman rose
and walked forward. It was still too early to identify the familiar
landmarks. On such a morning, he had stood here gazing toward the shore
in the predawn haze and had heard a voice calling 'Simon!' With what
heart-racing haste had he scrambled into the little boat and flailed
the lake with excited oars! And then he had received his commission as
the fisherman who would now 'fish for men.'

The sky was brightening a little and the fog was dissolving. Dimly the
outlines of the wharves and huts became visible. The Big Fisherman's
narrowed eyes slowly swept the shoreline. A tall, slender column of
blue smoke was rising from a small, bright fire at the water's edge.
Beside the fire, warming his hands, stood the Master. He raised his
arm, waved a hand, and called:

'Peter!'

Half an hour later the disciples began to arrive, by twos and threes,
for the day's work. They hurried to the spot where Jesus and Peter
sat side by side before the fire, and were greeted by the Master's
welcoming smile. The Big Fisherman's shaggy head was wet; he was bare
to the waist; his shirt lay near-by on the sand, drying. His eyes were
red and swollen with weeping, but strangely luminous. It was plain to
see what had happened. Peter had tearfully repented his weakness and
had been fully restored to the Master's comradeship.

Thad and John ran to the live-box and returned with fish for breakfast,
which they broiled over the fire, and produced wheaten bread from their
well-filled baskets. The hour that followed was memorable. In a few
days, the Master said, he would return home to his Father's House and
leave them to continue his work.

Eventually he would revisit the world. In the meantime, they who
believed in him--'and they who will believe in me through your
testimony'--would receive many indubitable evidences of his spiritual
presence.

'Can you tell us when to expect your return, Master?' asked Philip.

'No one knows the day, nor the hour, Philip,' replied Jesus. 'What I
say unto you, you may say unto all--Watch!'

In a quiet voice he gave them instructions for their movements in the
days immediately before them. No more fishing now: their fishing days
were over. They were to return to Jerusalem and await further orders.
With that, he rose, held his outstretched hands over them in blessing,
and said tenderly, 'My peace be with you.' They had all bowed their
heads while the touching words were spoken; and when, at length, they
lifted their eyes, he was gone.

For a long moment they sat stunned to silence. Peter was the first
to rise. They all came to their feet and gathered about him, their
questing eyes fixed on his sober face. No one needed to inquire which,
among them, was appointed to be their leader. Peter had suddenly
acquired maturity. His resonant voice, when he spoke, had a tone of
authority. There was no trace of pride or arrogance in it: indeed, it
had something of the tenderness and compassion that had distinguished
the voice of the Master. It quietly entreated, but with full confidence
that it would be heard with respect. He remembered the strange
sensation of power that he had experienced on the day, long ago, in
the palatial home of Jairus when he had been in complete command of
the crowd that had swarmed in out of the storm. It had been a heady
potion, that consciousness of ability to command...Today, he had no
pride of power: instead, he felt weighted with responsibility. Jesus
had privately said to him, 'You are a shepherd now! Feed my sheep!'

'We will proceed to Jerusalem,' said Peter. 'James, John, and Thaddeus,
you will row out to the ships, stow the nets, and secure the hatches.
Then you will return home and prepare for your journey. The rest of us
will go to our homes and say farewell to our families. We will all meet
in Bethsaida an hour after noon.'

The Big Fisherman picked up his shirt and tugged it on over his massive
shoulders.

'And bid farewell to the lake,' he added, as he turned away with
Andrew. 'It is unlikely that we will ever see it again.'

'What will you do with the ships?' asked Andrew, as they moved toward
the highway.

'I shall give them to Hannah,' said Peter. 'She can dispose of
them--and use the money for her support...And your house in Capernaum,
Andy?'

'That shall be Hannah's, too.'

 * * * * * *

Making their headquarters at the shop of the old weaver Ben-Josef, the
disciples restlessly awaited their summons. At length it was announced
that they were to assemble on a near-by hill-top in the early morning
of the twenty-fourth day of Iyar.

In obedience, they went singly up the long hill where the Master met
them; and, after a few enheartening words, instructed them to remain in
Jerusalem until they received further tidings.

Then they all knelt while he prayed for them; and when they arose from
their knees, he was gone. Nor did they ever see him again, though--to
the end of their days--they were constantly on the alert for his return.



Chapter XXIV


For more than a dozen centuries the fifth of Sivan, fiftieth day after
the Passover, had been celebrated as the harvest festival. It was the
gayest occasion of the Jewish year.

Many an oldster, with the ancient traditions as his hobby, would tell
you that Pentecost was originally intended to commemorate the giving
of the law to Moses on Mount Sinai; but little if anything was made
of that now. This carefree day was singularly detached from historic
events.

Whereas the Passover enjoined a period when the houses were shuttered
and prayers were offered for the recovery of a long-lost freedom, and
the Day of Atonement implored on bended knees the forgiveness of the
people's sins, Pentecost was observed with joyful music, colourful
processions and dancing in the streets.

The gala-day marked the end of the barley harvest, Palestine's largest
and most reliable crop. For a little while, and until the grapes and
other early autumn fruits were ripe, rural Jewry was at leisure with a
few well-earned shekels in its pocket. It was an appropriate time for a
pleasure trip to the city.

And Jerusalem always did her best to accommodate the merrymakers. Her
open gates were adorned with bright bunting and banners. The booths and
bazaars were decorated with garlands of mid-summer flowers. Merchants
put away their expensive jewels, rugs, and furniture to give display to
gaudier items within the reach of a reckless holiday wallet. Trinkets
and baubles and gimcracks, anything that glittered on a necklace or
jingled on a bracelet, could be had at what seemed a bargain. The
narrow old streets swarmed with crowds in a state of happy confusion.
Vendors with trays of sweetmeats shouted their wares. Confectioners,
busy over hot braziers, filled the air with tantalizing aromas of mint
and anise. Harpists and pipers discordantly competed with mendicant
minstrels for the attention of hilarious groups that paused to listen,
laugh, drop a penny on the rug, and press on into the pack. The youth
of Israel were serious--but not on Pentecost.

It was not to be expected that everybody would behave. There was plenty
of rowdiness and drunkenness, which the Roman patrols pretended not to
notice; for, in the opinion of the tough and seasoned Roman soldier,
inebriation was not a capital offence. Tipsy country boys who embraced
and harangued strangers on the street were casually admonished by the
legionaries to take it easy, but nobody was arrested. It was the one
day of the year when the Holy City unbent a little. If the solemn
greybeards didn't like it, they could stay at home.

But there were many people who visited Jerusalem on Pentecost who did
not come to play. These men were mostly from the larger cities of the
Mediterranean countries who came to attend the celebrated camel-auction
conducted by Arabians. Anybody could tell you that the Jews and Arabs
hated each other so consistently that neither would set foot on the
other's land, but it was a long-established custom for the Arabs to
forget, on Pentecost, that Jerusalem was Jewish; and the Jews, on
that one day, forgot that the camel-breeders were Arabs and permitted
their use of the old drill-field for the exhibition and sale of their
incomparable camels.

And so it was that the annual day of Pentecost not only brought to
Jerusalem the youngster from the country, with a handful of coppers to
spend, but an assembly of the wealthy and urbane, who came from far
distances on business; big business transacted in gold and precious
stones. They stayed sober and were closely attended by body-guards.
When the day was over, they set off for home with the tall, sleek,
haughty camels they had bought at breath-taking prices; and the Arabs
leaped astride their beautiful horses and galloped home with a king's
ransom in their pockets.

Such was the nature of the Pentecostal celebration which annually
brought to Jerusalem not only a crowd of provincial pleasure-seekers
but scores of serious-minded, wealthy and influential men representing
every land and language of their turbulent world, whether barbarian,
bond, or free.

This year, the festival of Pentecost was considered an appropriate
occasion for the dramatic demonstration of God's Holy Spirit in the
presence of a selected company mysteriously assembled for this purpose
by an irresistible compulsion. In all the world's history, nothing like
this had ever happened before. At certain critical moments, young men
had seen visions and old men had dreamed dreams, but nothing like this
had ever happened in the world before!

 * * * * * *

Because he was the furthest away and needed more time than any of the
others for the unexpected journey to Jerusalem, Simon of Cyrene was the
first of the one hundred and twenty men to receive an invitation.

It was anything but welcome. Simon had left the old city at daybreak
next morning after the soul-sickening tragedy in which he had
unwittingly become involved, and he had promised himself that he would
never set foot in Jerusalem again. Never!

It had been his custom, and his father's before him, to attend the
Passover Week in the Jewish capital, where he had always found a ready
market for his merchandise: tropical spices, aromatic and medicinal
herbs, and the bulbs of exotic plants.

This season, business had not been good. His potential customers were
preoccupied and uneasy. They bought the spices as usual, but had no
interest in tulip-bulbs or flowering shrubbery. It was almost as if
they expected an early invasion demanding flight, though anybody could
see that the Romans weren't ready for their long-threatened offensive.
Simon's sales hadn't been worth the bother and expense of the trip and
he was half minded not to do it again.

Then, on that dreadful Friday morning, he had become accidentally
entangled in the crucifixion of the young Galilean. It had done
something to Simon. He was not a man given to meditation on the
mysteries of human existence. Whenever some thoughtful friend had
expressed an interest in such old riddles as: Why are we here? What is
the good of it? Who is in charge of it? What will be the outcome of it?
Simon would chuckle and shake his head and say that he was willing to
leave all that to the unemployed wiseacres who had time to worry over
these matters. Now Simon himself had joined the worriers. The shameless
abrogation of justice in the case of the innocent young preacher--a
crime sponsored and legalized by both the Insula and the Temple in a
country proud of its piety--indicated that humanity was not moving
forward toward the achievement of a better world: it was not even
standing still. It was losing ground, by the hour! The Cyrenian was a
very unhappy man as he departed from the Holy City firmly resolved that
he would never return.

The homeward trek had been tedious. Although habitually light-hearted,
Simon had become taciturn and glum. The men of his caravan, customarily
full of laughter and song, lost their gaiety. And as if the journey
were not long enough and dull enough, they had been required to make
a detour almost to Memphis for a river crossing, the lower Nile being
at flood later than usual. This had added many wearisome miles to an
already intolerable journey.

Now--at last--the jaded caravan was within one day's tramp of its
destination. Tonight's encampment would be the last. By late afternoon
tomorrow they would all be back on the beautiful and beloved plantation
within sight of the sea where even the oldest of them had been born.

Simon, weary and dispirited, retired early and fell at once into a
deep sleep, a sleep so profound that he was quite defenceless when
the handsome young courier rode boldly into his tent and, dismounting
gracefully, approached the cot and stood in silence for a long moment
looking down upon the inert figure of the man he had come to see.
Strangely enough, Simon was not affrighted by this unbidden visitation.
The messenger was obviously intending him no harm. Indeed, he seemed a
friendly youth, probably in his later teens. There were tight little
ringlets on his fair brow and at his temples that had escaped from the
gold bandeau circling his head. He was exquisitely dressed in white
silk, and on the left breast of his tunic was a device appliquéd in
gold which Simon could not identify. The beautiful white horse stood
quietly waiting. It too was equipped with trappings of great value, the
bridle and saddle heavily ornamented with silver.

Simon felt now that he was expected to acknowledge the presence of his
incredible guest.

'That's quite a turn-out you have there, my son,' he found himself
saying.

'It befits my errand,' said the courier. 'I come on business for my
King.'

'Say on, then, friend,' said Simon, 'if this business concerns me.'

'I bear a summons to you, Simon. Early in the morning you will send
your caravan home. You are not going home. You are required to be in
Jerusalem on the Day of Pentecost.'

Simon was instantly stirred to anger.

'I'll not go!' he growled. 'I've seen quite enough of Jerusalem! I do
not know by what authority you command me, but I tell you I shall not
go! Not even if the Emperor summoned me!'

The courier smiled and shrugged indifferently.

'You're not being summoned by a mere Emperor, Simon. You might defy
Caesar: you might hide from him. But you will obey my Master. He wants
you in Jerusalem on the Day of Pentecost--and you will be there!'

'And who is your Master?' demanded Simon.

'You know him,' said the youth. 'You carried his cross.'

'But he is dead! I saw him die!'

'True; he was dead. But he came alive again!'

'Nonsense! This is only a dream!'

'It is not a dream, Simon.'

'Give me a token, then--some sign that shall remain when I awake.'

The young courier obligingly thrust his hand into his tunic and brought
forth a long, rough, blood-rusted nail and laid it into Simon's open
hand.

'Ever seen that before?' he asked soberly.

'Yes--but it could be part of my dream. I'm sure you'll not be leaving
it here for me to find in the morning.'

'No; I shall not leave it here. I may need it again.' The courier
retrieved the heavy nail, restored it to an inner pocket of his tunic,
and seemed ready to depart.

'Farewell, friend Simon,' he said gently. 'Tomorrow you will ride
your horse to Alexandria, where you will find a ship embarking for
Joppa. This will shorten your trip. I shall see you on the Day of
Pentecost...Mid-forenoon--at the Coppersmiths' Guildhall.'

Simon chuckled a little.

'This is the strangest dream I ever had,' he mumbled. 'It seems
impossible that I could have invented so many things I never saw
before...I'm sure I never saw anybody like you!...By the way--what is
that golden device on your tunic?'

'It is the crest of the Master's Kingdom.'

'Come closer,' said Simon. 'Let me see it plainly.'

'What does it resemble?' asked the courier, bending over the cot.

Simon frowned and shuddered.

'I should never have chosen that ugly, cruel thing as an ornament!' he
muttered.

'Simon,' murmured the courier, impressively, 'that device is destined
to become the most beautiful emblem in the world!' And with that, he
mounted and rode out of the Cyrenian's fantastic dream.

Again Simon slept, a sleep so deep as to be deathlike. It was broad
daylight when he awoke, dazed by the recollection of having had an
eventful dream. He heard the cheerful voices of his men as they
dismantled and packed their tents for the final journey home. He
wondered if they would notice, in his face, any evidences of his
bewilderment. He must pull himself together--and try to forget about it.

Throwing open the door of his tent, he beckoned to his body-servant,
who came running with a basin of water and an armful of towels. Simon
plunged his bearded face into the basin and splashed the sleep out of
his eyes.

'How did you hurt your hand, sir?' asked the servant. 'There's blood on
it.'

Simon gazed intently into his right hand. A broad bloodstain diagonally
transversed his palm. He dipped it into the basin and scrubbed it
vigorously, but the stain was indelible. The servant stared hard, but
ventured no comment when he observed that his master's hands were
trembling...The butler now appeared with a breakfast tray and stood
ready to serve.

'Take it away,' ordered Simon huskily, 'and bid Enos come to me.'

It was obvious that the butler had been disturbed by his master's
strange manner; for when the steward arrived his wide eyes showed
concern.

'Enos,' said Simon, 'I find that I must return at once to Jerusalem.
You will take the caravan home. I shall ride to Alexandria and take
passage on a ship.'

'Are--are you well, sir?' stammered Enos. 'Perhaps I should go with
you.'

'I am quite well, Enos. Notify my family that when my errand in
Jerusalem has been accomplished I shall return...Order my horse. I
shall leave directly.'

The loyal steward reluctantly turned to do as he was bidden. At the
tent-door he paused to say, 'But you have been injured, sir! There is
blood on your hand!'

'Be at ease, my good Enos,' said Simon quietly. 'I have not been
injured. That is not my blood.'

 * * * * * *

Although the virile young Prince of Arimathaea was customarily an early
riser in summer, and this was an exceptionally beautiful day, he was
finding it difficult this morning to shake off his lethargy and regain
full consciousness.

For a long time he sat on the edge of his bed, with a bare foot in one
hand and a silk stocking in the other, staring dully out through the
open window, unable to proceed with his dressing. He was still under
the spell of an extraordinarily vivid dream.

At length he tugged himself loose from his captivity, drew on a robe,
and made his way out to the patio, where his pretty sister awaited him
at the breakfast-table.

'Whatever has been keeping you, Joe?' she inquired. 'Hassan is in a
great dither; says they have been ready to start for an hour.'

'Start?' mumbled her bewildered brother. 'Start where?'

'Maybe good old Hassan is going crazy--or perhaps you are. I thought
it queer that you had said nothing to me about this sudden trip to
Jerusalem. But--weren't you intending to go?'

Now the sleepy Prince came awake with a start. Leaning forward on his
elbows he studied his sister's eyes. Then he slowly rubbed the back of
his shaky hand across his forehead and huskily ordered the serving-maid
to send for Hassan.

'This is the most unbelievable thing that ever happened,' he muttered,
half to himself. 'Tamar, just what did Hassan say?'

'Here he comes,' she said. 'He'll tell you.'

The dignified steward, tall, greying, dressed for travel, approached
the table and stood at attention with anxiety in his eyes.

'Hassan,' said the Prince, 'who told you we were going to Jerusalem?'

The steward's voice was unsteady as he apologized for his mistake.

'I am very sorry, sire! I had a most peculiar dream, last night;
something more than a dream. It seemed real!'

The Prince impulsively turned his chair about to face his steward
directly.

'Proceed, Hassan,' he said soberly. 'Tell me about this dream.'

'I fear it will sound very foolish, sire. I know you do not believe in
dreams.'

'Don't be too sure about that!' said the Prince. 'Let's have it!'

'Well, sire, to begin with: do you remember the well-favoured youth who
assisted us that night when we took the body of Jesus down from the
cross? And how he helped us at the tomb? And we couldn't understand his
behaviour at all--the way he held the Master's body caressingly, as
one might carry a sleeping child, with a tender smile; and showing no
grief, no grief at all!'

The Prince nodded his full remembrance, and Hassan went on:

'The handsome youth was garbed in a working-man's clothing; but after
his exertions and while we rested at the tomb, he slipped off his brown
jacket and revealed a white silk tunic of exquisite texture--'

'That sounds like a dream, too, Hassan,' interposed Tamar.

'What Hassan says is true, my sister. I was about to pay the handsome
youth for his service to us; but when I saw that tunic it seemed
inappropriate to offer him anything...Continue, Hassan.'

'This strange young man has been much in my thoughts, sire. There was
one story, you will remember, about the women seeing an angel, clad in
white, when they went to the tomb that Sunday morning.'

'Perhaps you have thought about it so much that it has gone to your
head, Hassan,' put in Tamar.

'No, no, sister!' cautioned the Prince. 'Hassan is not crazy! Let him
tell his story.'

'He came to my bedside last night, sire, saying that we were wanted in
Jerusalem, mid-morning of the Day of Pentecost, at the Coppersmiths'
Guildhall; an important meeting, to which your grace and his humble
servant Hassan were both invited...He said you had been notified, sire.
It was all so real that I believed it, and prepared for the journey. I
see that I was mistaken--and I crave your grace's pardon!'

There was a lengthy silence before the Prince spoke. In an unsteady
voice, he said, 'Hassan, you were not mistaken. I was notified. He
came to me. I dismissed it as a dream. We will go to Jerusalem, as he
commanded.'

Hassan's gloomy face instantly cleared. He drew himself up to his full
height, saluted, and withdrew. Tamar broke the silence.

'Joe, dear,' she said solicitously, 'you know you don't believe in such
things!...They just don't happen!'

'I wish you could have seen him, Tamar! Wherever he came from, they
practise no economy. You never saw such clothing! White silk; satin,
maybe, with a luminous sheen! On the breast of his tunic was some sort
of insignia done in gold. I didn't recognize it.' He beckoned to the
maid. 'Bring me a slate and a stylus...See, Tamar--it looked like this!
What is it?'

She rose, came round to his side of the table, studied the drawing, and
shook her head.

'Have you any idea what it means?' she asked.

'Yes,' said Joseph. 'It is the cross on which they crucified the
Master!...Tamar--that was a greater event than we knew!'

 * * * * * *

Every able-bodied employee on Jairus' vast estate, whatever his
specific occupation, was annually drafted for a week to assist in the
barley harvest.

By virtue of his recent appointment to the position of overseer of the
vineyards, Joel could have claimed exemption from this hard work in
the harvest-fields, but had not done so. From dawn to dusk, every day
that week, he had cheerfully toiled beside the common labourers, adding
much to their diligence and his own popularity. Nor had this evidence
of his sincere concern for his master's welfare escaped the attention
of Jairus himself; and when the last load of yellow sheaves had been
stored and the harvesters were wearily trudging home with Joel bringing
up the rear, he dismounted from his horse to express his appreciation.

'You are entitled to a few days' rest, my boy,' said Jairus. 'Perhaps
you would like to go fishing.'

'If you would be so kind, sir,' said Joel, 'I should like to go to
Jerusalem and see the celebration of Pentecost. I have never been
there, and, sir'--he hesitated, flushing a little through his tan--'I
have a particular reason for wanting to go.'

Jairus' face had suddenly become so sober that it seemed stern; and
Joel, rather crestfallen, feared a rebuke.

'What is this particular reason, Joel?' demanded Jairus.

'I'm afraid I can't rightly explain, sir,' murmured Joel, much
embarrassed. 'If you prefer not to let me go, I will think no more
about it.'

'No, no!' barked Jairus, impatiently. 'I did not say you couldn't go!
I asked you what is your reason for wanting to go to Jerusalem--on the
Day of Pentecost!'

Joel sheepishly dug the toe of his worn sandal into the ground and
avoided his rich employer's eyes. After a long moment, he confessed, 'I
dreamed that I was expected to be there.'

'My God!' ejaculated Jairus, in a shaken voice. 'So you dreamed! Tell
me about it!'

Joel was frightened now. Jairus had thought better of him than that
he would turn out to be a superstitious dunce. He shook his head and
grinned foolishly.

'It was nothing, sir,' he mumbled. 'I can't remember.'

'Perhaps I can refresh your memory, Joel,' said Jairus. 'You dreamed
that a fine-looking young man came to you--by the way, was he riding?'

Joel was staring up into Jairus' face now, with wide eyes.

'Yes, sir; on a white horse.'

'Silver-mounted bridle?'

'Yes, sir.' Joel swallowed noisily. 'And a silver saddle! How did you
know, sir? Did you see him?'

'He rode into my bedroom last night,' admitted Jairus. 'He told me to
come to Pentecost. It seemed very real. But, this morning when I awoke,
I decided to give it no further thought; though, I must say, I have
thought of nothing else all day...It's a strange business, Joel!'

'Yes, sir! It is that!' And it was also a strange business, reflected
Joel, to be having this man-to-man talk with his eminent employer.

'Well, Joel'--Jairus turned to mount his horse. 'We are summoned. Go
home now and make ready for the journey. We will try to get off at
daybreak.'

 * * * * * *

Ephraim, the good-natured farrier and general blacksmith of Nazareth,
lounged at full-length on his tool-scarred work-bench and waited for a
cessation of the pelting summer shower that was detaining him long past
supper-time.

Since early morning he had been toiling on a broken ploughshare,
hoping to complete his task by the end of the day, but the sudden
storm had darkened the shop, already at dusk, and he had given it
up--complacently, however, for the gardens needed the rain more than
Hoseph needed his plough. Wearied by the day's work and drowsy in
the darkness--for he had banked his forge-fire in preparation for
leaving--Ephraim stretched out comfortably and fell asleep so soundly
that he was quite unaware of the opening and closing of the double
doors facing the street.

A brightening glow from the suddenly revived fire on the forge
attracted his attention, though he did not stir. In his dream he saw
a well-favoured youth tugging at the bellows-rope with what seemed
an experienced hand. Every fresh blast from the old leather bellows
quickened the fire. It was possible to see more clearly now. The tall
white horse--a superb animal--was attempting to take a drink from the
grimy water-tub beside the anvil, just as any other horse would have
done, and his young master was forbidding him to do it, just as any
other man would have done; but Ephraim knew it was only a dream because
neither the horse nor the man was wet.

With his curiosity considerably stirred, Ephraim turned on his side,
elevated his head into the crook of his arm, and had a better view of
his remarkable visitors. The handsome youth was gorgeously clad in
white, with a broad fillet of gleaming gold circling his head, and the
horse's trappings were heavily ornamented with silver.

'How does it happen, young master,' Ephraim heard himself inquiring,
'that your clothing and your horse's coat are dry, after coming through
that rain-storm?'

'We came another way,' replied the youth casually, still pumping the
bellows.

'But you're cold,' remarked Ephraim, 'or you wouldn't be firing the
forge.'

'That's for light,' said the youth, raking the coals toward the centre.

'A young fellow as queer as you are,' chuckled Ephraim, 'should be able
to see in the dark.'

'Perhaps I can--but you can't.' The strange visitor let go of the
bellows-rope now and approached the work-bench. 'I wanted you to see
me plainly enough to remember what I came to say. I have an important
message for you, Ephraim. You are expected in Jerusalem on the Day of
Pentecost.'

Ephraim heard himself laughing softly in his sleep. What a dream this
had turned out to be!

'What's the idea of my going to Pentecost?' he inquired. 'I don't need
a camel. I can't even afford a good donkey.'

At this juncture the young messenger seriously proceeded to explain. A
large number of the friends and followers of Jesus were being called
together in Jerusalem on the morning of the Day of Pentecost. The
meeting would convene in the Coppersmiths' Guildhall, in the middle of
the forenoon.

'And you are entitled to be there, Ephraim,' he went on. 'You
always showed kindness to Jesus, from his childhood. Nobody in
Nazareth--except his family and you--had any sympathy for him because
he was different from other children. And when he was grown to manhood,
the Nazarenes--all but you--openly scoffed at his singular powers. So
he went away and talked to people who believed in him and loved him.
And you left your shop--and followed him.'

'Aye, sir; that I did!' said Ephraim. 'I heard him speak, for many
days, in Cana and Hammath and Capernaum. And I saw him heal the
sick...But how did you know?'

'And when you returned to Nazareth,' continued the young messenger,
ignoring Ephraim's query, 'you told all Nazareth what you had heard and
seen, and they said you were a blasphemer...Doubtless it injured your
business.'

'Not very much,' replied Ephraim cheerfully. 'When the chain to the
well-bucket is broken, Nazareth is willing to have it mended by a
blasphemer...But I must say for Nazareth that the people were sorry
when they heard that Jesus had been crucified.'

'What did they say when the word came that he had returned to life?'

'Well--of course they didn't believe that!'

'How about you, Ephraim? Do you believe it?'

'I don't know,' replied Ephraim vaguely, after some delay. 'It's not
easy to believe, especially in a town where the people are sure it
can't be true...I ponder on it--every day.'

'Would you be glad to have firm proof that it is so?'

'Indeed I would, sir!'

'Then come to Jerusalem on Pentecost.'

'I might do that if I knew that this message was real.'

The youthful messenger made no reply to that. The leaky old bellows
wheezed a few times, so loudly that it brought Ephraim wide awake. He
sat up, rubbing his eyes. His visitor was gone. But the coals on the
forge glowed brightly...Ephraim knew now that he would be in Jerusalem
on the Day of Pentecost.

 * * * * * *

The strong and steady northerly breeze that had shortened the voyage of
The Vestris from Gaza to Joppa continued unabated, to the considerable
delay of the return trip.

Captain Fulvius, whose detestation was labour that wasn't strictly
necessary, had sailed in light ballast, and The Vestris had frisked
about in a manner unsuitable to her age and decrepitude. The voyage had
been tiresome beyond description for everybody but Voldi, who was in no
hurry to make port anywhere, though the Captain and the Proconsul were
of the opinion that only a perfunctory investigation, if any, would be
made into the assassination of Herod Antipas.

To make sure, however, that Voldi was not apprehended, an action that
might disturb the ever-delicate political relations of Jewry and
Arabia, it had been decided that Voldi was to remain under cover during
the stop at Gaza and proceed on The Vestris to Rome. He could return to
Arabia when the sensation caused by the Tetrarch's death had ceased to
be of interest.

It had been the hope of Mencius and Fulvius that the salt-caravan from
Engedi might have arrived by the time The Vestris tardily waddled to
her berth in the dirty old city, but they were disappointed. Of course
almost anything might have happened to delay that slow-plodding,
heavily-laden procession. The weather was cruelly hot, requiring
longer and more frequent periods of rest for the camels. You couldn't
hustle a camel, either by appealing to his moral obligation to serve
the Empire with all his heart, mind, and strength, or even by the more
practical method of beating his rump with a club. When a camel decided
that he had done his day's work he sat down, right where he was, and no
amount of flattering cajolery or forthright brutality would alter his
resolution to adjourn. Mencius and Fulvius knew, from experience, that
they might have to wait another fortnight.

As for Voldi, his confinement on the ship, as the empty days and hot
nights dragged out their length in the suffocating stench of Gaza's
waterfront, was almost more than he could bear. He had promised to
remain on board at the insistence of men who had befriended him at no
little risk. It was not only that they didn't want him to get into
trouble; they didn't want to get into trouble themselves for harbouring
a fugitive.

But after a week had passed, the Arabian's impatience boiled over. He
had had time to do much thinking and most of it concerned Fara. Now
that Jesus was dead and there was nothing more that she could do for
him, where would she go? Surely not to Galilee to be dependent upon the
fisherfolk. In her loneliness, was it not likely that she would want to
return to Ione? Now that she was adrift, perhaps Fara would listen to
reason. Voldi felt confident that she loved him. This might be the time
to present his case with some hope of success.

Mencius sympathetically heard him out, and Fulvius too agreed that if
the authorities had suspected he was sailing in The Vestris they would
have had ample time to pursue the ship by land and arrest him. After
some debate it was decided that Voldi might leave without much risk
to any of them, which he did forthwith, it being then two hours past
midday, when all Gaza had crept into the shade to sleep. At the last
minute, Mencius impulsively announced that he would accompany him for a
few miles. Brutus needed exercise.

They stopped at the old fort of Minoa for water. The sentry at the gate
immediately recognized the Proconsul and deferentially volunteered to
notify Centurion Paulus, who, he said, was in temporary command. Paulus
cordially extended such hospitality as was to be had, and while they
lounged in the shade their conversation promptly turned to the singular
case of the young Legate, Marcellus, who had been unexpectedly summoned
to Rome.

'And half out of his wits, too,' put in Paulus. 'That crucifixion was
too much for him.'

'The whole affair,' growled Mencius, 'was a disgrace to the Empire! The
dead man is better off than the people who condemned him.'

'So you think the Galilean is dead,' remarked Paulus.

'What else should I think?' demanded Mencius. 'You crucified him,
didn't you?'

Then the strange story came out. The contingent from Minoa had not left
Jerusalem until Monday morning. By that time the city was buzzing with
rumours that the crucified Galilean had left his tomb and had been seen
by many credible witnesses. The Sanhedrin was making every effort to
have the report officially denied and the rumour-spreaders punished,
but Pilate was doing nothing about it.

'Of course, sir, it can't be true,' added Paulus, unwilling to be
suspected of half-believing it himself.

'Why not?' barked the Proconsul, to the Centurion's amazement. 'This
Galilean was no ordinary man. There is no doubt at all that he healed
the sick and gave sight to the blind. Why shouldn't he have the power
to come to life?'

'Well, sir, the way I look at it, if he had the power to recover his
life after death, why did he permit himself to be killed? It cost him
great suffering.' Paulus waited for further comment from the grizzled
Roman who outranked him, and when it was not forthcoming he ventured to
ask, 'Do you think it makes sense, sir?'

'No,' muttered Mencius. 'It doesn't make sense. And opening the eyes
of the blind doesn't make sense, either...I would give a great deal,
Paulus, to know whether there is any truth in this story...How does it
strike you, Voldi?'

'I have no opinions, Mencius. It's difficult to believe.'

'But you saw him in action, and were deeply impressed. You even
suggested that he might be humanity's "Torchbearer."'

'That is true,' admitted Voldi, 'but it hadn't occurred to me that
he would live for ever. Couldn't he give the world all the light it
needed--and then depart? What more can he do, now that he has returned
from his tomb? Will he continue to admonish the new generations as they
arrive?'

It was a long speech, coming from Voldi, who was habitually laconic,
and Mencius regarded him with fresh interest.

'That raises an important question,' he said. 'If this generation paid
no attention to his panacea for the world's agonies, what hope is there
for better success with the next generation?'

'In other words,' interposed Paulus, 'what's the good of his
resurrection--assuming it to have happened? The world doesn't want him:
didn't want him last week; won't want him next week!'

'You're a cynic, Paulus,' drawled Mencius.

Paulus grinned, shrugged, toyed absently with the handle of his dagger,
and mumbled that his occupation was not calculated to make a man
sentimental or optimistic.

Apparently having had his fill of this inconclusive discussion, Voldi
said he would be on his way. Paulus suggested that he spend the night
at the fort and leave in the cool of early morning. Mencius too thought
this was sensible. Paulus extended the invitation to the Proconsul,
but he declined. Fulvius might think he had got into trouble. After an
early supper under the trees, farewells were said, and Mencius departed
for Gaza at sunset.

The air grew cooler as twilight came on; and Brutus, seeming anxious
to stretch his long legs, quickened his brisk trot to a canter. After
half a mile, he suddenly threw up his head, laid back his ears, and
increased his speed, Mencius wondering why a horse so intelligent as
Brutus should be eager to get back to his sweltering stall in the hold
of The Vestris.

Now Mencius himself heard the distant hoof-beats to the rear. Brutus
had remembered an unpleasant incident on this road and wanted no
repetition of it. The sound of hoof-beats was increasing. Mencius
turned in his saddle and saw, through the gloom, a rider rapidly
overtaking them on a tall white horse. Brutus, who had no intention of
being outrun, leaped to a greyhound gallop, putting everything he had
into it, but his pursuer presently drew alongside, making no effort to
pass.

Mencius stared hard into the face of the stranger and was amazed to see
a mere youth, clad in white, whose disarming expression of good-will
caused the Proconsul to check his speed, an action immediately followed
by his unexplained companion. After some effort they tugged their
panting horses to a walk. Mencius spoke:

'That's a very indiscreet thing to do, my boy, overtaking a man in
the dark, on a bandit-infested road, without giving a sign of your
intentions.'

'I shouldn't have done it,' admitted the handsome youngster, 'but you
have a very fast horse, Proconsul Mencius, and it's so rarely that
Israfel has a chance to let himself out; and he was enjoying himself so
much, sir.'

'So were you, I think,' commented Mencius dryly. 'I see that you know
my name. And who are you? Where do you hail from? I'm sure you don't
belong in this poverty-cursed neighbourhood. What's that insignia on
your tunic? I don't recognize it.'

'It's the cross on which they crucified my King.'

They halted their horses now, and Mencius turned Brutus about so that
they faced each other directly.

'There are tales in circulation,' said the Proconsul in an unsteady
voice, 'that he returned to life. Have you any information on that?'

'That is what I came to tell you, sir.'

For the next few minutes the young courier talked earnestly, the
bewildered Proconsul listening in silence.

'It all seems very strange,' said Mencius; 'but I'll be there.'

'The Coppersmiths' Guildhall,' said the messenger, gathering up his
reins. He spoke quietly to 'Israfel,' who bounded away into the
darkness. And by the time Mencius had turned Brutus about in the
direction of Gaza, the sound of the hoof-heats was faint in the
distance.

 * * * * * *

And so it was that in strangely convincing dreams, and by intuitive,
compelling impulses, and many other indubitable signs, one hundred and
twenty men, having no consultation with one another, turned their faces
toward Jerusalem, arriving mid-morning of the Day of Pentecost, to
receive tidings concerning the future of the Kingdom. Nothing like this
had ever happened in the world before.



Chapter XXV


Not until they were halfway up the tortuous trail that ascended sharply
from the Valley of Aisne did Darik give signs of recognizing his own
country by jerking impatiently at the bridle-reins, noisily blowing his
nose and picking up his tired feet with fresh interest.

Last night Voldi had put in early at the tavern in Engedi and had
been on the road before dawn. Within an hour the sun was hot and its
reflection on the white salt of the seashore was blinding, but there
was no shade to rest in and Darik had been advised to get it over as
soon as possible.

It was two hours past noon now, and they were climbing the narrow,
well-worn road that clung to the mountain-side. At intervals on the
zigzag trail there were evidences that travellers had paused to rest,
for it was a rugged ascent. The foliage was becoming more abundant as
the increased altitude tempered the midsummer heat.

Darik, sniffing the cool, blossom-scented air, was so improvidently
overdoing his efforts to reach home that Voldi--unwilling to see
him wear himself out--dismounted and led him off the trail into a
heavily-shaded dell where a narrow little stream, edged with wild
flowers, tumbled lazily over an eroded niche in a flat ledge of
limestone. Loosening the hot saddle-girths and tossing the reins over a
low-hanging willow-branch, Voldi strolled further into the sequestered
bower. A shaggy white donkey was munching the fresh grass that grew
luxuriantly near the water. Deeper into the thicket a young woman,
quite unaware of his presence, was industriously gathering blackberries
and devouring them hungrily. Evidently she was not far from her home,
for her simple country dress was hardly appropriate for travel. Her
head was bare and her curly black hair, unbound, had been tousled by
the clinging vines.

Voldi sat quietly on the moss-grown limestone ledge, regarding her with
interest; hesitant to speak for fear of startling her.

Presently her intuition seemed to warn her that she was not alone. For
a little while she stood motionless in an attitude of listening; then
turned her head slowly to glance backward over her shoulder. Suddenly
her eyes widened and she threw up her berry-stained hands in surprise.

Leaping to his feet, Voldi dashed across the little stream and clasped
her in his arms with ecstatic little murmurs of rapturous relief,
kissing her sun-browned forehead and her sun-warmed hair, her cheeks,
her half-closed eyes, while she hung limp in his embrace. Then, lifting
her face, she offered him her parted lips and twined her arms around
his neck, holding him so tightly to her that he could feel the racing
of her heart. After a long, blissful moment, she slowly relaxed with
a happy sigh, gazed up tenderly into his eyes and pressed her face
against his breast.

'I was afraid I had lost you, Fara.' Voldi's shaken voice sounded as if
he had just finished a gruelling foot-race.

She slowly nodded her head without looking up.

'We will never be parted again!' he declared.

Fara made no reply, but clutched his arms tightly and snuggled her
cheek against his heart.

'Say it, darling!' he entreated. 'You are mine now--for always!'

She did not answer, but raised her face to his and impetuously returned
his kisses without reserve.

'So--that is settled!' he exclaimed. 'You have made me very happy,
dear!'

Gently releasing herself from his arms, Fara steadied her voice to say,
'Let us sit down--and talk, Voldi!'

Gathering her up in his arms, he carried her back to the stone ledge
and sat close beside her. They were both bursting with questions about
each other's recent movements...Oddly enough, they had left Jerusalem
by different routes on the same morning...Voldi explained briefly that
he had accompanied a caravan bound for Tiberias in Galilee. Fara's eyes
widened.

'And then what?' she asked.

Well--then Voldi had left the caravan in the night--in the Samaritan
mountains--and had ridden to Joppa and boarded a ship.

She did not press him for further details. After a little silence,
Voldi insisted on knowing her story and she told him about her journey
to Jerusalem, the wicked trial and conviction of her Master, and she
wept pitiably as she remembered her last sight of him on the way to his
execution. Voldi held her close and tried to comfort her.

'You heard nothing more--about his death?' he asked, gently.

'Was there more--to hear?' She raised her tearful eyes to search his
face.

'Much more,' said Voldi. 'It sounds incredible, but--well--it is firmly
believed by his disciples that Jesus left his sepulchre on Sunday
morning and is alive again!'

Fara sat bolt upright and stared soberly into his eyes. Could such a
thing be possible?--she wanted to know. Did Voldi believe it?...Voldi
didn't know; didn't know whether it was possible; didn't know whether
he believed it.

'But he was a man of singular powers,' he admitted.

'I saw him bring Hannah back from death,' pondered Fara. 'How faithless
of us--to think that his power would die with him!... Voldi--I believe
the story! I am sure he is alive!'

'If it is true,' reflected Voldi soberly, 'it will not be a local
secret very long. A great many people, besides the farmers and
fishermen of Galilee, are interested in life after death. It is no
small matter that a dead man--any dead man--should return to life and
walk the streets in broad daylight--and sit at supper with his friends.'

'Jesus did that?' Fara's eyes were radiant.

'That's what they're saying, dear.'

'I must go back--and find him!' she cried impetuously.

'That can wait,' admonished Voldi. 'If he is alive, he will stay
alive...You must see Ione now--and the King and Queen.' He glanced up
at the sun.' And we should be on our way if we expect to get there
before nightfall.'

Fara slipped her hand under his arm and searched his face thoughtfully.

'Think they will be glad to see us, Voldi?'

He hesitated a little before replying. 'Ione will: you may be sure of
that.'

Thinking she detected some evasiveness in the tone and manner of his
reply, she asked, 'But not the King and Queen?'

Voldi was leading the way toward Darik now. Turning about, he said,
with a laboured casualness that only increased Fara's curiosity, 'Don't
expect too much--and you will not be disappointed.'

She patted Darik on the muzzle and they imagined that he recognized
her. Voldi picked her up lightly and tossed her into the saddle.

'You ride on to the King's encampment,' he said, 'and send a horse back
for me. I'll be trudging along with your silly little donkey.'

'"Trudging" is what you will be doing,' laughed Fara, 'if you walk with
Jasper. He never hurries.'

Voldi's face was sober as she gathered up the reins to depart.

'One more thing, dear,' he said. 'If Deran should be there, keep your
temper.'

Her bewilderment showed in her reluctance to go, but Voldi waved her
on. Digging her heels into Darik's ribs, she set out on the last lap of
her home-bound journey.

After she had disappeared, Voldi wondered whether he should have been
more explicit--or, better, should have said nothing at all about
conditions in the royal household. Perhaps Fara's intuition might
provide a partial explanation. She couldn't help remembering that Deran
had shown himself to be unfriendly. Maybe she would guess that the
jealous Prince would resent his return. It was difficult for Voldi to
tell her that Deran was bitterly jealous of him: she would presently
discover this without being told.

It had often occurred to Voldi that the King had unwittingly done him
a disservice in appointing him to succeed his eminent grandfather as
a member of the King's Council. Deran had been noisily resentful and
derisive. Voldi's long-time comrades, approving his appointment, were
treated to the Prince's scorn.

Before he left again, on the grim errand from which he was now
returning, a dozen of Voldi's boyhood cronies, all of them sons or
grandsons of distinguished Arabians, had invited him to join them on
a stag-hunt deep in the wooded mountains. And that night around the
camp-fire they had confided their bitter opposition to the Prince who,
they said, had become so arrogant and so thoroughly detested by the
people that his accession to the throne would amount to a national
disaster. Voldi had tried to temper their anger...'He's young yet. Be
patient. His attitude may change as he grows older.'

'The trouble is,' they told him, 'the Queen, who is passionately
devoted to the Prince, encourages him in his folly.'

'And the King?' Voldi had asked.

Well--the gentle-spirited, peace-loving Zendi, whatever he might think
of the situation, had done nothing about it.

'The fact is,' Museph had blurted out recklessly, 'Arabia needs a King
with a loud voice and a savage temper; somebody like rough old Aretas,
who could outyell and outcurse the toughest sheik in the land!'

At this juncture Voldi had said quietly, 'Let us forget now that this
matter has been discussed. Such talk is treasonable--and we all know
it.'

'Someone ought to tell Deran,' rumbled Raboth, 'just how thin the ice
is where he walks!'

And Voldi had brought a laugh--and a conclusion to the talk--by
reminding Raboth of the convention of mice that resolved to put a bell
on the cat, and found that no mouse would volunteer to perform this
service.

 * * * * * *

All the way up the mountain-side Fara's thoughts were busy with Voldi's
enigmatic warning of a cool reception. It was not like Voldi to imagine
a feeling of animosity on the part of young Deran. The Prince had been
overindulged and badly spoiled. Even as a child he had been rude and
impudent. Doubtless Voldi, on his recent return to Arabia, had been
given fresh evidence of Deran's unfriendliness.

Arriving at the King's encampment, Fara was instantly surrounded by
a devoted company of servants, who swarmed out of the service tents
and stables and paddocks. Ione, a mere shadow of her former self, was
tearful and speechless with joy. Old Kedar dispatched a rider, with a
led horse, to meet Voldi. So far, it was a happy reunion.

But an hour later, when the home-comers sat at supper with the royal
family, their welcome lacked enthusiasm.

Fara was shocked to see how King Zendi had aged in the past three
years. The hair at his temples was white. His face was thin and
haggard. His smile was feeble and fleeting, and he had little to say.
But what Zendi had lost in forcefulness Rennah had gained. Arabia had
never been governed by a Queen: Arabia was distinctly a man's land.
But as Fara glanced from the Queen's imperious face into Zendi's
unresponsive eyes, it was clear enough that the peace-loving King had
abdicated.

Deran strutted in late when their supper was nearly finished, and
sprawled in his seat, nodding carelessly to their guests as if he had
seen them within the hour. His face was flushed. It was easy to see
that he had been drinking.

'It's going about, Councillor Voldi,' he remarked, with a patronizing
grin, 'that you finally paid off that frail old rascal in Galilee. How
did you do it? Stick him in the back while he slept?'

Voldi made no reply to the raw insult; seemed not to have heard it.
Presently he glanced across the table and confronted Fara's indignant
eyes. His look repeated the warning that she must control her temper.
Quickly masking her sudden anger, she darted a wordless inquiry.
'Councillor?' Voldi knew she was inquiring about that. He had not told
her.

There was a brief, awkward silence, which Rennah now broke with a dry
trill of mirthless laughter.

'Perhaps Councillor Voldi doesn't think your remark is very amusing,
Deran,' she cooed softly...Then, turning to Voldi with a contrived
smile to which he did not respond, she added, 'The Prince is such a
tease.'...And turning to Fara, 'One never can tell when he's joking.'

'But it's easy to tell when he is not joking!' retorted Fara crisply.
Voldi gently rebuked her with an almost imperceptible shake of his head.

Deran was having a good time now. If Voldi wouldn't quarrel, perhaps
he could bedevil the girl into some reckless disregard of his princely
rank. He turned on her with a sardonic chuckle.

'We observe that Princess Fara returns to us as sharp-tongued as ever.
We had hoped that her long sojourn with her meek Jewish relatives--'

'Now, Deran,' interrupted his mother impatiently, 'there has been quite
enough teasing, please.'

Voldi now surprised them by addressing the King, who had sat demurely
through these indignities, occasionally shaking his greying head, but
saying nothing.

'Sire, if I may be excused now, I shall go home and see my parents.'

'Of course, Voldi,' said the King, with obvious relief. 'You should go
while there is still moonlight. We will see you tomorrow.'

Voldi promptly got to his feet, bowed deeply to their majesties, smiled
for Fara, ignored the Prince, and straightway made his exit.

'And may I go now, please?' entreated Fara, in a half-whisper to the
Queen. 'I have had only a glimpse of poor Ione--and she is waiting to
see me.'

Rennah drew a pursed smile and nodded. Fara, bowing to the King,
quickly left the room.

Deran leaned back in his chair, stretched his arms, yawned, and
chuckled. 'That was fun.'

'You're a fool!' muttered his father.

'I'm sure Deran meant no harm, Zendi,' put in Rennah.

'Deran is a fool!' shouted Zendi.

 * * * * * *

But now a more acute problem than the foolishness of Prince Deran was
monopolizing the mind and conversation of Arabia.

At widespread intervals, usually in midsummer, there had been many
cases of a sudden, crippling paralysis, affecting children mostly,
though occasionally striking down an adult, too. This season the
mysterious affliction, for which there had been found no cure, was
rapidly mounting to epidemic proportions. Alarmed mothers were keeping
their children at home, but with no assurance of their safety. The
dreaded disease struck at random and struck hard! Nor was it a
respecter of persons, in testimony whereof the Thing laid its hand on
Prince Deran. The news travelled fast, and the sorrow of Arabia was
under excellent control. The sheiks and the shepherds did not risk
saying, 'Serve him right!' But they scowled and lifted an indifferent
shoulder, which came to the same thing--and couldn't be quoted.



Chapter XXVI


Never had there been a fairer morning in Jerusalem than on this Day of
Pentecost.

Since dawn, every road leading into the city had been filling with
merry-makers on foot from the provinces, and within an hour the
highways were crowded.

Frequently the country people scampered to the hedges, good-naturedly
conceding the right of way to impressive caravans from distant lands,
unannoyed by the haughty stares of the urbane strangers.

Once within the gaily decorated gates, the festive throng jostled
toward the bazaars and food-markets, while the sober-faced men of
consequence, indifferent to the city's gaiety, proceeded on through
to the Sheep Gate and up the steepening Bethany boulevard to Levi's
Inn, where, after a comforting bath and a change of linen, they would
rest until it was time to attend the famous camel-auction in the early
afternoon.

A short distance down the hill from Levi's stood a massive old stone
structure which had long served as headquarters for the Coppersmiths'
Guild. It was an undeniably ugly building, but no discredit to the
street, for the organization that it housed was one of the most
honourable institutions in Jerusalem. The Coppersmiths' Guild had been
the first society to volunteer substantial aid to Nehemiah when he
rebuilt the city's walls more than four centuries ago.

The high-ceilinged, rectangular second story of the Guildhall,
accessible by an outside staircase, was used as an auditorium. It
had seating for approximately two hundred and served not only the
general conclaves of the Guild but was frequently rented to business
conventions with a large non-resident membership.

The hall was open this morning and gradually filling with men of all
sorts whose only observable relation to one another was their apparent
uncertainty as to the nature of their errand. For the most part they
came singly. The majority of them were of middle age, plainly dressed
in country garb, and obviously from the provinces. They slowly mounted
the stone staircase, diffidently entered the dingy old auditorium,
and stood awkwardly for a long moment wondering what was expected of
them, for there were no ushers, nor was there anyone in sight who had
the appearance of being responsible for the mysterious meeting. After
tarrying awhile at the door, the bewildered men from the country found
seats and sat down to wait. A sprinkling of well-dressed men of affairs
stalked in, one by one; but, for all their urbanity, they seemed quite
as confused as the unsophisticated provincials.

Jairus turned to young Joel, as they lingered in the doorway to
survey the half-filled room, and asked, 'Do you see anyone you ever
saw before?' And Joel, craning about, shook his head; but immediately
amended his reply to whisper, 'Over there is a man I recognize. His
name is Micah. He was a labourer in the Tetrarch's vineyard.'

'I wonder what brings him here,' mumbled Jairus.

'His little girl was blind,' said Joel. 'Jesus opened her eyes. I saw
Him do it, sir. Last summer. But I heard, a few days ago, that the
child had just died. Of a fever...Maybe that's what brings Him here,
sir.'

'You mean--perhaps Micah thinks that Jesus, now that He is alive again,
may give his little girl back to him?'

'I don't know, sir,' murmured Joel.

'Do you suppose that all these people knew Jesus?' wondered Jairus.

'It could be, sir.'

They found seats near the rear of the hall. Presently a
distinguished-looking, smooth-shaven Roman with close-cropped grizzled
hair came in, glanced about, and strode directly to the rear, seating
himself at the end of the row but one vacant chair apart from Jairus.
They gave each other a brief appraisal without speaking.

For a full quarter of an hour there had been no new arrivals.
Apparently the company was complete. Now the heavy oaken door began to
complain of its rusted hinges. All heads were turned in that direction
and mystified eyes watched the massive door slowly close, though no
one had touched it. Jairus darted an inquiring glance at the Roman at
the same instant that Mencius arched an eyebrow toward Jairus; but
neither spoke. The baffled audience again faced forward. The room grew
strangely quiet.

Then a giant of a man, seated in the front row, rose and walked
confidently to the rostrum. Only a few in the transfixed audience
failed to recognize him; but even those who had seen him, again and
again, as he stood at the Master's side, protecting him in the crush of
great throngs, observed instantly that something had happened to the
Big Fisherman.

They hadn't always liked his attitude on those eventful summer days. He
had kept the great crowds in order, yes; and he had made the bearers
of the sick ones take their turn. But sometimes his manner had annoyed
them. It was almost as if he owned the show--and Jesus was his exhibit.
Not infrequently some offended man, who had been unceremoniously pushed
back into line, would grumble, 'Who does that big fellow think he is,
anyhow?'

Now it appeared that some sort of miracle had been wrought upon Peter.

For one thing, he had a different face. The former face had been more
than a bit bumptious, the darting eyes audacious, the lips inclined to
purse protrudingly. The Big Fisherman's new face was refined. All the
old deep-chiselled lines carved by habitual brashness and bluster were
gone; ironed out as by fire. There were still plenty of lines, but they
had not been engraved by self-pride: Peter had evidently suffered to
earn his new countenance.

Maybe the changed colour of his hair had had something to do with the
softening and refinement of his face. His heavy thatch, previously
black as a raven's wing, had turned grey--in patches. It was sprinkled
with grey throughout, but at his temples and where the hair grew low
on the middle of his forehead, there were broad strips of white,
snow-white. His formerly unkempt black beard had been shortened; it
too glistened with white. Peter's face had lost its austerity and had
taken on dignity...Mencius, who once had had a fleeting glimpse of the
gigantic man running down the street, recognized nothing about him but
his extraordinary height, and told Captain Fulvius, when he rejoined
The Vestris, that the massive Galilean, who directed the meeting on the
Day of Pentecost, was the most august and majestic figure he had ever
seen.

But perhaps the chief distinction of the transformed disciple was
his arresting voice: deep, resonant, commanding. It had the tone of
authority. When he began by saying that he was speaking on behalf of
the Living Christ to a selected company of men reverently awaiting
tidings of him, it was evident in the faces and postures of the
audience that Peter's commission was, in their opinion, authentic.

It had been the hope of God from the beginning, he said, that His
children would inherit the Kingdom. He had not compelled them to accept
its benefits. He had endowed them with free will to claim or refuse
their heritage.

But God had not left them in darkness concerning the results of their
decisions. Every generation had had its inspired prophets who had
entreated men to receive and enjoy their heavenly legacy. Only a few
had heeded these messages. The lonely prophets had been imprisoned,
flogged, and stoned by the forces of greed and the lust for power.

God had been patient with the evil-doers. Again and again, through the
ages, humanity had reaped such appalling harvests of its own misdeeds
that even the kings and warriors had stood aghast at the tragedies they
had contrived. And always, in the midst of ruin and the fear that had
chastened both the just and the unjust, the prophets had shouted, 'Now
we shall begin anew! We shall rebuild the wastes! We shall repair the
world's desolations!'

But when a brief day of peace had brought prosperity, new tyrants
rose up and another era of rapine, slavery, and slaughter would bring
distrust and terror to the children of men. The sceptre had passed from
one bloody hand to another as the nations clamoured for power, and yet
more power, over the lives of the helpless.

Here the Big Fisherman, after pausing for a moment, continued in an
ominous tone that deepened the silence. He had done with his calm
review of mankind's unfortunate history. It was time now for the world
to be shaken wide awake. God had sent forth His Son with power to heal
the sick, bind up broken hearts, open blind eyes, and proclaim a new
era of good-will among men.

But the world would not receive him. He had been scorned, whipped, and
put to a shameful death! But he had come alive again--and had been seen
of many. Now he had returned to his Father's House.

'Think you, then,' demanded Peter 'that the will of God has been set
at naught? Think you that His Spirit will no longer strive with men? I
declare to you that our Christ is King! He has begun to reign! And he
shall reign until all the kingdoms of this world shall have become his
Kingdom!'

For a moment the one hundred and twenty men thought the Big Fisherman's
speech had ended, for he stood silent with his head bowed as in prayer.

Then he faced them to say impressively: 'We, who confidently believe
in Him, have been summoned here to receive unmistakable proofs that
His Holy Spirit abides with us. And from this day forward we are
commissioned to spread the good news of His conquering Kingdom!'

Suddenly Peter drew himself up to his full height and glanced upward
as if he had been struck. His auditors straightened and stared.
Immediately above the Big Fisherman's head, and touching it, was a
shimmering crimson flame--in shape like the flame of a torch! All
breathing in the spacious room was suspended.

Then the massive oaken door flew open and banged hard against the
wall. There was the deafening roar of a mighty tempest that swept
through the hall. The startled men held to their seats and clung to
one another as the rushing wind lashed to and fro. It was as if the
world had come to an end! Now tongues of flame stabbed through the
storm, coming to rest--torch-like--upon the heads of all present! The
glow of the fire possessed exhilarating properties. Some of the men
shouted ecstatically. Some wept for joy. Strangers grasped the hands of
strangers and gazed at one another in wonderment. Jairus put his arm
round Joel, who was weeping. Mencius put both hands over his eyes and
shook his head. Joseph of Arimathaea clutched Hassan's arm.

Now the torch-like flames departed and the tempest roared out as
suddenly as it had come. Every man was on his feet, all talking at
once, loudly, as if the tempest still raged. Mencius, not one to be
easily discomposed, was so utterly stampeded that he turned to Jairus
and shouted--in Greek: 'This is a most amazing thing, sir!' And Jairus,
who didn't know a word of Greek, instantly replied, in that language,
'Surely the Lord has visited us!' Young Joel, listening intently,
nodded his head; and when Jairus asked him if he had understood what
they were saying he said he had, and added, in his own Aramaic, 'It is
true, sir! God Himself has been in this place!'

But the pandemonium in the Coppersmiths' Guildhall was no secret.
The roar of the storm had been heard throughout the city. The urbane
guests at Levi's Inn had rushed out into the street to see what was
happening. It was evident that the fury of the tempest was confined to
the Guildhall. They ran up the stairway, arriving when the tornado had
spent itself and all the men in the auditorium were shouting joyfully.
Crowding into the room they stared at the strange scene.

A tall, haughty man from Crete remarked sourly to his bodyguard, in the
outlandish dialect of that country, a curious composite of Greek and
Egyptian, 'Bah! They're all drunk!'

Peter, striding toward the door, answered him in Crete's guttural
patois, 'These men are not drunk! They are rejoicing because the
Kingdom of God is at hand! The world shall have peace! The slaves shall
be freed! The Lord has proclaimed a new day!'

'How do you happen to be speaking our language?' demanded the stranger.
'You are not a citizen of Crete!'

'I am a citizen of the Kingdom of God!' declared Peter. 'And from
henceforth that Kingdom includes Crete!'

'You say--all the slaves are to be set free?'

'Yes--and their masters, too. No men can be free while other men are
slaves!'

'You should be locked up!' growled the Cretan. 'You are speaking
treason!'

The controversy was attracting attention. A dozen of the illumined men
gathered close and joined in supporting Peter, all of them speaking the
barbarous jargon of far-away Crete. The man from that country, with
baffled eyes, raised his elbow as if to ward off a blow, and slowly
backed toward the door, muttering, 'No! No!'

The Guildhall rapidly emptied. The street was packed with a huge crowd
of bewildered people. The newly-commissioned men, radiant, confident,
infiltrated the throng, shouting, 'The Kingdom of God has come for all
who believe in Him!' They scattered through the city, spreading the
news. They were unafraid. They stopped Roman legionaries on the street
to announce the new Kingdom; and the legionaries, stunned by their
audacity, did not detain them.

That day, three thousand men in Jerusalem said they believed it and
would join the disciples in preparing for the reign of peace.

 * * * * * *

Late in the evening, as the little company of Jesus' Galileans sat
together at Ben-Josef's house, exhausted to the point of speechlessness
by the amazing events of the day, Philip, who had spread the tidings to
incredulous groups at the camel-auction, remarked, 'It is said that the
Prince of Arabia has been smitten with paralysis.'

Peter made no comment, but seemed deeply impressed by this tragedy that
had befallen the royal house of Israel's long-time enemy. Presently he
arose and seated himself in a far corner of the dimly lighted room,
with his elbows on his knees and his head in his hands, apparently
wrestling with a difficult problem.

After half an hour of silent meditation he took leave of them and
trudged slowly up the long hill to the Garden of Gethsemane, where he
knelt beside a great rock and prayed earnestly for guidance. Could
it be possible that God might use him as a messenger of good-will to
hostile Arabia?



Chapter XXVII


For a while the authorities in Jerusalem were so stunned by the
fearless activities of the new movement that they took no action at all.

Within a week after Pentecost the number of determined men who saw the
promise of peace in a divinely sponsored Kingdom that would overwhelm
all tyrannies had risen to five thousand.

Many of the converts were sincere believers in the miraculous power of
the inspired Galilean. Many more, who had neither heard nor seen him,
were ready to cast their lot with any party that guaranteed liberty
from oppression. With the rapacious Roman Empire preparing to close in
on them they had little to lose by joining in this quest for freedom.
Some wanted to save their souls and others their necks. The threat of
disaster was urgent. Any port was good enough in this storm.

It was futile for the city fathers to dispose of this Kingdom-movement
by declaring that the men of the Pentecostal experience had conspired
to fabricate a fantastic lie; and, at the risk of their lives, proclaim
it on crowded street-corners and in the Temple. Three men might have
been foolhardy enough to do that, but not one hundred and twenty! And
ten credulous men might have been taken in by such a fanciful talc, but
not five thousand!

The Sanhedrin met in day-long sessions, stroking its beard,
successively suggesting and rejecting remedies, ranging in tactics
and temper all the way from the conciliatory to the admonitory to the
punitive; and adjourned until tomorrow.

The venerable and highly respected Gamaliel, Chief Legal Counsel to
the lawgivers of Israel, when besought for advice, reminded them that
on several occasions revolutions had collected a few hundreds, made
reckless by their discontentments, but all such little tempests had
quickly blown out and away. 'Give these infatuated Galileans time. If
their cause is unworthy of regard it will perish. If it is inspired of
God, as they insist, you will not be able to thwart it, even if you
would.'

This sensible deliverance offered a measure of temporary relief. The
Sanhedrin would wait--and see...But it didn't have to wait very long.
That same afternoon the news broke that Peter, the leader of the new
party, had picked up a helpless paralytic on the terrace in front of
the Temple; and, setting him on his feet, had told him to walk--and
he had walked! And this was no trumped-up tale. A hundred people had
witnessed it. The paralysed man had sat on the Temple steps every fair
day for years, waving his alms-basin under the public's nose. Now
he had leaped up, shouting for joy! However he might feel about it
tomorrow, when he realized that his occupation was gone, he was spry
enough now; and if the Sanhedrin was to offer a plausible explanation
of this event it would have to think fast and hard!

As for Pilate, he gave little credence to these stories of miracles.
The whole movement, in his opinion, was but the natural aftermath of
Jerusalem's blunder in crucifying a harmless prophet. The victim's
friends were belatedly showing their colours. Perhaps it were better
to keep hands off and not dignify the new party by opposing it. If
the Sanhedrin demanded action, Pilate would act. In the meantime the
Insula would pretend not to notice. The jaded Procurator felt under no
obligation to relieve the embarrassment of the Sanhedrin.

And so, with no opposition at all, the Kingdom-movement in Jerusalem
became increasingly confident, proving its courage by the organization
of a 'Christian Ecclesia.' Regional meetings were held throughout the
city and mass meetings met in a huge vacant warehouse.

So amazing had been the unexpected triumph of the new cause that the
little group of original disciples became convinced of the early
reappearance of their Lord to fulfil his promise of 'peace on earth and
good-will among men.' It would be well to prepare for his coming by
binding together in harmony all the disparate elements comprising the
Ecclesia.

It occurred to Peter that if these people could live together they
might provide Jerusalem with an object-lesson in tolerance and
generosity. He proposed the establishment of a commune. No one would be
compelled to join it, but those who desired to experience its benefits
should convert their realty into money and bring it, with their
household goods, into the new communal home, where the well-to-do and
the ne'er-do-wells might share alike.

The people who had next to nothing thought it was a grand idea. The
more fortunate, who had something to contribute, weren't so sure, but
Peter had already demonstrated supernormal power, and perhaps--under
his administration--the experiment might succeed.

But the thing never worked. Peter's theory that the more closely
acquainted the people were the more they would love one another
turned out to be erroneous. He had declared that if men understood
one another, regardless of their training or temperament, they could
enjoy a pleasant and profitable fellowship. The facts were that as
their mutual understanding increased their mutual distrust mounted from
dispassionate contempt to forthright animosity.

In vain did the Big Fisherman plead for harmony. Often and often he
used the arresting phrase 'these latter times' in his warnings that
the Lord might come at any moment, and that when he came he would
expect to find his faithful followers ready to receive him. But this
ominous admonition, albeit listened to with respect--for they all
idolized Peter--failed to cure the quarrelling. The Greeks complained
that the Jews, who outnumbered them, were unfair in their distribution
of the necessities. This could easily have been true, though the
Greeks in Jerusalem, even in the minority, may have been too keenly
apprehensive of discrimination. But whatever may have been the merits
of these mounting controversies, the commune was becoming a burdensome
disillusionment to Peter. How indeed was the world ever to realize
universal peace if a hundred devoted followers of Christ, in the most
religious city on earth, couldn't get along with one another?

The problem having now become too hot to handle, Peter appointed a
board of seven representative men to administer the benefits of the
commune while he himself gave most of his time to visitation of the
needy throughout the city. And the commune, now lacking his direct
oversight, quickly deteriorated into a public nuisance. Now the
Sanhedrin really did have a case against the phantom Kingdom, and
pressed it with vigour. Pilate ordered a few companies of legionaries
to exterminate the unhappy commune and forbid any Kingdom-talk either
in public or private. Peter tried to salvage what was left of his
branch of the Kingdom, and was tossed into prison. That same night
he walked out of jail, barred doors quietly opening before him.
Considerately stepping over the big feet of recumbent guards in the
prison corridors, he went to his lodgings; and, next day, no effort was
made to recapture him. The authorities in control of the prison were
appropriately embarrassed over the incident and Pilate sneered at their
shame, advising them not to risk a repetition of their chagrin.

So Peter went free and continued to walk fearlessly and unmolested
in the city, his spiritual power gaining such prestige that
invalids--whether Christian believers or not--were carried on their
cots into the streets so that the great man's shadow, as he passed,
might fall across their wasted forms and heal them of their diseases.

As for the hapless adherents of the Christian Ecclesia, they had been
dispersed, silenced, scared, jailed, and stoned. Peter viewed the wreck
of his local project without dismay. Considering the enormous weight
of the forces aligned against it, it was a wonder that it had been
permitted even a brief existence. Its disintegration did not mean that
the Kingdom was a failure. Christ's Kingdom would prevail--but not
today, not tomorrow--and not easily.

 * * * * * *

And perhaps it was just as well that the Jerusalem experiment in
communal living had come to a prompt and decisive termination.

Had it shown any promise of recovery by careful nursing, the disciples
might have felt obliged to stay with it for better or worse; but its
collapse had been so complete, so far beyond the reach of repair,
that the disciples immediately set forth on other missions: Philip to
Antioch, Andrew to Damascus, Thaddeus to the fisher-folk on the Sea of
Galilee, Matthew to Capernaum and Bethsaida, John and James to Askelon,
Gaza, and Idumea, Thomas to the Parthians in India, the aged Nathaniel
Bartholomew to Jericho--and then on home to die.

Learning that a little company of Christians were meeting secretly in
Joppa, Peter decided to visit them. The shabby old city had lately
come awake, shaken out of its torpor by the Empire's activities on the
waterfront. Reconstruction of the wharves and reconditioning of the
harbour had tripled the population. The newcomers were slaves for the
most part, many of them quite unused to pick-and-shovel labour, paying
with their sweat and calluses for futile efforts to defend themselves
and their communities against the engulfing tyranny of Rome. Obviously
the Christian movement in Joppa was a good thing to keep away from,
especially for a distinguished-looking man whose unusual height and
bulk made it difficult for him to remain inconspicuous.

Peter was deeply touched by the welcome he received at the lame and
blistered hands of these despairing men. He had gone to Joppa with no
acquaintances to vouch for him. It was a wonder to him--once he had
learned in what danger they stood--that the wary slaves should have
accepted his overtures of friendship without distrust, for the Romans
were taking no chances of insurrection on the part of these intelligent
men, enslaved for political reasons; nor were the slaves risking
exposure by confiding in strangers. But the Big Fisherman instantly
disarmed suspicion.

Taking lodgings in the humble home of a tanner who lived near the
docks, Peter quickly won his taciturn host's confidence and discovered,
to his delight, that the quiet old man was a believer in the promised
Kingdom of justice and peace. It soon became evident that the house of
Simon the Tanner was a secret meeting-place of lonely men. In the night
they would arrive in small groups of twos and threes and sit together
in dim candle-light, listening to the Tanner's reassurances that all
would be well--sometime--somewhere.

Now that Peter had come, they could learn about the divine Nazarene
from one who had walked daily by his side. The lean and haggard men
hungrily heard the intimate details of the Master's ministry: his
comforting words, his marvellous deeds, his courageous death, his
return to life; and--most heartening of all--the amazing disclosures of
his abiding presence and power on the Day of Pentecost.

Very few of the wistful listeners understood Aramaic, but all of them
knew Greek, and although Peter's Greek was anything but fluent, it
served its purpose. Indeed, the thoughtful old Tanner told him that
his groping for the right words, which his sympathetic--and sometimes
amused--audience supplied, had but deepened their interest in what he
was saying.

'They help you tell the story,' said Simon. 'It means more to them that
way. Don't ever try to improve your Greek, Peter,' he added. 'It's much
better when it's not so good.'

Those were blessed days--at Joppa. Not only had they brought fresh
courage to the hard-pressed slaves, who, to all outward appearance,
were irretrievably doomed, but they had renewed Peter's faith in the
inevitable victory of the Kingdom...Perhaps it wasn't going to be so
difficult, after all! Perhaps the world would accept it sooner than
he had thought! The unhappy people of every nation needed only to be
told that peace and freedom were about to come--and with faith in that
promise their yokes would be easy and their burdens light.

'Surely,' Peter had remarked to the old Tanner, 'if these enslaved men
of Joppa, who live such wretched lives, can believe in the world's
liberation and look forward with confidence to the future, it shouldn't
be so difficult for the more fortunate to accept the promise.'

'I think you are in error there, my friend,' Simon had replied. 'It is
the faith of the beaten men in chains, for whom all human reliances
have failed, that will hasten the coming of the Kingdom.'

Late one afternoon--it turned out to be Peter's last day in Joppa--he
climbed the narrow stairs to the flat roof of the Tanner's house to
meditate in private. It was not yet supper-time, but he was hungry;
very hungry. Simon was a frail old man who didn't require much food.
Peter's appetite was robust. He found himself thinking about Hannah's
table. There was always more than enough to eat. Sometimes he and
Andy would buy a fat lamb and roast it over a glowing fire in their
back yard. He wished he were at home in Bethsaida now!...While he
daydreamed, he grew drowsy, stretched out comfortably in the big
chair--and slept. The well-pastured sheep and sleek calves of Galilee
strolled into his dream. Here came a spring lamb that he might buy. But
now the coveted lamb moved on and all the sheep and calves were gone.
Presently some other animals appeared: strange, misshapen, repulsive
beasts. Peter scowled with disgust.

Someone in the chair opposite chuckled a little.

'If you are so hungry, Peter,' remarked the visitor, 'how about
slaughtering one of these?'

'Ugh!' Peter heard himself muttering.

His dream companion laughed softly and Peter gazed in that direction to
see what manner of man he was. The newcomer was a well-favoured youth,
elegantly clad in white, with a broad band of gold encircling his head
and a gold cross on the breast of his tunic.

'You should make the acquaintance of these animals,' said the youth,
with a smile. 'They're not to be found in Galilee or Judaea, but you
will encounter them. This is a big world, Peter, and it all belongs to
our Father...That tall, ungainly beast is a giraffe--and the short,
not-very-pretty one behind it is a wart hog. The next one is an
ant-eater and beside it is a rhinoceros--'

'They're loathsome!' mumbled Peter.

'And the one on this side of the wart hog,' continued the Angel,
undisturbed by Peter's interruption, 'is a chimpanzee. Looks a little
like a man, does he not? And the creature shuffling along behind him
really is a man, even if lacking somewhat in refinement.'

'What's all this about?' demanded Peter crossly.

The mysterious visitor drew his chair nearer and when he spoke his tone
was serious.

'Peter--I have been sent to say that you have been entrusted with a
very important mission. It will take you to far places and you will
meet all manner of God's creatures. You must learn to say to yourself,
"God either created all of us--or none of us!" The Master intends his
Kingdom to serve the whole world. If it is not open to everybody, it is
not open to anybody! I was sent to tell you this.'

Peter came wide awake now and found himself alone. Good old Simon's
white head appeared at the top of the stairs.

'There are three strangers here to see you,' he said. 'They are from
Caesarea.'

'What can men of Caesarea want of me?' muttered Peter crossly.

'Perhaps they will tell you,' said Simon, retreating down the stairs.

 * * * * * *

How he had hated the Romans! Ever since he was a little boy the very
word angered him! Their cavalry from the Capernaum fort had galloped,
four abreast, on the Galilean highways, frightening poor people half
out of their wits, sending women and children scurrying into the
hedges. Their drunken foot-soldiers had reeled into the little shops
shouting for attention. They had grossly insulted women of all ages on
the streets. They had helped themselves to the defenceless farmers'
grapes and melons. Peter had despised the Romans with a bitter loathing!

And now, here he was in Caesarea, the honoured guest of 'The Italians,'
a social club composed entirely of Roman civilians in the employ of the
Prefect's government.

The three mounted men who had called for him in Joppa had deferentially
explained that Cornelius, the Senior Regent of 'The Italians,' urgently
desired him to come at once to Caesarea for an important conference.
Very much bewildered, Peter had awkwardly climbed on to the tall black
horse they had brought for him; and there he was, riding along under
the bright moonlight, in the company of Romans; to all appearances
the same kind of Romans he had learned to hate! Sleek, well-fed,
well-accoutred Romans, with the despised black eagle insignia on their
scarlet tunics, with the clean-shaven faces and close-cropped hair,
and the inevitable black bandeaux on their heads. The journey was made
mostly in silence. The couriers had told him little about his summons
to Caesarea. Cornelius wanted to see him. That was about all. The name
of Cornelius meant nothing to Peter, but evidently it meant a great
deal to these men. They spoke his name almost reverently. Peter was to
learn later that Cornelius was the treasurer of the Roman government in
Caesarea and high in the esteem of Prefect Sergius.

It was a fast trip. Peter had had almost no experience of riding. When
they arrived in Caesarea, he was weary and lame. They took him directly
to their well-appointed club-house, showed him into a beautifully
furnished guest-room, and told him to rest until Cornelius came. He
bathed, slept, and wolfed the food a servant brought him. And now--in
the early afternoon--he was invited to see the mysterious man who had
summoned him from Joppa.

Cornelius was seated behind a large desk in a sumptuous office.
As Peter entered, he rose, bowed deeply, and pointed to a heavily
upholstered chair opposite his own. Peter sat and regarded the Regent
with interest. He was a handsome old man of seventy, with snow-white
hair and a benign countenance. When he spoke, his voice was low and
gentle.

'You may think it strange, sir,' he began, in laboured Aramaic, 'to be
summoned here with so little information concerning your errand...By
the way,' he interrupted himself to ask, 'do you converse in Greek?'

'Not too well,' admitted Peter.

'Is your Greek as good as my Aramaic?'

'Yes, sir; not meaning any offence.' They both grinned.

'We will speak Greek, then,' said Cornelius softly. 'What I have to
say to you could not be confided to those fine fellows who brought you
here. They would not have understood. I have had a mysterious dream,
and I am informed that you can interpret it.'

Peter leaned forward and listened attentively.

'On the night before last I was visited by an Angel,' continued
Cornelius. 'Let me say that it is not my habit to dream of Angels. This
one seemed very real. He was a handsome young fellow, clad in white
satin, and wearing a golden fillet. On the left breast of his tunic--'
Cornelius laid his hand over the black eagle on his breast.

'There was a gold cross, I think,' assisted Peter.

Cornelius' deep-set eyes widened. He nodded his head.

'You too have seen him, then?' he asked.

'Yes, sir. He is a courier, representing the Kingdom.'

'Precisely!' said Cornelius. 'That is what he told me! And when I
asked him to tell me about this Kingdom, he told me to send for
you!...Proceed, please! What manner of Kingdom is this?'

'It is a long story, sir,' said Peter, wondering where to begin.
'Doubtless you have heard of Jesus, the Galilean, who went about the
Jewish provinces, healing the sick, encouraging the downtrodden--and
was crucified by Pontius Pilate--and, on the third day, left his tomb,
to be seen alive by many witnesses.'

Cornelius nodded, indifferently, almost impatiently. Yes, he had heard
all that--but these were tall tales, and who were these witnesses? And
what was this Kingdom?

Peter recrossed his legs and began at the beginning. He himself had
been a witness. He hadn't wanted to believe in this Carpenter. He had
been a rough, profane, sceptical, roistering fisherman. He had gone
out into the country to scoff at this young upstart and prove to the
deluded men of his fishing crew that the wonder-working prophet was a
fraud.

Cornelius listened with mounting interest.

Peter told him of the day when he had been forced to carry a blind
child to Jesus, and had seen the bewildered eyes open; told him of the
vast throngs that followed, day by day, hungry, footsore, fascinated by
tidings of a Kingdom to come where all men would be free of oppression;
told him of the healing of cripples, yes, and lepers!

The afternoon wore on. The story continued.

The authorities had tried to silence the Carpenter, but feared an
uprising by the people. The crowds increased. The highways were crowded
with frantic relatives bringing their sick to be healed.

Dusk came down. A servant slipped quietly into the room and lighted the
lamps. Cornelius told him to serve supper here on the desk. The servant
retired and Peter went on.

Now it was Passover Week in Jerusalem. Jesus had rebuked the Temple as
a place of merchandise. He had been arrested, tried for blasphemy and
treason, convicted, whipped, reviled, crucified. And then he had come
to life again.

'And you say you saw all this?' demanded Cornelius, sharply.

'I saw it all, sir. Yes, sir, all but--' Peter's voice broke. He bowed
his head and covered his distorted face with his huge, trembling hands.
Cornelius waited silently. Recovering his voice with an effort, Peter
went on. 'I saw him after he had returned to life, sir; but I must
confess, in shame, that I was not present at his trials, nor was I at
his side when he went to his death. At the last, when everything seemed
lost, I denied, in the presence of strangers, that I had ever known
him--and I ran away!'

There was a long silence. At length the old Roman huskily cleared his
throat and said gently, 'You are a brave man, my friend! And your
testimony is believable. Your confession proves your integrity. You
would not have told me this if you were not speaking the truth. I
believe you, Peter. I believe everything you have told me.'

Servants came in to serve supper, but Cornelius shook his head and
motioned them to leave.

'Do you want to tell me now about this Kingdom?' he asked softly. 'Or
would you prefer to wait until tomorrow?'

'Tomorrow,' murmured Peter.

'Come,' said Cornelius, rising, and laying a hand on Peter's bowed
shoulder. 'You shall go to your room; and when you are ready for your
supper they will bring it to you...I know you are weary. It was a heavy
task. Only a very strong man could do that!'

Taking his arm Cornelius accompanied him back to his room and quietly
closed the door. Utterly spent, Peter flung himself at full length
upon his bed. It seemed very strange that his shameful confession of
cowardice and disloyalty should have made him an accredited ambassador
of the Master's Kingdom!

 * * * * * *

The following afternoon, closeted with Cornelius, was a memorable
occasion. Peter had never met anyone like him. The gentle-spirited old
Roman had given much serious thought to the future of mankind. Indeed,
he disclosed a far deeper invasion of this subject than had ever been
undertaken by Peter, who knew next to nothing about the history of
nations.

'Now, as for this universal peace and freedom which your Kingdom
expects in the near future,' Cornelius was saying, 'I fear that
you--and all who share your hope--are letting yourselves in for a great
disappointment.'

'But does not every sane man desire peace?' queried Peter.

'As an individual, yes,' agreed Cornelius, 'but men are not permitted
to exercise their own private desires. They are in captivity to their
nation, and nations have neither the talent nor the training for the
achievement of peace.'

'But every man can claim the peace of the Kingdom in his own heart,'
argued Peter.

'Certainly!' said Cornelius. 'As an individual, he may acquire peace
of mind, or, as you say, peace in his heart; but why call that a
Kingdom?...You have been talking about a triumphant King whose reign
will supersede the authority and power of all regularly constituted
governments. You have been too discreet--or too polite--to tell me that
the coming Kingdom of your Christos will destroy the Roman Empire; but
that's what it comes to, does it not?'

Peter had shifted uneasily in his chair.

'I shouldn't want to put it that way, sir,' he said. 'The Christos will
not destroy the Empire. The Empire will destroy itself! As men see the
advantages of living in good-will toward one another--'

'They will not need the Empire,' broke in Cornelius. 'But it isn't that
simple! Your man of good-will is not at liberty to choose how he may
treat other men. His nation decides that for him.'

'But you yourself, my good Cornelius, believe in kindness and
friendship toward all men,' said Peter softly, 'and you practise it,
too. You are not far from the Kingdom.'

'Further than you think, my friend,' insisted Cornelius. 'It is true
that I do not bear arms. I do not slaughter or enslave other men. I
have not the physique to be a soldier. The Empire has given me the
more decent task of keeping the accounts and disbursing the funds for
the building of these great wharves which will be used some day in an
attack on you unhappy Jews.'

'If it hurts your conscience, why do you do it?' ventured Peter.

'What would you have me do?' countered the old man. 'Shall I
live in solitude, despised by my friends, unable to support my
dependents?...What I am saying is: your Kingdom presupposes that every
man is free to determine what manner of life he shall live. In that it
is hopelessly impractical.'

Peter was no match for the old Roman in debate. His faith in the
victory of the Master's Kingdom was undimmed, but he had no answer for
the problems that Cornelius presented. He had never confronted them.

'Is it your belief then,' he asked, 'that men are for ever to be the
victims of greed--and their rulers' lust for power?'

'It has been so from the beginning,' sighed Cornelius. 'Have we any way
to judge the future, save by the past?'

The afternoon slipped away quickly, Cornelius doing most of the
talking today...It was, he reflected, a strangely constructed world.
All that it knew about heroism it had learned on the battlefield. All
that it knew about the navigation of the seas it had learned in naval
warfare. Its sculpture, its architecture, its monuments, its songs, its
poetry--was there any art-form that found its theme elsewhere than in
the valour of armed men?...It was unfortunate that this should be true;
but wasn't it true?

The pity of it, admitted Cornelius, was that whole nations so often
were obliged to follow mad rulers, wicked men recklessly gambling with
the blood and property of their subjects.

The sun was sinking.

'I hope I have not wearied you, Peter,' said the old man. 'And I hope
I have not discouraged you...Good luck to your Kingdom of love...I
can say that much without committing an act of treason; for the Roman
Empire will not regard your Kingdom seriously. If it really constituted
a threat to the Empire, you would be tossed into prison--and so would
I, for entertaining you as my guest.'

'But--do you expect the Empire to endure for ever?' asked Peter.

'I have no opinion, my friend, about the Empire's ultimate future.
It is customary for the sceptre to pass from one hand to another. A
nation may be in the saddle today, and on foot--and barefoot--tomorrow.
Perhaps that, too, is God's will.' The old Roman sat in meditative
silence for a while; then he said, 'I have been wondering today
about the fate of your neighbours in Arabia. Their Crown Prince lies
hopelessly paralysed. Word came last night that their King Zendi is
dead. The Arabs have known what to expect of their royal house. What
becomes of them now will depend upon a new ruler. Will he reach out for
territory that he does not need? Will he be content with what he has?
Will he let the shepherds tend their flocks, or will they have to leave
them to the wolves and the weather while they gallop off to war?'

'War? With whom?' asked Peter.

'With Judaea, perhaps. It is possible.'

'The Empire might not like that,' observed Peter naively.

Cornelius smiled dryly and said no, the Empire might be annoyed.

It was supper-time now, and they proceeded to the club's spacious
dining-room, where two hundred of The Italians were assembled. Peter
sat at Cornelius' right and was formally presented. After supper he
was asked to speak, and he told the story of the divine Galilean who
had laid down his life in the cause of world-friendship. The Romans
listened respectfully. Peter did not raise his voice or his hand.
His audience, from the first moment, was held completely captive. He
confidently promised peace and freedom for all men in the name of
his risen Lord. He even dared to tell his fascinated audience of the
torch-like flames of Pentecost. And nobody stirred, and nobody smiled.

Next morning, after bidding farewell to Cornelius, Peter left Caesarea
on foot; his destination, Arabia.



Chapter XXVIII


Had any doubt lingered in Fara's mind about the unwisdom of making
Arabia her permanent home, it would have been dispelled on the evening
of her return.

The fact that she wasn't wanted there had been ruthlessly demonstrated
by the Queen and Prince Deran, and when she retired that night to lie
wide-awake for hours beside the happily sleeping Ione, she was firmly
resolved to leave at the earliest possible moment.

It was not the shocking conduct of Rennah and her detestable son that
had wounded her most deeply, though that intentional rudeness had been
as painful as a physical blow. King Zendi's utter indifference to the
distressing incident was beyond understanding.

From her earliest childhood Zendi had been as tender as a father. Fara
had all but worshipped him. Sometimes, during the loneliest days of her
self-exile in Galilee, when her deep devotion to Voldi and her desire
to share his life had momentarily shaken her resolve to sacrifice her
love rather than jeopardize his career, it was the remembrance of
Zendi's unfailing kindness that had abetted the temptation. The King's
affectionate attitude toward her would go far in making her future life
in Arabia pleasant and his undisguised loyalty to Voldi would silence
all criticism...Now it appeared that Zendi didn't care.

At dawn after a sleepless night, the unhappy girl slipped quietly out
of Ione's humble quarters in the midst of the servants' tents--hardly
an appropriate lodging for the daughter of an Arabian Princess--and
strolled out toward the well-remembered paddocks, feeling that the
sight of good old Kedar might be comforting. As she had hoped, Kedar
was already going about his morning duties. At the moment he was
brushing the glossy coat of a beautiful bay filly. He straightened his
rheumatic back with an effort.

'Did you do much riding while you were gone?' he asked.

'None. Saidi was stolen, and where I lived in Galilee we had no horses.'

'That was too bad--about Saidi. Voldi told me.' Kedar patted the
filly's satin shoulder. 'This girl is Saidi's niece,' he said. 'Her
name is Hagar.'

Fara stepped forward and laid her hand gently on the young mare's
velvety muzzle, murmuring, 'She's lovely!'

'She hasn't been ridden much,' said Kedar. 'I hope this isn't a secret,
but the King intends to give her to you.'

Fara's eyes widened in surprise.

'How long ago did he tell you that, Kedar?'

'Oh--three years ago, when she was foaled, shortly after you
disappeared.'

'The King may have changed his mind in the meantime,' said Fara
soberly. 'Has he ever spoken of it since then?'

'Last night,' said Kedar. 'After you had gone to bed. Want to take a
little canter, Princess? Nobody will be up for an hour. Why don't you
ride over to your old home?'

Fara shook her head. It would be much too painful. They would not
have left those valuable tents and equipment unattended. Nothing
would be there to see but the sad ghost of a garden and old paths
overgrown with weeds. Kedar had left her now to her pensive memories.
In a moment he returned with a saddle and bridle. Tossing the saddle
across Hagar's back, he fastened the girths; then turning to give
Fara a candid head-to-foot survey, he adjusted the stirrup straps,
mumbling, 'It seems to me your legs aren't much longer than when you
left. A little, maybe...There you are! Up you go...She's got a tender
mouth--or pretends she has,' still gripping the reins close against the
filly's chin. 'Let her show you how she can pace. She's very proud of
it. She makes believe she is scared of anything white, just like her
Aunt Saidi...That mare was an awful liar!' he added, as he opened the
paddock gate and released his hold on the reins. Fara gathered them up,
gently but firmly, with practised hands and Hagar made off at a mincing
rack. She was as beautiful as the legendary woman whose name she bore,
and as vain as a peacock.

Fara laughed merrily and waved a hand to old Kedar, who stood beaming.
How good it was to feel and watch again the ripple of a horse's
muscles! It had been so long! And Zendi had planned for her to have
this incomparable filly! It was very confusing. Zendi was her friend,
after all. Perhaps his conduct last night could be explained: it
certainly needed an explanation!

'Come out of it, Hagar!' called Fara, digging her heels into the
filly's ribs. Hagar tossed her head and broke into an easy lope...It
was an intoxicating sensation! The early-morning breeze tousled Fara's
hair. She was ecstatic. In spite of her decision not to visit the site
of her old home, she found herself on the familiar trail.

As she had anticipated, nothing remained but the sturdily built
paddocks. In the one nearest the vacant area where the tents had stood,
a beautiful black horse was tied. His saddle-blanket bore the Arabian
royal insignia. Dismounting at a little distance, Fara tied the filly
and strolled to the dilapidated garden. On the weather-beaten rustic
bench, where she had so often sat beside her mother during those
anxious days of her illness, King Zendi smilingly watched her approach.
She paused for a moment, slowly proceeded to the bench, and sat down
beside him. He took her hand.

'I have been waiting for you, dear child,' he said, gently.

'What made you think I might come?' she asked.

'I surmised you might be up early. You would want to talk to old Kedar,
everyone else being unfriendly. You knew you could count on Kedar. He
didn't tell you I was here?'

She shook her head.

'That's good,' said Zendi. 'I told him not to tell you. You might not
have come had you known. I hurt you badly last night.'

Fara made no comment. Tears stood in her eyes.

'It is not easy for me to tell you,' said Zendi hesitantly, 'but you
deserve to know. My life, at present, is difficult. Rennah is ill. It
is a sickness of the mind. She has become madly obsessed by the idea
that--that--'

He broke off here and sat moodily tracing lines in the sand with his
riding-whip; then he faced her to ask, entreatingly, 'You can't guess
what I'm trying to say, can you?'

'I'm afraid not, sir,' murmured Fara.

'Then I must begin at the beginning. Did you ever hear that your mother
and I were deeply in love when her marriage was forced upon her as a
patriotic duty?'

'I knew you were devoted friends,' admitted Fara.

'All of that!' said Zendi. 'After your dear mother had been carried
away into bondage and it became expedient for me to marry, Rennah
seemed contented with her belief that she had taken Arnon's place in my
heart. But after your mother returned alone to Arabia, the Queen became
uneasy. She tried hard, I think, to treat your mother kindly; but her
suspicion grew...Perhaps I was at fault.'

The unhappy King paused so long here that Fara wished she could think
of something appropriate to say.

'Yes,' he continued in a barely audible tone of soliloquy, 'I was
clearly at fault. Your mother had been used cruelly. She had come home
in humiliating circumstances. I tried to show my friendship. Then,
realizing that my attitude would be misunderstood, I went to special
pains to allay Rennah's jealousy; and so successfully that the Queen
began to take an interest in Arnon. I must give her full credit for
that.'

It was a long story, and Zendi insisted on telling it all. Fara
listened pensively, her heart aching for him.

'Of course,' he was saying now, 'Rennah had always humoured our son
in many things that were to his disadvantage. The boy was wilful, and
his over-indulgence had made him arrogant; but I hoped that as he grew
older his disposition might improve. Any Crown Prince is an object of
pity, Fara. No one dares tell him how to treat his fellows. No other
boy dares slap him for his impudence. Deran never had any discipline,
at all.

'When your mother died,' continued Zendi, 'and you disappeared, I was
sorely grieved. I tried not to show how deeply I had been wounded; but
Rennah knew. I had no appetite; I was moody; I wanted to be alone.
Rennah turned to Deran for companionship. Anything Deran did or said
was exactly right. She made believe he was witty and laughed at his
impudences. He insulted my Councillors; he ridiculed me in the presence
of our servants. Nothing short of divorcing Rennah and disowning Deran
could have relieved my intolerable predicament.'

Again Zendi reached for Fara's hand.

'Now, my child, you know why you were so shamefully used, last night,
at our own table.'

'I am glad you wanted to tell me,' said Fara. 'It does relieve my
mind to know that you are still my friend. It would be unfair for me
to remain here and add to your burden. I shall take Ione--and go. She
will be happy to return to her own country. And as I have no country, I
think I should prefer to live in Greece. May I have your permission to
do that?'

'What about Voldi?'

'Voldi knows I can't marry him.'

'But you do love him, I think.'

'Dearly! Far too dearly to risk ruining his life!'

'You two will be unhappy as long as you live.'

'But I cannot live happily in Arabia, and Voldi will not be happy
anywhere else. Our choice is limited to two kinds of unhappiness.'

'Well--you're making the wrong choice! How many thousands of times I
have wished that your mother and I had had the courage to run away. I
don't know where we could have gone; but any hardship would have been
preferable to what we endured.' It suddenly occurred to Zendi that he
had unwittingly drawn a picture without Fara in it, and he mumbled an
apology that didn't help very much.

'Don't mind me!' said Fara, with a half-bitter chuckle. 'I've never
thought it was any fun to be alive.'

King Zendi now sighted something on the trail that won his interest. He
stood up and surveyed with apparent satisfaction an approaching train
of camels. Fara rose and stood beside him. He took her arm.

'Your tents and furniture,' he said. 'Everything will be put in place
today, just as you left it. Your servants will be here soon.'

'Oh, but you mustn't! I cannot stay here!' pleaded Fara.

Then Zendi explained. He had supposed, he said, that she might not want
to remain. When the news arrived of her father's assassination, he had
assumed that she would return for her beloved Ione and plan to reside
in some other country; possibly Greece, for she had often expressed
admiration for that historic land. In view of this probable decision,
he had been converting her property into money.

'Your sheep and cattle were sent to Damascus,' he said, 'and the
caravan will return shortly with the proceeds. Your estate should be
ample to provide for you wherever you may decide to live.'

All through the forenoon the King watched as the experienced men
pitched Fara's tents on their former site and installed the familiar
equipment. The old servants came and set about their accustomed
tasks. Ione, directing them, was dizzy with joy. Lunch was served in
the garden and Voldi arrived in time for it. The King declined an
invitation to stay. Deran had been taken ill in the night, he said,
with what appeared to be an unusually bad cold, accompanied by a fever.
The Queen was greatly worried about him.

 * * * * * *

During the next three days the servants went to and fro between the
King's encampment and Fara's compound, bringing forgotten articles of
household gear from the storage. They brought also disturbing news of
the Prince's illness. His fever had mounted dangerously and he was
delirious much of the time. In the morning of the fourth day of his
sickness, Voldi rode over to tell Fara that the fever was subsiding but
Deran was unable to move his legs. The Queen, he said, was hysterical
with grief, noisily upbraiding the physician for his failure to propose
a remedy.

But there was no remedy for Deran's disease. He had fallen victim to
the dreaded epidemic that had wrought such havoc this summer. Within
a week all Arabia had learned that the Crown Prince was a helpless,
hopeless paralytic.

Rennah's lamentations were so appalling that even Deran was disgusted
by her emotional collapse and bitterly complained that he had enough
to bear without being tortured by her outcries--and would she have the
goodness to desist and let him die in peace. His surly comment was of
no consolation to her. Still in need of some outlet for her distress,
Rennah turned to accusations, reviling the baffled old physician,
badgering the servants, and making life wretched for the King.

For relief from this tumult, Zendi rode alone for hours and leagues in
weather that was becoming increasingly inclement as the chill winds of
autumn began to lash the mountain trails.

One snowy morning he brought Fara's money, six heavy pouches loaded
with gold, stowed in huge saddle-bags. He handed down the precious
freight to the stable-boys, but did not dismount.

Late one afternoon, he arrived home, wet to the skin, his teeth
chattering, his face flushed with fever. They helped him off his horse
and asked him what was the matter. He was too hoarse to make an audible
reply. They put him to bed with hot bricks at his feet and plied him
with the usual remedies for severe exposure. The Councillors were
summoned. The physician tried everything he knew. The hours of the
night dragged wearily through, and at dawn Zendi died.

 * * * * * *

A fortnight had passed since the death of the King. Much snow had
fallen, earlier than usual, but the sun shone brightly at midday,
melting the drifts. Old men who remembered freely predicted a mild,
open winter, which meant that Arabia faced the heartening prospect of
ample pasturage and prosperity. This was good, especially in view of
the fact that the nation was without a ruler. It was in seasons when
the grass was scarce that the tribesmen quarrelled and fought and
the country needed the control of a firm hand. When the traditional
thirty days of mourning passed, the Council would meet and consider the
appointment of a new King, it being quite obvious that Prince Deran was
unable to succeed to the throne, a fact which the wise men discreetly
deplored in their demeanour and conversation but to which they bravely
reconciled themselves in their hearts.

At dusk one afternoon, Ione came into Fara's bed-chamber to say that an
old man whom she had never seen before was asking to see her.

'A huge man!' she said. 'Very tall and very tired and very wet; someone
important, I think,' she added. 'I brought him in out of the snow.'

Fara followed her quickly. At the sight of the visitor, who stood
waiting, she stared incredulously for an instant, and then rushed into
his arms. 'Petros!' she cried. 'Is it possible? Is it really you?'

'Have I changed so much?' he asked.

She led him to the glowing fireplace and began tugging off his
snow-covered robe. He sat down wearily and Ione knelt to unfasten the
soaked sandal-thongs.

'Your hair!' exclaimed Fara. 'Your beard! Even your voice is different,
Peter! I'm afraid you have suffered deeply. But--' she studied him
candidly, intuitively. 'But--whatever has happened to you, it has made
you great!' Her husky voice lowered to a tone of reverence. 'Did the
Master leave you in charge of his earthly Kingdom?'

Ione stood before them, wide-eyed with bewilderment, apparently unable
to decide whether to listen or leave. Fara said, in Greek, 'Petros,
this is my dear Ione, of whom I have often spoken...And Ione, this is
the Big Fisherman whom Jesus named Petros.'

'A rock?' murmured Ione. 'Yes,' she added quickly. 'That is so! A rock!
Yes--it is true!' Impulsively she knelt at his feet; and Peter, taking
both her hands in his, raised her up gently.

'I am not to be worshipped, Ione,' he said, in her own tongue. 'I
am only a man who has walked humbly beside a King. I give you his
blessing.'

Ione supervised the preparation of a nourishing supper; and, after
they had eaten, Peter and Fara sat by the fire talking earnestly until
far into the night. Fara listened with increasing perplexity as Peter
confided the nature of his errand in Arabia. A strange power had been
bestowed upon him, he said. The Holy Spirit had enabled him to perform
miracles of healing. He had made cripples walk!

Fara's heart raced as her intuition informed her of the amazing
experiment he had in mind. He was going to try to heal Deran!

'No direct command has come to me,' Peter was saying, 'but surely
it would please God, and advance the Master's Kingdom of peace and
goodwill among men, if some act of kindness might cure the ancient
enmity between the Arab and the Jew. Perhaps it is my task, by God's
help, to do this thing.'

Fara made no comment; did not lift her eyes. After a moment's waiting,
Peter continued:

'Would it not soften the heart of Arabia if a Jew should be the means
of restoring the heir to their throne?'

'I do not know,' murmured Fara; adding, when Peter's searching look
called for an explanation of her doubt, 'It has been a bitter enmity
for ages.' She could not bring herself to tell him that it would be
no great favour to Arabia to put Deran on his feet. Who was Fara--to
discourage the healing of any man's paralysis? And how dared she
pit her judgment against that of the man whom God had invested with
superhuman power?

'Think you, Fara, that the Queen will let me see the Prince?' wondered
Peter.

'I do not know,' she replied. 'The Queen is much overwrought by the
recent afflictions. There's no telling what attitude she might take.'

'Will you go with me tomorrow,' entreated Peter, 'and tell her why I
have come?'

'Queen Rennah is not friendly to me,' said Fara.

'Your Voldi is a Councillor,' said Peter. 'Could you persuade him to
present me?'

'No! No!' exclaimed Fara. 'I couldn't ask Voldi to do that!'

There was a long, tense silence. Peter sat gnawing his bearded underlip
in perplexity. At length he spoke almost sternly.

'Something tells me that you do not want the Prince to be healed! Is
this true?'

There was no use trying to evade this query. Fara straightened for her
task.

'The Arabians do not like Prince Deran, Peter,' she said firmly. 'From
his childhood he has been detested for his selfishness and arrogance.
They will want--and they deserve--another kind of King.'

'But if, by a miracle, the Prince should be healed, might he not change
his ways and become acceptable?' argued Peter.

'It is not for me to say,' replied Fara.

'You remember what happened to the rich Zacchaeus? How the people's
hatred of him was changed to loyalty and affection when Jesus redeemed
him?'

Fara slowly nodded her head, without looking up.

'I'll go with you, Peter, in the morning,' she said.

 * * * * * *

'A Jew, you say?' sneered Rennah. 'The Prince would not tolerate the
sight of him!' She sat up indignantly. 'How like you Jews to mock us in
our distress!'

Fara had experienced no difficulty in gaining an audience with the
Queen, who was curious to learn what had induced the girl to visit her.
Supine on her couch she had stared crossly without speaking when Fara
was shown in. Wasting no time on insincere amenities, Fara had briefly
stated her errand. A friend of hers, a man possessed of divine power to
heal, had come from a great distance to see the Prince. The man waited
without. He hoped he could help the Prince as he had helped other men.
He wanted no money.

'And where did you become acquainted with this--this God?'

'In Galilee, Your Majesty. He is a Jew.'

That had brought Rennah up in a towering rage. With fine scorn she had
voiced her opinion of Fara's impudence, and was pointing a trembling
finger toward the door.

'There is a legend among the Syrians,' said Fara, undisturbed by the
Queen's anger, 'about their famous warrior-king, Naaman, who contracted
leprosy. Learning of a Jewish prophet, who had been endowed with the
power to heal diseases, Naaman reluctantly besought this Jew to cure
him, and was told to bathe in the Jordan River. This was an unthinkable
humiliation to the celebrated Syrian, and he started home enraged
beyond any words to tell of it. But--he was a leper and there was no
help or hope for him, at all. So he turned back and bathed in the
Jordan--and was healed.'

'Nonsense!' screamed Rennah. 'Get out of here! You and your holy Jew!
Go--I say--go!'

Fara bowed and moved toward the door. Rennah suddenly rose to her feet
and followed her, clutching her arm.

'No!' she muttered hoarsely. 'You shall not go! I forbid you to go!'
She burst out crying. 'Bring him in!' With that, the hysterical woman
rushed to the door of the Prince's bed-chamber and entered. There was
the sound of voices, Rennah's softly wheedling, Deran's shrill with
scorn; Fara stepped out into the entry and beckoned to Peter, who
followed her through to the Prince's room, where the Queen nervously
admitted them.

'Deran,' she said, steadying her voice, 'here is the Jewish healer who
has come all this way from his own country to help you.'

Peter moved toward the bed.

'And since when,' stormed Deran, 'has Arabia sought favours from the
Jews?'

'My son, I am not here as a Jew.' Peter's calm, resonant voice seemed
to drive the anger from the Prince's sunken eyes. 'Nor have I come,'
he went on quietly, 'to minister to an Arabian. We are two fellow men,
both of us God's children. Let us forget our nationality now, and treat
each other as brothers.' He reached out his hand to take Deran's.
Instinctively the Prince recoiled, withdrawing his hand; but, on second
thoughts, slowly and reluctantly offering it.

Rennah drew in closer. She was weeping quietly.

'You are in great trouble, Deran,' continued Peter. 'There is no
earthly cure for your disease. If you are to regain your health and
strength the remedy must come from our Father. I have no power of my
own. Whether it is the will of God that you should be restored to rule
your country, I do not know. Perhaps that decision rests with you.'

'What do you want him to do?' broke in Rennah.

'A King should desire and deserve the respect of his people,' declared
Peter, ignoring the Queen's query and searching the Prince's eyes. 'As
a Prince, you have been vain and froward of heart. My Master taught
that whoever would become great among men should be as a servant, and
whoever would be the greatest of all should be servant of all. You,
Deran, have served no one but yourself.'

'Sir,' interrupted Rennah, 'that is no way to speak to a Prince!'

Deran made an impatient gesture in her direction.

'Say on!' he mumbled.

'Now if it should please God to heal you,' continued Peter, 'it will
be a miracle, and if you should win the devotion and obedience of your
people, that too will be a miracle. Are you willing to accept both
of these benefits? If it is the will of God, you may have both--or
neither. Will you promise that if your strength is restored you will
serve your country unselfishly?'

Deran soberly nodded his head. There was an impressive silence.

'Be well aware,' cautioned Peter, 'that if, in the days to come,
you forget your vow, and turn again to your unseemly ways, a worse
affliction may befall you.'

Again the Prince solemnly nodded his head. Instantly Peter startled
them by stretching forth both his huge hands. Clutching Deran's arms,
he sat him up in bed; and, raising his voice to a tone of command, he
shouted, 'In the name of God, stand up on your feet--and walk!'

No place had ever been so quiet during the brief moment that followed.
Slowly, bewilderingly, Deran put his feet out on the floor, and stood
erect. Rennah threw her arms around him and sobbed. Fara's eyes were
wet. The Prince pushed his mother aside and walked slowly across the
room. Peter sank heavily into a chair. His face was pale and great
beads of sweat stood on his forehead. Fara moved to his side and laid
her hand on his shoulder. Rennah, with tears of joy running down her
cheeks, fell on her knees before him and cried, 'We shall repay you!
Whatever you ask, we will give it! What would you have?'

'A drink of water, please,' murmured Peter huskily.

Little was said after that. Deran was pacing about, his face alight.
Rennah was bringing his clothing and boots. They were too preoccupied
with their good fortune to notice that Peter and Fara had slipped
quietly away.

 * * * * * *

He was visibly annoyed by the servants' stares when they came to serve
luncheon to him and his mother. When the maids offered him dishes, at
arm's length, he growled, 'One would think you were serving a ghost!'

'Please don't be impatient with them, son,' begged Rennah. 'It is no
small matter that you are walking again.'

'I would have recovered--in time,' said Deran airily. 'I was feeling
better. I lacked confidence; that was all. The old Jew pulled me
up--and I found I could walk. That's about all there is to it.'

'Even so--if I were you I shouldn't resent it if the people are
surprised to see you out again,' admonished Rennah.

'Why should I care what they think!' muttered Deran.

After he had eaten, the Prince swaggered out to the paddocks, to be
greeted by the silent, open-mouthed awe of the stable-boys.

'This is amazing, sire!' exclaimed old Kedar, limping forward.

'Saddle my sorrel mare!' commanded Deran.

Rennah had followed him out. She stood soberly watching as he bounded
into the saddle and rode away at a gallop. Then she turned and slowly
retraced her steps, with bent head and drooping shoulders.

Back in her own room, she sat motionless, leaning far forward with
her knuckles pressed hard against her teeth. Deran had no intention
of keeping his vow to the Jewish healer. It wasn't in Deran to change
his nature. It was too much to expect of him. He was a high-spirited,
proud young Prince. It was his destiny to rule his people. Any sign of
sympathy or friendship on his part would be mistaken for weakness. The
Arabians needed a firm hand to govern them; not an outstretched hand,
but a closed fist!

Yes; but the mysterious Jew was still to be reckoned with. In a few
hours he would learn that Deran had repudiated his promise. Then
what? If this miracle-worker had the power to put Deran on his feet
he probably had the power to put him to bed again. He had solemnly
declared that the Prince must keep his pledge, or a worse affliction
might befall him. In God's name, what could be worse?

Rennah's mind was in tumult. Something must be done promptly or the
potent Jew might put a curse on Deran! He must be got out of the
country! Now!

She walked determinedly to her desk, drew out a sheet of papyrus, and
wrote in large, sprawling letters:

'Fara: Much as the Prince appreciates the kindness of your Jewish
prophet, we are aware, as you doubtless are yourself, that there is
bitter enmity between the Jews and the Arabians. Already there is
muttering among our people that our Prince shall not be beholden to a
Jew for his recovery. For the old prophet's protection--for Deran does
not want anything to happen to him--it is important that he leave the
country forthwith! Let there be no delay! I am sending, with this note,
a purse of gold. Give it to this man--and tell him to go! Perhaps it
would be well if you accompanied him. You may not be safe here when it
is learned that you brought the Jew to Arabia.'

 * * * * * *

Less than two hours after the return of Peter and Fara to her home,
Rennah's letter, accompanied by the bag of gold coins, arrived. Shortly
afterward Voldi came. His face was serious. He had stopped at the royal
encampment and old Kedar had told him everything. The three of them
studied the letter. Peter's only comment was, 'God will not be mocked!'

'It is obvious,' said Voldi, 'that the Queen made this up. However, her
advice should be taken. Peter is in danger not because he is a Jew but
because he miraculously restored the Prince after Arabia was assured
that he had been disqualified from acceding to the throne.'

'You are right, Voldi,' agreed Fara. 'And I shall go with him. It is
quite impossible for me to remain here any longer.'

So it was decided that Peter and Fara should start early the next
morning for Gaza and take passage on a ship. It was now at the height
of the season for grain shipments to Rome and they might be lucky
enough to sail without much delay on some craft that called at Piraeus,
the port of Athens. Voldi impulsively resolved to go too.

'In his present mood,' explained Voldi, 'the Prince will not object to
my absence.'

All through the night, preparations went forward for departure in
the morning. Voldi rode to the royal encampment and confided their
intentions to Kedar, who took it upon himself to organize a pack-train
to carry Fara's and Ione's belongings to the port. Assured that the
Queen had commanded them to clear out, Kedar felt himself on safe
ground to give his full aid to their departure.

In the grey light that announced the coming dawn, the caravan started
down the tortuous trail toward the Valley of Aisne. In two hours they
had left the snow behind them and the men were taking off their leather
jackets. Peter preferred to walk--and he walked alone, his grey head
bent in serious meditation. He had made a mistake, it seemed. He had
wanted to do a great favour to a foe, but his good intentions had only
widened the breach and fanned the smouldering fire of hatred.

 * * * * * *

The astounding and unwelcome news of Prince Deran's miraculous
recovery, after the country had thought itself well rid of him,
travelled fast and far. The Councillors met informally in the venerable
Dumah's encampment, but found no cure for their dilemma. Only one
opinion was unanimously agreed upon: the Jews should mind their own
business.

But if the Councillors had no plan to alleviate the tragic situation,
the 'Sons of Ishmael' thought they might give aid. This exclusive and
secretive organization was composed of the sons and adult grandsons and
nephews of influential tribal chiefs who ran the caravans from Arabia
to the port cities. These long and dangerous journeys conducting flocks
and herds, hides and wool, to far-away Damascus and Caesarea and Gaza,
menaced by well-equipped bands of robbers, demanded the safeguarding of
fearless men. It was an honour to be chosen for this perilous business,
and the young fellows who undertook it were indeed a tough aggregation.

Now that winter was coming, most of the caravans had returned from
their expeditions, and the 'Sons of Ishmael' were having some free
time. On the second day after the Prince was restored, word was passed
from camp to camp announcing a secret meeting for the following night
in the tent of Jeshri, their leader. After an hour's conference,
Jeshri, in their presence, filled a quiver with thirty arrows, which
was the number of men present. All the arrows but one were made for
target-practice. The exception was tipped with a long, slim finger of
steel, sharpened to a needlepoint.

Jeshri walked out of the tent and into the moonlight, and mounted his
horse. A half-mile up the trail he halted beside a large oak-tree;
and, still mounted, drove a nail at the height of his shoulder, hung
up the quiver, and returned to camp. One by one, at intervals of a few
minutes, the silent men mounted their horses and set out for home. As
each man passed the quiver, he paused to take an arrow.

Late in the afternoon of the following day, Prince Deran's sorrel mare
arrived at her paddock, riderless.

 * * * * * *

The Antonia would sail within the hour. Grizzled old Captain Polemus
was happy to make this announcement, for his passengers had been on
board nearly a week and were growing restless.

With plenty of time to reflect on his dilemma, Voldi had decided that
the course he was taking was the right one. As a Councillor he would
be completely at odds with Deran, and it would be of small service to
Arabia if a Councillor and the King were in constant conflict. Besides,
once he and Fara were in a strange country, relying more and more upon
each other for companionship, he might persuade her to marry him. He
faced the voyage and their new adventures with increasing interest.

Fara stood by his side at the rail as the sailors made ready to cast
off. She slipped her arm under his and Voldi felt her trembling with
excitement.

'It will not be long now,' she said softly.

Voldi did not hear her. His eyes were fixed on two horsemen, riding on
the wharf. He identified them now. Museph and Raboth! Their horses were
wet.

Leaving Fara abruptly, he ran down the gangway as his friends
dismounted. He faced them with apprehensive eyes. What could have
happened to bring them here? They straightened, and formally saluted
him.

'That was a close thing, sire!' muttered Museph. 'We weren't a minute
too soon.'

Voldi grinned at the 'sire,' and wondered why. It was a strange time to
be teasing him.

'Deran is dead,' said Raboth, in a half-whisper.

'Dead!' echoed Voldi. 'How?'

'He was found beside a mountain trail with an arrow in his back,' said
Museph.

'And I suppose you have come to ask me to return,' said Voldi. 'But I
can't now! I have gone too far with my other plans!'

'But the King's Council insists that you return--forthwith, sire!'
entreated Raboth in an unsteady voice.

'And why is my presence in Arabia of such urgent importance?' demanded
Voldi. 'And why, in God's name, are you fellows "sire"-ing me?'

'Because,' said Museph, 'you are the King of Arabia!'

 * * * * * *



Chapter XXIX


Peter had not been too uncomfortable here. For one thing, the cell was
dry, a welcome change from the perpetual dampness of the Catacombs.
Perhaps when winter came--it was August now--the prison would be damp
too; but Peter did not expect to be here when winter came, so there was
no need to worry about that.

The cot was narrow, but there were two folded blankets on it, kindly
provided by Glaucus, the jailor. There was also a bare wooden chair.
Throughout the daytime hours a little strip of sunshine penetrated the
mere slit of a window near the ceiling; not enough light to read by,
but better than the Catacombs, where there was no sunlight at all.

True, it was wearisome, sitting here all day with nothing to do, and
the nights were still more tedious; for, with no physical exercise
to tire him, he did not require much sleep. Indeed it was the long
nights that had made his prison-life so hard to bear. His mistakes
asked to be reviewed as he lay awake for hours in the darkness. Every
painful detail of his quarrel with Johnny that day on The Abigail was
re-experienced. There was no use saying to himself that he had been
fully forgiven for his treatment of Johnny; he had to go through it
again, night after night. When the torturing memory of his denial of
Jesus' friendship threatened to invade his mind, he would sit up and
make an effort to drive it away by sheer will-power; and sometimes he
succeeded, but not always.

Occasionally through the day a guard would pause briefly at his barred
door and inquire how he was feeling today, and Peter would say that he
was very well, thank you. A slave brought food and a pitcher of water
in the morning and again in the late afternoon, but without tarrying
to talk. Perhaps he was not permitted to speak to prisoners. Twice,
during the past month of his incarceration, Glaucus himself had come in
to call. On these occasions Peter sat on the cot; and Glaucus, turning
the chair about, bestrode it, facing him. It was not easy to talk with
Glaucus, who spoke some outlandish variant of the vulgaris. By exerting
his imagination, Peter gathered that the badly scarred jailor was a
veteran of the wars. Once he had understood Glaucus to inquire why
these foolish Christians were throwing their lives away, and he had
tried to explain; but Glaucus didn't understand it. He had shaken his
head and yawned and left.

For several days now Peter had been expecting a visit from Mencius,
who was making an effort to have the sentence commuted. He had worried
more than a little about Mencius' intervention in his behalf. It was a
risky business, even for an influential Proconsul, to be showing such
concern for the welfare of any Christian, especially for the known
leader of the movement. It was of no great importance to Peter whether
he himself lived or died, but he didn't want to see Mencius punished;
and that might easily be, for young Caligula was fiercely determined to
stamp out this indomitable underground party that seemed to thrive on
persecution.

As he had sat there alone in his cell, day after day, Peter had passed
the dragging hours by re-living his experiences of recent years. During
the first days of his imprisonment, his reminiscences would speed from
one event to another. A couple of hours would cover the significant
episodes of the past quadrennium. Next day he would do it all over
again. So he had contrived a better plan. He would give a whole
half-day to the recovery of one event.

On one morning after breakfast he would project himself back to
Gaza...After a tedious delay, The Antonia was making ready to sail.
Peter felt himself standing at the rail, watching the last bales and
boxes of cargo come on board. Voldi and Fara stood very close together,
only a few feet from him. What a handsome, well-matched pair they were!
Voldi had made a wise decision to get out of Arabia. He and Fara were
made for each other.

Suddenly two young horsemen had appeared on the wharf. Voldi had run
down the gangway to greet them. The three friends had held a brief
parley. Then Voldi had slowly returned, followed by the visitors, who
explained to Fara why Voldi could not leave the country. His fellow
Councillors had just appointed him King of Arabia. She had taken
Voldi's hands in hers and had tried to smile. Then Voldi had put his
arms around her, had kissed her tenderly, before them all, and had
whispered something into her ear; and she had nodded her head. And he
had whispered to her again, and she had shaken her head. Then he had
followed his friends down the gangway. His horse had been brought up
from the hold. Fara had disappeared, probably to her cabin. Captain
Polemus had shouted an order. The mainsail was creeping up. The Antonia
edged away from the wharf.

It would take Peter all forenoon to remember that scene in its every
detail. In the afternoon, he would decide to review the voyage,
the long talks with Captain Polemus and with Fara, who tried to be
cheerful, but the sight of whose eyes made his heart ache.

Peter had made no secret of his devotion to his Master and his firm
belief in the early victory of the Kingdom. Weather-beaten old Polemus
had listened respectfully, but shook his grey head. It was a pleasant
dream, he would admit. It would be a happy day for the world when all
men were brothers, but Polemus didn't expect to live so long.

'You'd better be careful who you talk to about this,' he cautioned.
'You're safe enough with me, of course. I like to hear you tell of
this Jesus. He must have been a great man. But this idea of a new
Kingdom--you'd do better to keep that to yourself...Of course, in
Athens you won't be in much danger. The Empire doesn't care what they
talk about in Athens.'

'And why is that?' Peter had wanted to know.

'Oh, Athens is full of windy old philosophers who spend their time
sitting in the park on Mars Hill, talking all manner of nonsense. Not
meaning,' Polemus was quick to add, 'that what you believe is nonsense;
but you can say almost anything you like in Athens, and nobody will
take you seriously...I'll wager you could make a public speech
predicting that the Empire would collapse tomorrow, and even the Roman
patrols wouldn't bother you.'

'But--isn't there a Christian Ecclesia in Athens?' Peter had inquired.

'I suppose so,' drawled Polemus. 'Almost everywhere now there is an
organization of these Christians. And some of them have to be cautious;
but not in Athens. I'm glad you are going there. Now if it was Rome,
I'd advise you to stay away. They're making it mighty tough for these
poor people in Rome.'

Peter hadn't felt much complimented by the Captain's friendly counsel
to avoid all danger.

'Perhaps that's where I'm needed, Polemus,' he had said.

'You wouldn't last very long, sir!' the Captain had declared. 'Some
ordinary fellow, average height, dragging his heels, looking like ten
thousand other men of no importance, might not be run in for a long
time. You, sir, would be a marked man! You take my advice and make your
home in Athens.'

So Peter had gone on to Rome. He hadn't even got off the ship at
Piraeus. Fara and Ione didn't need him. In fact, they might be better
off without him. He might get them into trouble. It had been a sad
parting, though. Fara had pleaded with him.

'Dear Petros, you have had trouble enough. You deserve some rest, free
of danger. Let us take care of you.'

And that would have been very pleasant, Peter knew. Good old Polemus
had overheard the conversation. 'You'd better do as she says,' he
advised.

Then The Antonia had swung about to resume the long voyage. One chilly
morning, for it was mid-winter now, they had arrived at Ostia's busy
roadstead; and, after brief formalities of clearance, proceeded up
the river. It was late in the evening when they tied up at the wharf
that served the huge granaries. Peter had expected to find the streets
deserted, but they were noisy with heavy vehicular traffic and crowded
with pedestrians. Did these Romans never sleep?...He had walked the
streets all night, bewildered by the throngs. The food-shops were open.
Hawkers shouted their wares. Mendicant musicians added to the din.
Blind men whined.

He found himself in an area of magnificent public buildings: the
Praetorium, the forums, the stupendous Colosseum. In the grey light of
morning he had come upon the broad Via Appia and had followed it out of
the city. Polemus had told him how to find the Catacombs...It always
stirred him when he remembered the welcome he had received. He was
amazed that these forlorn fugitives had heard of him and the miracles
he had wrought in the Master's name. They had gathered about him and
knelt at his feet; and he had prayed that they might all be given faith
to watch and wait for the coming of the Kingdom.

 * * * * * *

And then there was that first visit from Mencius. Peter loved to recall
it. One morning, late in the autumn, Mencius had come. He hadn't said
how he had discovered Peter's whereabouts, but here he was in the
Catacombs--a Roman Proconsul! The frightened refugees had scurried away
in the darkness. But Peter had had no fear. He had heard all about
Mencius: Voldi had told him.

'Let us go outside,' Mencius had suggested. 'It will do you good to
breathe some fresh air.'

'Will it not endanger you, sir,' Peter had inquired, 'if you should be
seen talking with a Christian?'

'No,' Mencius had declared. 'The patrols are not interested in my
goings and comings. I talk with whom I please. The Emperor might not
approve of my being here in friendly converse with you, Peter; but he
cannot dispose of me. I know how to deal with the copper-miners in
Cyprus. I know the ruffians who run the salt-caravans from Engedi to
Gaza. I know what is going on in Joppa and Caesarea...Come--we have
much to talk about.'

So they had gone up the narrow ladder and had sat down under the locust
trees.

'How do you find it possible to live down there in those caverns?'
Mencius had wanted to know.

'Because I must!' Peter had replied. 'It is not so difficult to do
what one must do.' And then he had told the Proconsul about the little
groups of Christians who met secretly in their own houses until the
patrols suspected them, and they would flee to these labyrinthian
caverns for safety, frightened, beaten, sick, and hungry; and of the
secret exits from which the more fearless ones emerged to procure food
from the peasant farmers and cheap fish from the smaller markets along
the waterfront. 'I pray with them and minister to their sick ones,
Mencius. I offer words of comfort when they die--and beside their
graves...And I bid them be of good cheer, for the Kingdom is coming!'

'It must take great faith, Peter,' mused Mencius, 'to believe that the
Kingdom of the Christos is coming when everything they had is lost.'

'That's when our faith is strongest, Mencius,' Peter had replied; 'when
there is nothing else to lean upon. The Spirit of God is very real--and
near--to these distressed ones...You remember how you felt on the Day
of Pentecost? We have Pentecost every day in the Catacombs!'

After a little silence Peter had asked Mencius to tell him about
himself, and his recent journeys; and the Proconsul had had quite a
story to tell. He had just returned from the usual round: Cyprus,
Caesarea, Joppa, Gaza, Engedi; and had ridden up into Arabia to see
Voldi.

'Is he making a good King?' Peter had wanted to know.

'The best ever!' Mencius had declared. 'The Arabians love him.'

'Married?'

'No--and perhaps it's for the best. Voldi rarely shows up at the King's
Encampment. He spends his time visiting the tribesmen. Arabia has never
been so completely unified...By the way, he told me a good story. I
know he would want you to hear it, for you were on the ship when the
word came that Prince Deran had been assassinated. The secret band of
young caravan-guards, who called themselves the "Sons of Ishmael," drew
lots to see which one should attend to the Prince. Old Jeshri, their
leader, filled a quiver with thirty arrows, the exact number of all men
present at the meeting. Only one arrow was armed with steel. Jeshri
hung the quiver on a tree and each man as he rode past took an arrow.'

'So no one of them knew which man was appointed to kill the Prince?'

'Right...But, afterwards, one of the men who had aspired to be their
leader remembered that old Jeshri himself had not taken an arrow from
the quiver, and he talked about it to Jeshri's disparagement...Voldi
told me that when the old man lay sick unto death he asked them all to
leave his bedside except the King, and to him he said, "I have been
maligned for refusing to take one of the arrows. I want you to know,
sire, that I did take one of the arrows before I hung the quiver on the
tree. It was the steel-tipped arrow. When I am gone, sire, will you
tell my brave lads?"'

 * * * * * *

It had been very wearisome, sitting here day after day in his prison
cell, with nothing to do but remember. Often he spent a whole afternoon
recalling that eventful night when Marcellus and Marcipor had brought
him out of the secret passage into the old quarry, and had taken him
swiftly to the Gallio mansion, where the gallant Greek slave lay dying
of his wounds...The Spirit of God had empowered him, that night, to
heal Demetrius...And, after that, many agitated fugitives came with
reports that the Gallios' physician, one Sarpedon, was seeking in high
quarters for his arrest...But God had withheld the hands of his enemies.

Perhaps God would save him this time, too; though Peter was not sure he
wanted to be saved, this time. Life in the Catacombs had taken a heavy
toll of him. He was gaunt, weak in the legs, hollow-eyed. Maybe his
work was done. If there was anything further for him to do, he would
try to do it. But if it should be his Father's will to take him home
now--to the House of Many Mansions--it would be a relief.

 * * * * * *

One morning he fell to thinking about the day when Marcipor brought him
the Master's robe. Marcellus had sent it to him. Noble fellow, that
Marcellus! And his bride! They had been very brave!...Only a little
while, perhaps, and he would see them...Marcipor had brought the robe.
Peter remembered its comforting softness when he had taken it in his
arms. He had not tried to put it on over his huge shoulders. Somehow
he didn't want to put it on, anyhow. It was too sacred for that. They
had laid it reverently upon the altar in the taper-lit chapel...It
was there now. Every day the people knelt before it. He had tried
to counsel them not to worship it, but they probably did...Well--he
couldn't blame them much. After all, it was the Master's robe. If they
needed something tangible to fix their eyes upon while they prayed for
courage, what token of His presence could serve so well?

'I have often knelt there beside them,' Peter had admitted.

'And worshipped the robe?' wondered Mencius.

'It stirred cherished memories, Mencius, and brought the Master very
near. If that is idolatry, I think I shall be forgiven.'

 * * * * * *

For the past few days, Peter had meditated deeply upon the incident
that had brought him to prison.

Mencius, returning from another long voyage, had come out one morning,
very much agitated, to say that the son of his longtime friend, Prefect
Sergius of Caesarea, who had just finished his course in the Military
Academy, was dangerously ill.

'This splendid young fellow, Felix, is the apple of his father's eye,'
Mencius had said. 'He is very near death, I fear. He is burning up with
a fever. Since yesterday he has been unconscious. The physicians admit
they are helpless...Now I cannot ask you to go to him, Peter. You would
certainly be arrested. Sarpedon, who has charge of the case, would see
to that. You must not be seen there.'

'What would you have me do?' Peter had inquired.

'Can't you pray for his recovery?' entreated Mencius.

For a long moment Peter had wrestled with his problem. Then he had
said, 'I shall go with you, Mencius.'

'It is too great a risk! You would be seen by many. Doubtless Sarpedon
himself will be there. He would leave no stone unturned to have you
brought to trial.'

'But if, by the Holy Spirit, I should heal the boy--'

'No; that would make no difference to Sarpedon. His professional pride
is more important than the life of young Felix.'

'Be that as it may, Mencius, I am going with you!'

'Come, then,' said Mencius in a shaken voice. 'Perhaps an Angel will
stand guard over you.'

 * * * * * *

But no Angel had intervened. Nor had Peter been permitted to see the
dying Felix. He had been arrested in the courtyard of the Academy upon
arrival there; and, after a hasty trial on the charge of conspiracy to
overthrow the Government, he was thrown into prison.

'Is it true, then,' the Judge had demanded, 'that you believe, and have
taught others to believe, in the coming of a King who will rule the
world?'

'Yes,' Peter had replied boldly, 'that is true!'

'You are a fool!' the Judge had growled, adding, 'But an honest and
fearless fool. You have not the manner and speech of a seditionist. If
you will renounce this idiotic theory and promise not to speak of it
again, this court will let you off with a prison sentence. Otherwise
you are condemned of treason by the words of your own mouth, and the
penalty is death. Which would you have?'

The courtroom had been very quiet.

Mencius had dared to rise and ask permission to speak. The Judge
showed surprise, but replied deferentially, 'It will be our pleasure,
Proconsul Mencius, to hear anything you wish to say.'

'Your Grace,' began Mencius, 'this man Peter is well known to me. He
has no designs on the Empire. He has incited no one to rebellion. He
has healed the sick and comforted the down-trodden and distressed. This
Kingdom in which he believes is not a temporal but a spiritual Kingdom.
It has naught to do with Caesar!'

Then Mencius had sat down and the Judge had faced Peter, inquiring: 'Is
this true?'

It had been a trying moment. It was not an easy question. Mencius had
done his best to find a way out for him. After some delay, Peter had
found his voice.

'Sir,' he said, 'the Proconsul has told you truly that the Kingdom of
the Christos is a spiritual Kingdom. But when it rules the hearts of
men everywhere it will be their highest allegiance. Peace will reign
throughout the earth. And when it comes, there will be no need of
armies; no, nor of magistrates.'

'And what becomes of Caesar?' demanded the Judge, sternly.

'Our Christos, sir,' declared Peter, 'will rule the world and every
knee shall bow before him!'

The heavy silence now had been broken only by the rattling of the
papyrus sheet as the Judge recorded his decision on the indictment.
Then he arose and said: 'You have left this court no alternative,
Peter. The law is the law. It is not in our province to amend it, not
even to save the life of a misguided fanatic. You will be taken hence
to prison and in thirty days you will be put to death!'

 * * * * * *

The next day, Mencius had come to see him. Glaucus, admitting him, had
waited. The court order, he said, required him to remain. The Proconsul
had sat silent for a while before speaking.

'Peter,' he began, gently reproachful, 'why did you do it? Fabius was
doing his best to save you.'

'I had to tell the truth,' Peter had replied. 'I disowned my Master
once. I think he depends on me not to do it again.'

'But--did you have to say that the Master's Kingdom would rule the
world? Judge Fabius is really quite a decent fellow. He did not want
to inflict the sentence of death upon you. It was your prediction of
the fall of the Empire that left him helpless. Had he been lenient with
you, the Emperor would have punished him.'

'And you have risked too much, Mencius,' said Peter in Greek. 'Much as
I value your aid--'

'None of that, Peter!' broke in Glaucus. 'You will speak in our tongue!'

'I am having another session with Fabius,' said Mencius, ignoring the
interruption. 'Perhaps the sentence may be commuted...This makes me
sick at heart, Peter.'

 * * * * * *

And so the days had dragged on. The day after tomorrow would mark the
expiration of Peter's month in prison.

Late that afternoon, Mencius had come. His haggard face made his report
unnecessary. He laid his hand on Peter's arm and sadly shook his head.

'I am permitted to be with you for only a moment,' he said. 'But on
Friday morning, I shall be here for a farewell word. Is there anything
I can do for you, Peter?'

'Pray for me, good Mencius, that my faith fail not.'

'I have prayed for you, Peter,' murmured Mencius, 'but it hasn't done
you any good.'

'I'm sure it has!' said Peter. 'I haven't been afraid. Your prayers may
have helped me. You have been a loyal friend, Mencius. We will meet,
one day, in our Father's House!'



Chapter XXX


Peter had risen early and was calmly waiting. His mind was at rest. The
only question that had troubled him had been answered in the night. An
Angel had visited him in a dream.

On the Day of Pentecost the stirring demonstration of the Holy Spirit's
power had led him to believe that the establishment of the Master's
Kingdom throughout the world was imminent. It was not easy to conceive
of such an event, but neither was Pentecost easy to accept as an actual
experience. All things were possible with God and His ways were beyond
understanding. God had waited long and patiently for His children to
acknowledge His fatherhood and their brotherhood. Now the time had come
for the cleansing of the nations and the reign of peace. Now!

He had expected it to begin in Jerusalem, where thousands of
fear-ridden men had hung upon his words. Jerusalem was the right place
for the new Kingdom to manifest itself first. A society would be formed
for the demonstration of friendship and good-will. The news of it would
quickly spread. But the Jerusalem experiment had been unsuccessful.
Perhaps Jerusalem was not the right place to begin.

He had declared the early coming of the Kingdom to the harassed slaves
in Joppa. They had listened wistfully, but without comment. He had
repeated his message to 'The Italians' in Caesarea: they had received
him politely and had left the dinner tables in silence. No one had
paused to ask a question or express an opinion. Wise old Cornelius,
quite dissatisfied with things as they were, had no expectation of a
remedy for the world's sorry predicament, and had shaken his grey head
at any mention of an early triumph of the Master's Kingdom.

Undaunted, Peter had journeyed to Arabia in the hope of effecting peace
and friendship between the Arabs and the Jews. Perhaps the Kingdom
would begin its work here. It would be a great day for the Kingdom when
the tidings spread that two hostile nations, at enmity for fifteen
centuries, had resolved their difficulties. But his efforts had been in
vain. The relations between the sons of Israel and Ishmael had not been
improved. Indeed they had been worsened.

Fara was a firm believer in the Master's power; but, when the Kingdom
of peace on earth was mentioned, she had nothing to say. Captain
Polemus thought the idea fantastic. Mencius, although deeply impressed
at Pentecost, was silent when Peter talked of the coming Kingdom. In
the opinion of Judge Fabius, clearly a man of good intent, Peter was a
fool; a brave and honest fool--but a fool.

In the days of his solitude, he had wondered whether he might be
mistaken. He still clung to his belief, but he wished more people
shared it. Was the Kingdom coming now? And, if not now, was the Kingdom
coming at all?

Last night an Angel had cleared his mind.

Yes, Peter, the Master's Kingdom is coming, but not by some spectacular
miracle whereby thrones would topple in a day and all men everywhere
would cast aside their weapons and clasp hands.

'From the beginning of the world, Peter,' the Angel had said, 'the
rulers of the nations have striven for power over other men's lives.
The ablest minds among their subjects always spent their genius on
contriving instruments of destruction.

'The kings of the earth, for their own pride and glory, have laid waste
their neighbours' lands and enslaved their children...You, Peter, have
daily talked about "these latter times." But--these are not "latter
times." The world has suffered grievously, but it must suffer more and
more. Again and again, in desperate hours, men have come to a parting
of the ways, and they have always chosen the road to national pomp and
glory; never the road to peace and friendship.

'The Kingdom of the Christos will come, but not now, not soon. Empires
will rise and fall. Slavery and slaughter will prevail and increase
in horror until the sight of it will sicken the heart of God! Terror
will reign until the hungry and homeless will cry to the rocks to cover
them! And when all seems lost--then the Kingdom will come.

'Remember how the Master said that the Kingdom would grow as a mustard
tree, from the smallest of seeds. Always there will be some who hear
His voice. In the midst of their distresses, they will watch and wait
and hope for the coming of the King! And He will come, at length, to
keep His covenant, and set men free.

'Meantime, He offers the benefits of the Kingdom to every man who
yearns to see the Kingdom come. For them the Kingdom has come! You,
Peter, have earned that peace. For you, the Kingdom is here; it is now;
it is yours!'

 * * * * * *

The time had passed quickly. Peter was roused from his reverie by the
sound of many footsteps in the corridor. There was the heavy tread of
hobnailed boots.

Glaucus rattled his keys and drew the cell-door open. Surrounding him
were prison guards and two tall legionaries in battle dress, their
polished helmets gleaming.

Mencius edged past them and entered.

'You have only a moment, Proconsul!' muttered Glaucus. 'Let there be no
tarrying!'

'Is it well with you, Peter?' asked Mencius, in a half-whisper.

'Yes, good Mencius,' said Peter, 'I am quite ready.'

'Have you a final request? Is there anything I can do?'

'I wish you would go to the home of Senator Gallio,' said Peter in a
steady voice, 'and ask to see the old steward, Marcipor. Give Marcipor
my abiding love and tell him to be a shepherd to my little flock. Tell
him to say to them that the Kingdom will come, but they must not expect
it to reign now--except in their hearts; for the world is not yet ready
to receive the King.'

'Come now!' commanded Glaucus. 'Time is up.'

Peter moved slowly toward the door. There he paused for another word
with Mencius.

'Last night in a dream I saw the King. He was standing on a high hill,
gazing entreatingly into the far distance, across the mountains, plains
and seas. And I heard him saying, in sorrow:

'"YOU WOULD NOT COME UNTO ME THAT YOU MIGHT HAVE LIFE!"'



End of this Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook The Big Fisherman by
Lloyd C. Douglas




Project Gutenberg Australia


