

Project Gutenberg Australia




A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook

Title:      The Endeavour Journal of Sir Joseph Banks
Author:     Sir Joseph Banks (1743-1820)
eBook No.:  0501141.txt
Edition:    1
Language:   English
Character set encoding:     Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted:          November 2005
Date most recently updated: November 2005

Production notes:

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

* * * * *

The Endeavour Journal of Sir Joseph Banks (1743-1820)
[Journal from 25 August 1768-12 July 1771]


The text file of this work was prepared in 1962 from the manuscript
"The Endeavour Journal of Sir Joseph Banks, 1768-1771" held at the
State Library of NSW.


Including:--

MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF S. SEA ISLANDS. 1769
     (1769 August 31.)
ACCOUNT OF NEW ZEALAND
     (1770 March 31.)
SOME ACCOUNT OF THAT PART OF NEW HOLLAND NOW CALLED NEW SOUTH WALES
     (1770 August 31.)
SEPTEMBER 1770: INCL. ACCOUNTS OF SAVU AND ISLANDS NEAR SAVU (20TH)
     (1770 September 1.)
SOME ACCOUNT OF BATAVIA
     (1770 December 24.)
SOME ACCOUNT OF PRINCES ISLAND
     (1770 January 13.)
SOME ACCOUNT OF THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE
     (1771 April 13.)
SOME ACCOUNT OF ST. HELENA
     (1771 May 3.)

* * * * *


1768 August 25.

After having waited in this place ten days, the ship, and everything
belonging to me, being all that time in perfect readyness to sail at a
moments warning, we at last got a fair wind, and this day at 3 O'Clock in
the even weigd anchor, and set sail, all in excellent health and spirits
perfectly prepard (in Mind at least) to undergo with Chearfullness any
fatigues or dangers that may occur in our intended Voyage.


1768 August 26.

Wind still fair, but very light breezes; saw this Even a shoal of those fish
which are particularly calld Porpoises by the seamen, probably the
Delphinus Phocaena of Linnaeus, as their noses are very blunt.


1768 August 27.

Wind fair and a fine Breeze; found the ship to be but a heavy sailer,
indeed we could not Expect her to be any other from her built, so are
obligd to set down with this Inconvenience, as a nescessary consequence of
her form; which is much more calculated for stowage, than for sailing.


1768 August 28.

Little wind today; in some sea water, which was taken on board to season
a cask, observed a very minute sea Insect, which Dr Solander describd by
the name of Podura marina. In the Evening very calm; with the small
casting net took several specimens of Medusa Pelagica, whose different
motions in swimming amus'd us very much: among the appendages to this
animal we found also a new species of oniscus. We took also another
animal, quite different from any we had Ever seen; it was of an angular
figure, about 3 inches long and one thick, with a hollow passing quite
through it. On one end was a Brown spot, which might be the stomach of
the animal.

Four of these, the whole number that we took, adherd together when
taken by their sides; so that at first we imagind them to be one animal, but
upon being put into a glass of water they very soon separated and swam
briskly about the water.


1768 August 29.

Wind foul: Morning employd in finishing the Drawings of the animals
taken yesterday till the ship got so much motion that Mr Parkinson could
not set to his Pencil; in the Evening wind still Fresher so much as to make
the night very uncomfortable.


1768 August 30.

Wind still Foul, ship in violent motion, but towards Evening much more
quiet: Now for the first time my Sea sickness left me, and I was sufficiently
well to write.


1768 August 31.

Wind Freshend again this morn; observ'd about the Ship several of the
Birds calld by the seamen Mother Careys chickens, Procellaria Pelagica
Linn. which were thought by them to be a sure presage of a storm, as
indeed it provd, for before night it blew so hard as to bring us under our
Courses, and make me very sea sick again.


1768 September 1.

Still Blew, Mother Careys chickens had not yet left us, but towards night
wind slackened so that we were again tolerably easy; by our reckoning we
must make some part of the coast of Spain before Morning.


1768 September 2.

This Morn about 7 saw the coast of Gallicia between Cape Ortegal and
Finisterre; weather tolerably fine, so that we could use the casting net,
which brought up two kinds of Animals, different from any before taken;
they came up in Clusters, both sorts indifferen[t]ly in each Cluster, tho
much fewer of the Horned ones than of the others. They seem to [be] two
species of one genus, but are not at all reducible to any genus hitherto
describd.


1768 September 3.

Blew fresh this morn. We were employd all day in describing the animals
taken yesterday; found them to be of a new genus and of the same with that
taken on the 28 of August Calld the genus Dagysa from the likeness of one
Species to a Gem. Towards Even wind fair Settled tolerably fine.


1768 September 4.

Calm today; we were employd in fishing with the casting net and were
fortunate in taking several specimens of Dagysa saccata adhering together,
sometimes to the Lengh of a yard or more, and shining in the water with
very beautifull Colours; but another insect which we took today was
possest of more beautiful Colouring than any thing in nature I have ever
seen, hardly excepting gemms. He is of a new genus and calld [] of which
we took another species who had no beauty to boast, but this which we
called opalinum shone in the water with all the splendor and variety of
colours that we observe in a real opal; he livd in the Glass of salt water in
which he was put for examination several hours; darting about with great
agility, and at every motion shewing an almost infinite variety of
changeable colours. Towards the Evening of this day a new phaenomenon
appeard, the sea was almost coverd with a small species of Crabbs Cancer
depurator of Linnaeus, floating upon the surface of the water, and moving
themselves with tolerable agility, as if the surface of the water and not the
bottom was their Proper station. Here again as usual our casting net was of
great service, we took with it as many as were wanted, and went to bed
well contented with the Produce of the day.


1768 September 5.

I forgot to mention yesterday that two birds were caught in the rigging,
who probably had come from Spain, as we were not then distant above 5 or
6 Leagues, this morning another was caught, and brought to me, but so
weak that it dyed in my hand almost immediately; they were all three of
the same species, and not describd by Linnaeus, we calld them Motacilla
velificans, as they must be sailors who would venture themselves aboard a
ship which is going round the world. But to make some balance to our
good fortune now become too prevalent, a misfortune happned this morn,
equaling almost the worst which our enemies could have wishd; the morn
was calm and Richmond employd in searching for what should appear on
the surface of the water, a shoal of dagysa's were observd and he Eagar to
take some of them threw the cast-net fastned to nothing but his wrist, the
string slippd from him and the net at once sunk into the profound never
more to torment its inhabitants but Leaving us for some time intirely
without a resource, plenty of animals coming past the ship, and no netts but
in the hold, stowd under so many things that it was impossible even to
hope for their being got out today at least, however an old hoop net was
fastned to a fishing rod, and with it one new speces of Dagysa was caught
and calld Lobata.


1768 September 6.

Fine and calm this morn, immence numbers of Dagysa Lobata floated by,
and were taken by our new contrivance, some of them in clusters as many
as 14 together, united by a Lobe on the underside. Towards the Middle of
the day the sea was almost coverd with dagysa's of different kinds among
which two intirely new ones were taken, rostrata and strumosa, but neither
of these were observd hanging in clusters as most of the other Species had
been, indeed whether from the badness of the new machine or their scarcity
I cannot say; only one of rostrata and two of strumosa were taken. It is now
time to give some account of the genus of Dagysa, of which there are
already six species taken, all agreeing in many particulars vastly well but
cheifly in this very singular one, that they have a hole at each end, which
holes Communicate by a tube, often as large as the body of the animal, by
the help of which they swim with some degree of activity when seperated
from each other, for several sorts are seen most generaly Joind together,
gemma more particularly which adhere in clusters of some hundreds
irregularly shap'd; in the midst of these were generaly found a few
specimens of cornuta, from which circamstance we may Judge that they
are very nearly allied.

It seems singular that no naturalist before this time should have taken
notice of thise animals as they abound so much where the ship now is, not
twenty Leagues from the coast of Spain; from hence however great hopes
may be formd, that the inhabitants of the deep have been but little examind,
and as Dr Solander and my self shall have probably greater opportunity in
the course of this voyage than any one has had before us, it is a very
incouraging circumstance to hope that so large a feild of natural history has
remaind almost untrod, even till this time, and that we may be able from
this circumstance alone (almost unthought of when we embarkd in the
undertaking) to add considerable Light to the science which we so eagerly
Pursue.

This Evening a large quantity of the Carcinium opalinum which may be
calld opal insect came under the ships stern, making the very sea appear
with uncommon bea[u]ty, their colours appearing with vast brightness even
at the depth of two or three fathoms, tho they are not more than three lines
long and one broad.


1768 September 7.

On examining the Dagysa's which were taken yesterday, several small
animals were found Lodgd in the hollow parts of their bodys, and some in
the very substance of the flesh, which seems to be their food, as many of
the dagysas were full of scars which had undoubtedly been the Lodgment
of these animals some time before; upon a minute inspection they provd to
be animals not to be class'd under any of Linnaeus's genera tho nearly
related to Oniscus, from which Circumstance the name of Onidium was
given to the new genus, and to them was added an animal taken the 28th of
August and mentiond in the second Page by the name of Oniscus
Macropthalmos.

In one circumstance these insects differ from any hitherto describd, and
in that they all three agree, viz the having two Eyes joind together under
one common membrane, without the least distinction or division between
them, which circumstance alone seems a sufficient reason for constituting a
new genus.

The wind was now fair and we went very pleasantly on towards our
destind port, tho rather too fast for any natural Enquiries, for my own part I
could well dispence with a much slower pace, but I fancy few in the ship,
Dr Solander excepted, are of the same opinion, tho I beleive Every body
envyed our easy contented countenances during the last Calm, which
brought so much food to our pursuits.


1768 September 8.

Blew fresh today, but the wind was very fair so nobody complaind, nor
would they was the wind much stronger, so impatient has the Calms and
foul wind made every body; by the reckoning we were off Cape St Vincent
so shall soon bid adieu to Europe for some time.


1768 September 10.

Since the northerly wind began to blow it has not varied a point, the Sea
is now down and we go pleasantly on at the rate of about 6 Knotts; could
any contrivance be found by the help of which new subjects of natual
history could be taken Dr Solander and myself would be Quite happy, we
are forc'd to be content; three days are now passd since any thing has been
taken or indeed seen, except a stray turtle who swam by the ship about
noon, but was left far behind before any instrument by which he might
have been taken could possibly have been got to hand.

Today for the first time we dind in Africa, and took our leave of Europe
for heaven alone knows how long, perhaps for Ever; that thought demands
a sigh as a tribute due to the memory of freinds left behind and they have
it; but two cannot be spard, twold give more pain to the sigher, than
pleasure to those sighd for. Tis Enough that they are rememberd, they
would not wish to be too much thought of by one so long to be seperated
from them and left alone to the Mercy of winds and waves.


1768 September 11.

Wind fair but rather slackend upon us, nothing however was observ'd, we
expected to have made Porto Santo tonight but did not.


1768 September 12.

This morn Porto Santo and Madeira were in full veiw, they were seen at
day break, indeed we had a little overshot them; as the wind was rather
scanty we had however no doubt of fetching in at night. Accordingly at ten
tonight came to an anchor in Fonchiale bay.


1768 September 13.

This morn about 11 the product boat (as it is calld by English Sailors)
which is the boat from the oficers of health who must give leave before any
ships crew can land, came on board, and we immediately went on shore in
the town of Fonchiale, the Capital of the Island, situate in Latitude 32:40
North, calld so from the Fennel which grows in plenty upon the rocks in its
neighbourhood and which is calld Funcho in the Portugese Language. Here
we immediately went to the house of the English Consul Mr Cheap, one of
the first merchants in the place, where we were receivd with uncommon
marks of civility; he insisted upon our taking possession of his house and
living intirely with him during our stay which we did and were by him
furnishd with every accomodation that we could wish. Leave was procurd
by him for us to search the Island for whatever natural productions we
might find worth taking notice of, people were also employd to procure for
us fish and shells which we could not have spard time to have collected
ourselves, horses and Guides were also got for Dr Solander and myself to
carry us to any part of the Island which we might chuse to visit. But our
very short stay which was only five Days inclusive made it impossible to
go to any distance, so we contented ourselves with collecting as much as
we could in the neighbourhood of the town, never going above three miles
from it during our whole stay.

The season of the year was undoubtedly the worst for both plants and
insects, being the hight of the vintage, when nothing is green in the
countrey but just on the verge of small brooks, by which these vines are
waterd; we made shift however to collect specimens of several plants, etc.:
of which a catalogue follows as it is not worth while to mix them in the
Journal, where they would take up much room.

The five days which we remained upon the Island were spent so exactly
in the same manner, that it is by no means nescessary to divide them, I
shall therefore only say, that in general we got up in the Morn, went out on
our researches, retur[n]d to dine, and went out again in the Evening; one
day however we had a visit from the Governor, of which we had notice
before and were obligd to stay at home, so that unsought honour lost us
very near the whole day, a very material part of the short time we were
allowd to stay upon the Island: we however contrivd to revenge ourselves
upon his excellency, by an Electrical machine which we had on board;
upon his expressing a desire to see it we sent for it ashore, and shockd him
full as much as he chose.

While at this place we were much indebted to Dr Heberden, the cheif
Physitian of the Island, and brother to the Physitian of that name at
London; he had for many years been an inhabitant of the Canaries and this
Island, and had made several observations cheifly philosophical, some
however were Botanical, describing the trees of the Island: of these he
immediately gave us a copy, together with such specimens as he had in his
possession, and indeed spard no pains to get for us such living specimens
of such as could be procurd in flower.

We tryed here to learn what Species of wood it is which has been
imported into England, and is now known to Cabinet makers by the name
of Madeira mahogeny, but without much success, as we could not learn
that any wood had been exported out of the Island by that name; the wood
however of the tree calld here Vigniatico, Laurus indicus Linn. bidds fair
to be the thing, it being of a fine grain and brown like mahogeny, from
which it is dificult to distinguish it, which is well shewn at Dr Heberdens
house where in a bookcase vigniatico and mahogeny were placd close by
each other, and were only to be known asunder by the first being not quite
so dark colourd as the other.

As much of the Island as we saw shewd evidently the signs of a volcano
having some time or other possibly produced the whole; as we saw no one
peice of stone which did not evidently shew signs of having been burnt,
some very much, especialy the sand which was absolutely cinders. Indeed
we did not see much of the countrey, but we were told that the whole was
like the specimen we saw of it.

When you first aproach it from seaward it has a very beautifull
appearance, the sides of the hills being intirely coverd with vineyards
almost as high as the eye can distinguish, which make a constant
appearance of verdure tho at this time nothing but the vines remaind green,
the grass and herbs being intirely burnt up except near the sides of the rills
of water by which the vines are waterd, and under the shade of the vines
themselves; tho these very few Species of plants were in perfection the
greater part being burnt up.

The people here in general seem to be as idle, or rather uninformd a set
as I ever yet saw; all their instruments, even those with which their wine,
the only article of trade in the Island is made, are perfectly simple and
unimprovd. Their method is this: the Grapes are put into a square wooden
vessel, of dimensions according to the size of the vineyard to which it
belongs, into which the servants get (having taken off their stockins and
Jackets) and with their feet and Elbows squeeze out as much of the Juice as
they can; the stalks etc. are then collected, tyed together with a rope and put
under a square peice of wood which is pressd down by a Leaver, to the
other end of which is fastned a stone that may be raisd up at pleasure by a
screw; by this way and this only they make their wine, and by this way
probably Noah made his when he had newly planted the first vineyard after
the general destruction of mankind and their arts; tho it is not impossible
that he might have used a better, if he rememberd the ways he had seen
us'd before the flood.

It was with great dificulty that some (and not as yet all) of them were
persuaded not long ago to graft their vines and by this means bring all the
fruit of a vineyard to be of one sort, tho before the vine which it producd
had been spoild by different sorts of bad ones which were nevertheless
sufferd to grow, and taken as much care of as the best, because they added
to the quantity of the wine. Yet were they perfectly acquainted with the use
of grafting, and constantly practisd it on their chestnut trees, by which
means they were brought to bear sooner much than they would have done
had they been allowd to remain unimprovd.

Wheel carriages I saw none in the Island of any sort or kind, indeed their
roads are so intolerably bad that if they had them they could scarcely make
use of them: they have however some horses and mules, wonderfully
clever in traveling upon them, notwithstanding which they bring to town
every drop of wine they make upon mens heads, in vessells made of goat
skins. The only imitation of a carriage they have, is a board a little hollowd
out in the middle, to one end of which a pole is tyed by a strap of
whitleather, the whole machine comeing about as near the perfection of a
European cart as an Indian canoe does to a boat with this they move the
pipes of wine about the town. Indeed I suppose they would never have
made use even of this had not the English introd[u]ced vessels to put their
wine in which were rather too large to be carried by hand, as they used to
do every thing else.

A speech of their late governeur is recorded here, which shews in what
light they are lookd upon even by the Portugese, (themselves I beleive far
behind all the rest of Europe, except possibly the Spaniards): it was very
fortunate said he that this Island was not Eden in which Adam and Eve
dwelt before the fall, for had it been so the inhabitants here would never
have been induc'd to put on Cloaths; so much are they resolvd in every
particular to follow exactly the paths of their forefathers.

Indeed were the people here only tolerably industrious, there is scarcely
any Luxury which might [not] be produc'd that either Europe or the Indies
afford, owing to the great difference of Climate observable in ascending
the hills; this we experien[c]d in a visit to Dr Heberden, who lives about
two miles from the town, we left the Thermometer when we set out at 74
and found it there at 66. Indeed the hills produce almost spontaneously vast
plenty of Wallnutts, chestnutts, and apples, but in the town you find some
few plants natives of both the Indies, whose flourishing state put it out of
all doubt that were they taken any care of they might have any quantity of
them. Of these I mention some: the Banana tree, (Musa sapientum Linn.) in
great abundance; the guava (Psidium pyriferum Linn.) not uncommon; the
pine apple, Bromelia ananas Linn. of this I saw some very healthy plants in
the provadores Garden; Mango, Mangifera indica Linn. one plant also of
this in the same garden Bearing fruit every year; Cinnamon, Laurus
cinnamomum Linn. very healthy plants of this I saw on the top of Dr
Heberdens house at Fonchiale, which had stood there through the winter
without any kind of Care having been taken of them. These without
mentioning any more seem very sufficient to shew that the tenderest plants
might be cultivated here without any trouble; yet the indolence of the
inhabitants is so great, that even that is too much for them; indeed the
policy of the English here is to hinder them as much as possible from
growing any thing themselves except what they find their account in taking
in exchange for Corn, tho the people might with much Less trouble and
expence grow the corn themselves. What corn grows here, which indeed is
not much, is of a most excellent quality, Large graind, and very fine; their
meat also is very good, mutton, pork, and beef more especialy, of which
what we had on board the ship was agreed by all of us to be very little
inferior to our own; tho we Englishmen value ourselves not a little on our
peculiar excellence in that production. The fat of this was white like the fat
of mutton, yet the meat Brown, and coarse graind as ours, tho much
smaller.

The town of Fonchiale is situated at the Bottom of the Bay, very ill Built,
tho larger than the size of the Island seems to deserve. The houses of the
bettermost people are in general large but those of the poorer sort very
small, and the streets very narrow and uncommonly ill pavd. The Churches
here have abundance of ornaments, cheifly bad pictures and figures of their
favourite saints in lac'd cloaths; the Convent of the Franciscans indeed
which we went to See had very little ornament; but the neatness with which
those fathers kept everything was well worthy of commendation, especialy
their infirmary, the contrivance of which deserves to be taken particular
notice of; it was a long room, on one side of which were windows, and an
altar for the convenience of administering the sacrament to the sick; on the
other were the wards, each just capable of containing a bed, and lind with
white duch tiles; to every one of these was a door communicating with a
gallery which ran paralel to the great room, so that any of the sick might be
supplied with whatever they wanted without disturbing their neighbours.

In this Convent was a curiosity of a very singular nature; a small chapel
whose whole lining, wainscote, and ceiling, was intirely compos'd of
human bones, two large thigh bones across, and a skull in each of the
openings. Among these was a very singular anatomical curiosity, a skull in
which one side of the Lower jaw was perfectly and very firmly fastned to
the upper by an ossification, so that the man whoever he was must have
livd some time without being able to open his mouth, indeed it was plain
on the other side that a hole had been made by beating out his teeth, and in
some measure damaging his Jaw bone, by which alone he must have
receivd his nourishment.

I must not leave these good fathers without mentioning a thing which
does great credit to their civility, and at the same time shews that they are
not bigots to their religion: we visited them on Thursday Even just before
their supper time; they made many apologies that they could not ask us to
sup, not being prepard; but said they, if you will come tomorrow,
notwithstanding it is fast with us, we will have a turkey roasted for you.

There are here, beside friarys, 3 or 4 houses of nunns. To one of these
(Sa'nta Clara) we went, and indeed the ladies did us the honour to express
great pleasure in seeing us there; they had heard that we were great
Philosophers, and expected much from us, one of the first questions that
they askd was, when it would thunder; they then desird to know if we
could put them in a way of finding water in their convent, which it seems
they were in want of; but notwishstanding our answers to these questions
were not quite so much to the purpose as they expected, they did not at all
cease their civilities, for while we stayd, which was about half an hour, I
am sure there was not the fraction of a second in which their tongues did
not go at an uncommonly nimble rate.

It remains now that I should say something of the Island in general, and
then take my leave of Madeira till some other opportunity offers of visiting
it again, for the climate is so fine that any man might wish it was in his
power to live here under the benefits of English laws and liberty.

The hills here are very high, much higher than any one would imagine,
Pico Ruevo the highest is 5068 ft which is much higher than any land that
has been measured in Great Britain; indeed as I hinted before the whole
Island has probably been the production of a Volcano, notwishstanding
which its fertility is amazing, all the sides of the hills are coverd with vines
to a certain hight, above which are woods of chestnut and pine of immense
extent; and above them forests of wild timber of kinds not known in
Europe, which amply supply the inhabitants with whatever they may want.
Among these some there were whose flowers we were not able to procure
and consequently could not settle their Genera, particularly those calld by
the Portugese Mirmulano and Pao branco, both which, and especialy the
first, from the Beauty of their leaves promise to be a great ornament to our
European gardens.

The inhabitants here are supposd to be about 80,000; and from the town
of Fonchiale (its custom house I mean) the King of Portugal receives
20000 pounds a year, after having paid the Governor and all expences of
every kind, which may serve to shew in some degree the consequence
which this little Island is of to the crown of Portugal; was it in the hands of
any other people in the world its value might easily be doubled, from the
excellence of its climate capable of bearing any kind of crop, a
circumstance which the Portugese do not make the least advantage of.

The Coin current here is intirely Spanish, for the Balance of trade with
Lisbon being in disfavour of this Island all the Portugese money naturaly
goes there, to prevent which Spanish money is allowd to pass: it is of three
denominations, Pistereens, Bitts, and ½ bitts; the first worth about 1
shilling, the 2nd 6 pence, the third 3 pence; they have also Portugese
money of Copper, but so scarce that I did not in my stay there see a single
peice.


1768 September 18.


This Evening every thing being ready for sea, we went on board, and at 8
o'Clock got under way with a very light breeze.


1768 September 19.

Light Breezes all day, without any event worth writing about.


1768 September 20.

Still almost calm, which gave us an opportunity of taking with the
casting nett a most beautifull species of Medusa, of a colour equaling if not
exceeding the finest ultramarine; it was describd and calld Medusa azurea.


1768 September 21.

This morn wind foul, saw however some rocks call'd in the old charts
Salvages which lay to the northward of the Canarys.


1768 September 22.

No land in sight this morn, towards noon almost calm, many fish were
about the ship, but our fishermen could not contrive to catch any of them.


1768 September 23.

This morn we were calld up very early to see the pike of Teneriffe, which
now for the first time appeard at a vast distance much above the clouds (I
mean those which form a bank near the Horizon); the hill itself was so
faint, that no man who was not used to the appearance of land at a great
distance could tell it from a cloud, it soon however appeard something
clearer and a sketch was made of it.

While we were engagd in looking at the hill a fish was taken which was
describ'd and called Scomber serpens; the seamen said they had never seen
such a one before except the first lieutenant, who rememberd to have taken
one before just about these Islands; Sr Hans Sloane in his Passage out to
Jamaica also took one of these fish which he gives a figure of, Vol.1,T.1, f.2.

The Pike continued in sight almost all day, tho sometimes obscurd by the
clouds; at sunset however its appearance was most truely elegant, the rays
of the sun remaining upon it sometime after it was set and the other land
quite Black, and giving it a warmth of colour not to be express'd by
painting.


1768 September 24.

This Morn the Pike appeard very plain and immensely above the clouds,
as may well be imagin'd by its hight which Dr Heberden of Madeira who
has been himself upon it communicated to us, 15,396 feet. The Dr also
says that tho there is no eruption of visible fire from it, yet heat issues from
the chinks near the top so strongly that a person who putts his hand upon
these is scalded; from him we receivd among many other favours some salt
which he supposes to be the true natron or nitrum of the ancients, and some
native sulphur exceedingly pure, both which he collected himself on the
top of the mountain, where large quantities, especialy of the salt, are found
on the surface of the Earth.


1768 September 25.

Wind continued to blow much as it had done so we were sure we were
well in the trade; now for the first time we saw plenty of flying fish, whose
bea[u]ty especialy when seen from the cabbin windows is beyond
imagination, their sides shining like burnishd silver; when seen from the
Deck they do not appear to such advantage as their backs are then
presented to the view, which are dark colourd.


1768 September 26.

Went as usual and as we expect to go these next two months; flying fish
are in great plenty about the ship. About one today we crossd the tropick,
the night most intolerably hot, the Thermometer standing all night at 78 in
the cabbin tho every window was open.


1768 September 27.

About one this morn a flying fish was brought into the cabbin, the first
that had been taken; it flew aboard, I suppose chasd by some other fish, or
maybe merely because he did not see the ship; at breakfast another was
brought, which had flown into Mr Green the Astronomers Cabbin. This
whole day we saild at the rate of 7 knotts, sometimes a fathom or two more
the wind being rather stronger than it usualy is in the trade.


1768 September 28.

Wind rather slackend; three birds were today about the ship, a swallow,
to all appearance the same as our European one, and two motacillas, about
night fall one of the latter was taken; about 11 a shoal of Porpoises came
about the ship, and the fisgig was soon thrown into one of them but would
not hold.


1768 September 29.

This morn calm; employd in drawing and describing the bird taken
yesterday, calld it Motacilla avida; while the drawing was in hand it
became very familiar, so much so that we had a brace made for it in hope
to keep it alive; as flies were in amazing abundance onboard the ship we
had no fear of plentiful supply of provision.

About noon a young shark was seen from the Cabbin windows following
the ship, who immediately took a bait and was caught on board; he provd
to be the Squalus Charcharias of Linn[aeus] and assisted us in clearing up
much confusion which almost all authors had made about that species; with
him came on board 4 sucking fish, echineis remora Linn. who were
preserved in spirit. Notwistanding it was twelve O'Clock before the shark
was taken, we made shift to have a part of him stewd for dinner, and very
good meat he was, at least in the opinion of Dr Solander and myself, tho
some of the Seamen did not seem to be fond of him, probably from some
prejudice founded on the species sometimes feeding on human flesh.


1768 September 30.

This Morn at day break made the Island of Bonavista, one of the Cape
Verde Islands: Mr Buchan employd in taking views of the land; Mr
Parkinson busy in finishing the sketches made of the shark yesterday.

This Evening the other Motacilla avida was brought to us, it differd
scarce at all from the first taken, except that it was something larger; his
head however gave us some good, by supplying us with near twenty
specimens of ticks, which differd but little from the acarus vicinus Linn; it
was however described and calld Motacilla.


1768 October 1.

This Morn Bonetos were in great plenty about the ship, we were calld up
early to see one that had been struck, found it to be the Scomber Pelamis
Linn., had a drawing made of it; I confess however that I was a good deal
disapointd, expecting to find the animal much more bea[u]tifull than it
provd, tho its colours were extreemly lively, especialy the blue lines on the
Back (which equald at least any ultramarine); yet the name, and accounts I
had heard from all who had seen them, made me expect an animal of a
much greater variety of colour, this consisting of no other than blue lines
on the back crossing each other, a gold and purple changeable on the sides,
and white with black lines on the bottom of the sides and belly.

After having examind and drawn the animal we proceeded to disect him,
and in the course of the operation were much pleasd by the infinite strength
we observd in every part of him, specialy the stomack, the coats of which
were uncommonly strong especialy about the sp[h]incter, or extremity by
which the digested meat is discharged; this I suppose is intended to crush
and render usefull the scales and bones of fishes which this animal must
continualy swalow without seperating them from the flesh.

From the inside of its scales we took a small animal who seemd to be a
louse (if I may so call it) as it certainly stuck to him and preyd upon the
Juices which it extra[c]ted by sucktion, probably much to his disquiet; it
provd to be monoculus piscinus Linn. which Baster has given a figure of in
his Opera subcessive, but has by some unlucky accident mistaken the head
to be the tail, and the tail the head, and the ovaria for antennae.

In the inside of the fish were also found two animals which preyd upon
him, one in his very flesh tho near the membrane which covers the
intestines, Fasciola Pelamines Mss, the other in the stomach sipunculus
piscium Mss.


1768 October 2.

This morn two swallows were about the ship, tho we must now be 60
Leagues at least from any land, at night one of them is taken and proved to
be Hirundo domestica Linn.


1768 October 3.

This morn the other swallow was found dead upon the deck; now for the
first time we have lost the trade, and expected calm and squally weather till
we shall cross the line.

The trade had now lasted us pretty free from squalls or calms these days
it has been in general between but ever since we have been in it the air has
been uncommonly damp, every thing more than usualy liable to mould,
and all Iron work to rust, the air has seldom been Clear, but a haize in it
which was even perceiveable to the human frame.


1768 October 4.

Today quite calm, I went out in a boat and took dagysa strumosa, medusa
porpita, the same which we before calld asurea, mimus volutator, and
cimex []who runns upon the water here in the same manner as C. Lacustris
does on our ponds in England. Towards even two small fish were taken
under the stern, they were following a shirt which was towing and showd
not the least signs of fear, so that they were taken with a landing net
without the least difficulty. Balistes monoceros Linn.


1768 October 5.

Weather pretty good, at night a squall with Lightning and rain, another
swallow came to the ship today and was taken with the snippers as soon as
he went to roost.


1768 October 6.

Blew fresh this morn with heavy rain; towards noon five swallows came
on board and were taken at roosting time, and provd like all we have taken
before to be H. domestica Linn.


1768 October 7.

This morn calm; went out in the boat and took what is calld by the
Seamen a Portugese man of war, Holothuria Physalis Linn; also Medusa
velella L. onidium spinosum Mss, Diodon Erinaceus Mss, dagysa vitrea
Mss, Helix Janthina Linn,--violacea Mss and procellaria Oceanica Mss.
The Holothuria proved to be one of the most bea[u]tifull sights I had ever
seen, it consisted of a small bladder in shape much like the air bladder of
fishes, from the bottom of which descended a number of strings of bright
blue and red, some three or four feet in length which if touchd stung the
person who touchd them in the same manner as nettles, only much
stronger: on the top of this Bladder was a membrane which he turnd either
one way or the other as the wind blew to receive it, this was veind with
pink in an uncommonly beautifull manner, in short the whole together was
one of the most beautifull sights I have seen among the mollusca, tho many
of them are beautifull.

The floating shells H. Janthina and violacea from their particularity
deserve also to be mentiond, they are found floating on the top of the water
by means of a small cluster of Bubbles filld with air, which are composd of
a tenacious slimey substance, not easily parting with its contents; these
keep him suspended on the surface of the water and serve as a hiding for
his Eggs, and it is probable that he never goes down to the bottom, or
willingly comes near any shore, as his shell is of so brittle a construction
that few fresh water snails are so thin.

Every shell contains within it about a teaspoonfull of Liquid, which it
easily discharges on being touched, this is of a most beautifull red purple
colour and easily dies linnen clothes; it may be well worth inquiry whether
or not this is the purpura of the ancients as the shell is certainly found in
the Mediterranean. We have not yet taken a sufficient quantity of the shells
to try the experiment, probably we shall do soon.

Procellaria oceanica differs very little from P. pelagica Linn, but from his
place of abode so far south and some small difference in plumage it is
more than likely that he is different in species.


1768 October 8.

A fine Breze today; employd in figuring etc. what was taken yesterday.


1768 October 9.

This morn a shark calld us out of our bedds, and was soon hookd, but as
soon broke his hold and went off: at noon went out in the boat but found
nothing on the surface of the water; on returning home however found on
the sterm of the ship two new species of Lepas vittata and midas, they were
both sticking to the bottom in company with the anatifera, of which there
was great abundance. After dinner calld upon deck by another shark, who
had been lately wounded by a harpoon, but he was two cunning after his
misfortune to bite at our baits, which we much Lamented as he had sucking
fish upon him that were quite white, probably a species not yet describd.


1768 October 10.

Went out in the boat today, took plenty of Helix Janthina and some few
of violacea, shot the black toed gull of Penn. Zool. It had not yet been
describd according to Linnaeus's system, so calld it Larus crepidatus; its
food here seems to be cheifly Helixes which appeard probable at least, on
account of its dung being of a lively red colour, much like that which was
procurd from the shells.

I was drove home from this excursion by a very heavy squall of rain,
which intirely wetted me through long before it was possible to return to
the ship, however I receivd no other harm from the ducking than the
present inconvenience of being so thoroughly wet. The remainder of today
was very squally, with much rain; indeed it has been so ever since we lost
the trade, and the people who have been here before say that it is generaly
so in these latitudes; I can liken it to nothing so much as April in England,
when it is very showery, the weather is never certain for two hours, or
indeed half the time, tho calms spend much the greatest part of our time in
idleness.


1768 October 11.

Today much like yesterday, very squally; saw a dolphin, and admired the
infinite beauty of his colour as he swam in the water, but in vain, he would
not give us even a chance of taking him.


1768 October 12.

A shark, squalus carcharias Linn. taken this morn, and with him two pilot
fish; at noon calm, I went out in the boat and took several Blubbers. The
pilot fish Gasterosteus ductor Linn. is certainly as bea[u]tyfull a fish as can
be imagind: it is of a light blue with cross streaks of darker colour; it is
wonderful to see them about a Shark, swimming round him without
expressing the least signs of fear; what their motive for doing so is I cannot
guess as I cannot find that they get any provision by it, or any other
emolument, except possibly the company of the shark keeps them free
from the attacks of Dolphins or other large fish of prey, who would
otherwise devour them.

The blubbers taken today were Beroe Labiata and Marsupialis Mss, the
first of which made a pretty appearance in the water, by reason of its
swimmers, which line its sides like fringes, and are of a changeable fire
colour; Callirhoe bivia Mss, the most lifeless lump of Jelly I have seen, it
scarcely seems to be possessd of life but for one or two motions we saw it
make.


1768 October 13.

Calm this Morn; a shark was taken, but not one pilot fish attended him,
which is rather uncommon as they seldom are without a shoal of from ten
to twenty. At noon I went in the boat, and took the Sallee man Phyllodoce
velella Linn. who is a Sailor tho inferior in size to the Portugese man of
war, yet not without its beauty, cheifly from the charming blue of its
bottom; its sail is transparent but not moveable, so it trusts itself to the
mercy of the winds without being able to turn to windward as the
Portugese man of war maybe can? We saw several of the latter today, and
observd many small fish under their tentacula who seemd to shelter there
as if with its stings it could defend them from large enemies.


1768 October 14.

Calm today but so squally and rainy that I dar'd not venture out with the
boat.


1768 October 15.

Ventur'd out today, but found the surface of the water so ruffled that
nothing at all floated upon it, I had the good fortune however to see a bird
of the shearwater kind which I shot, and it provd to be not describd; it was
about as large as the common but differd from it in being whiter, especialy
about the face: calld it Procellaria crepidata, as its feet were like the gulls
shot last week, black without but white near the leggs.

A large shoal of fish were all this day under the shipp's stern, playing
about, but refusing to take bait; we however contrivd to take one of them
with a fish gigg, which provd not describd; it was in make and appearance
like a Carp, weighing near two pounds, its sides were ornamented with
narrow yellow lines and its finns almost intirely coverd with scales: calld it
Chaetodon cyprinaceus.


1768 October 16.

A fine breeze of wind started up last night which held us all day, so I
found it impossible to go out in the boat; tonight however to make these 24
hours not intirely unprofitable I had the opportunity of seeing a
Phenomenon I had never before met with, a lunar rainbow which appeard
about ten O'Clock very faint and almost or quite without colour, so that it
could be tracd by little More than an appearance which lookd like shade on
a cloud.


1768 October 17.

This morn went out in the boat but caught no one thing, I had never been
before so unfortunate. In the Evening a breeze of wind sprung up from SE
by S which makes us hope we had got the S.E. trade.


1768 October 18.

Wind continued to blow fresh so we had little doubt of the reality of
yesterdays hopes. This evening trying as I have often (foolishly no doubt)
done to exercise myself by playing tricks with two ropes in the Cabbin I
got a fall which hurt me a good deal and alarmd me more, as the blow was
on my head, and two hours after it I was taken with sickness at my stomack
which made me fear some ill consequence.


1768 October 19.

Today thank God I was much better and easd of all apprehensions, the
wind continuing fair and I had given over all thoughts of boat expeditions
for some time at least.


1768 October 20.

Quite well today, employd in describing and attending the Draughtsmen.


1768 October 21.

Trade continues. Today the cat killd our bird M. Avida who had lived
with us ever since the 29th of Septr intirely on the flies which he caught for
himself; he was hearty and in high health so that probably he might have
livd a great while longer had fate been more kind.


1768 October 22.

Trade had got more to the Southward that it usualy had been, which was
unlucky for me as I proposd to the Captain to touch for part of a day at
least at the Island of Ferdinand Norronha, which he had no objection to if
we could fetch it: that however seemd very uncertain. This Evening we
saw 6 or 7 large fish of the whale kind which the Seamen calld Grampuses
tho I think they were very different from the fish commonly so calld; they
were however Certainly of the whale kind and blew throug[h] two? pipes
on the top of their heads. They had heads smaller and rounder than those
fish in general have and very low back finns and very small tails; thus
much was all that I could see as they never came within two cables lengh
of the ship.


1768 October 23.

Trade today was still more to the Southward, almost due South, so that
we tackd and stood to the eastward lest we should fall in with the coast of
Brazil to the Northward of Cape Frio.


1768 October 24.

Wind today as fair as we could wish, ship layd up so well that it renewd
our hopes of touching at the Island.

About noon today we experiencd what the Seamen call a white squall,
that is a gust of wind which came upon us quite unawares, unattended with
a cloud as squalls in general are and therefore took us quite unprepard; it
was however very slight so no ill consequence ensued except Mr Parkinson
and his potts going to leward, which diverted us more than it hurt him.


1768 October 25.

This morn about 8 O'Clock crossed the AEquinoctial line in about 33
degrees West Longitude from Greenwich, at the rate of four knotts which
our seamen said was an uncommonly good breeze, the Thermometer
standing at 29. (The Thermometers used in this voyage are two of Mr Birds
making after Farenheights scale, which seldom differ above a degree from
each other and that not till they are as high as 80, in which case the
medium between the two instruments is set down.) This Evening the
ceremony of ducking the ships company was performed as always
customary on crossing the line, when those who have crossd it before
Claim a right of ducking all that have not, the whole of the ceremony I
shall describe.

About dinner time a list was brought into the cabbin containing the
names of every body and thing aboard the ship, in which the dogs and catts
were not forgot; to this was affixd a petition, sign'd 'the ships company,'
desiring leave to examine every body in that List that it might be know[n]
whether or not they had crossd the line before. This was immediately
granted; every body was then calld upon the quarter deck and examind by
one of the lieutenants who had crossd, he markd every name either to be
duckd or let off according as their qualifications directed. Captn Cooke and
Doctor Solander were on the Black list, as were my self my servants and
doggs, which I was oblig'd to compound for by giving the Duckers a
certain quantity of Brandy for which they willingly excusd us the
ceremony.

Many of the Men however chose to be duckd rather than give up 4 days
allowance of wine which was the price fixd upon, and as for the boys they
are always duckd of course; so that about 21 underwent the ceremony
which was performd thus:

A block was made fast to the end of the Main Yard and a long line reved
through it, to which three Cross peices of wood were fastned, one of which
was put between the leggs of the man who was to be duckd and to this he
was tyed very fast, another was for him to hold in his hands and the third
was over his head least the rope should be hoisted too near the block and
by that means the man be hurt. When he was fas[t]ned upon this machine
the Boatswain gave the command by his whistle and the man was hoisted
up as high as the cross peice over his head would allow, when another
signal was made and immediately the rope was let go and his own weight
carried him down, he was then immediately hoisted up again and three
times served in this manner which was every mans allowance. Thus ended
the diversion of the day, for the ducking lasted till almost night, and
sufficiently diverting it certainly was to see the different faces that were
made on this occasion, some grinning and exulting in their hardiness whilst
others were almost suffocated and came up ready enough to have
compounded after the first or second duck, had such proceeding been
allowable.

It is now time that I should say something of the climate and degree of
heat since crossing the tropick, as we have been for some time within the
bounds which were supposd by the ancients to be uninhabitable on account
of their heat.

Almost immediately on crossing the tropick the air became sensibly
much damper than usual, tho not materialy hotter, the thermometer then in
general stood from 80 to 82. The nearer we approachd to the calms still the
damper every thing grew, this was perceivable even to the human body and
very much so, but more remarkably upon all kinds of furniture: every thing
made of Iron rusted so fast that the knives in peoples pockets became
almost useless and the razors in cases not free. All kinds of Leather became
mouldy, Portfolios and truncks coverd with black leather were almost
white, soon after this mould adheerd to almost every thing, all the books in
my Library became mouldy so that they were obligd to be wiped to
preserve them. About this time we came into the calms which we met with
earlier than usual; the thermometer was then at 83 and we sufferd from the
heat and damp together. Bathing however kept me in perfect health, tho
many of the ship[s] company were ill of bilious complaints which however
were but of short duration.

This continued till we got the S.E. trade, when or a little before the glass
fell to 88 and soon to 78 and 79, but the dampness continued yet; to that I
cheifly attribute the ill success of the Electrical experiments of which I
have wrote an account on separate papers that the different experiments
may appear at one view.

The air during the whole time sin[c]e we crossed the tropick and indeed
sometime before has been nearly of the same temperature throughout the
24 hours, the Thermometer seldom rising above a degree during the time
the sun is above the horizon. The windows of the cabbin have been open
without once being shut ever since we left Madeira.


1768 October 26.

Last night and today the weather has been squally, wind rather fresh but
keeping very much to the Southward; great plenty of flying fish have been
about the ship few or none of which have been seen since we left the N.E.
trade.


1768 October 27.

Fine weather but Wind rather too much to the Southward. We are today
nearly in the latitude of the Island of Fernand de Norhona, so that I am not
without hopes of making it if rightly laid down; night however put an end
to our hopes for the present at least, and left us in no very agreable
situation as shoals and foul ground is laid down all round the Islands.


1768 October 28.

Fine breeze today, our hopes of seeing the Island were again renewd but
without success, so at night we judge ourselves to be past it and that the
longitude is wrong laid down.


1768 October 29.

Wind East very pleasant, we now gave up all thoughts of the Island. This
Evening the sea appeard uncommonly bea[u]tifull, flashes of light coming
from it perfectly resembling small flashes of lightning, and these so
frequent that sometimes 8 or ten were visible at the same moment; the
seamen were divided in their acco[u]nts some assuring us that it proceeded
from fish who made the light by agitating the salt water, as they calld it, in
their darting at their prey, while others said that they had often seen them
and knew them to be nothing but blubbers (Medusas). This made us very
Eager to procure some of them, which at last we did one by the help of the
landing net. They prov'd to be a species of Medusa which when brought on
board appeard like metal violently heated, emitting a white light; on the
surface of this animal a small Lepas was fixd exactly the colour of it,
which was almost transparent not unlike thin starch in which a small
quantity of blue is disolv'd. In taking these animals three or 4 species of
Crabbs were taken also but very small, one of which gave light full as
much as a glow-worm in England tho the Creature was not so large by
10/9ths; indeed the sea this night seemd to abound with light in an
uncommon manner, as if every inhabitant of it furnishd its share, which
might have been the case tho none kept that property after being brought
out of the water except these two.


1768 October 30.

This Morn employd in Examining the things caught last night, which
being taken by the light of our lamps (for the wind which blows in at the
windows always open will not suffer us to burn candles) we could hardly
then distinguish into genera, much less into species, had the good fortune
to find that they were all quite new. Calld them Medusa pellucens, Lepas
pellucens,[], Clio[], Cancer fulgens and Cancer amplectens, but we had the
misfortune to loose two more species of Crabbs overboard by the tumbling
of a glass overboard in which they were containd.

In the Evening the Sea was lighted in the same manner as it was last
night only not near so strongly; we renewd however our endeavours to take
some of the light carriers, not without success as two new species of
Crabbs were taken one of which was very singular.


1768 October 31.

Nothing to be done today, found however that the crabbs taken yesterday
were both new, calld them vitreus and Crassicornis.


1768 November 1.

A shoal of small fish were today under our stern who attended the ship
for some time; she had however too much way through the water for our
instruments so we could not take any of them.


1768 November 2.

This day was quite void of Events, the wind however was very fair and
we now approachd the place where we were next to refresh ourselves
apace.


1768 November 3.

This morn the sun was immediately over our heads notwiths[t]anding
which the Thermometer was no higher than 77. Since we left the calms
under the line the weather has grown cooler by gradual degrees, now we
reckon it quite moderate after having felt the heat of 83 so lately.

This Even I for the first time (for other people had seen them much
before) observd two Light spots in the heavens apearing much like the
milky way, one the largest and brightest Bore S. by E. the other about
South.


1768 November 4.

Still as we got more to the westward the wind became more favourable,
today it was almost aft and has been all along creeping to the northward.


1768 November 5.

The thermometer kept still gradualy falling as the wind got more to the
northward, which appears odd as the North wind should now be the warm
wind; we were not yet however enough to the Southward to find much
alteration. Wind this morn was North-east, at noon North by west, between
this place and mid channel it has changd from South by East. The Trade
being to the Northward upon this coast has been observd long ago, tho I
question whether our navigators are sufficiently apprisd of it. Piso in his
Natural history of the Brasils says that the winds along shore are constantly
to the Northward from October to March and to the southward from March
to October. Dampier also who certainly had as much experience as most
men says the same thing, advising ships outward bound to keep to the
westward where they are almost certain to find the Trade more Eastward
than in mid channel, where it sometimes is due South or within ½ a point
of it as we ourselves experienced.


1768 November 6.

Today light winds and very pleasant weather, the Thermometer was
never above 76. Towards evening the colour of the water was observd to
change upon which we sounded and found ground at 32 fathom; the lead
was cast three times between 6 and 10 without finding a foot difference in
the depth or quality of the bottom, which was incrusted with coral; we
supposd this to be the tail of a great shoal laid down in all our charts by the
name of Albrolhos, on which Ld Anson struck soundings in his outward
bound passage.


1768 November 7.

This morn at four no ground with 100 Fathoms of Line. About noon long
ranges of a yellowish colour appeard upon the sea, many of them very
large, one (the largest) might be a mile in lengh and 3 or 400 yards wide.
The seamen in general affirmd roundly that they were the spawn of fishes
and that they had often seen the same appearance before; upon taking up
some of the water so coloured we found it to be causd by innumerable
small atoms, each pointed at the end and of a yellowish colour, none of
them above a quarter of a line in lengh; in the microscope they appeard to
be fasciculi of small fibres interwove one within the other, not unlike the
nidi of some Phryganeas which we call caddices. What they were or for
what purposes designd we could not even guess, nor so much as
distinguish whether their substance was animal or vegetable.


1768 November 8.

At day break today we made the Land which Provd to be the Continent
of S. America in Lat. 21.16; about ten we saw a fishing boat who told us
that the countrey we saw belongd to the Captainship of Espirito Santo.

Doctor Solander and myself went on board this boat in which were 11
men (9 of whom were blacks) who all fishd with lines. We bought of them
the cheif part of their cargo consisting of Dolphins, two kinds of large
Pelagick Scombers, Sea Bream and the fish calld in the West Indies
Welshman, for which they made us pay 19 shillings and Sixpence. We had
taken Spanish silver with us which we imagind was the currency of the
Continent, we were therefore not a little surprizd that they askd us for
English shillings and preferrd two which we by accident had to the
Pistereens, tho they after some words took them also. The Business of
these people seemd to be going a good distance from land and catching
large fish, which they salted in bulk in a place in the middle of their boat
made for that purpose; in this place was about 2 Quintals of fish laid in salt
which they offerd to sale for 16 shillings, and would doubtless have taken
half the money had we been inclind to buy them, but fresh provisions was
all we wanted and the fresh fish they had which we bought servd the whole
ships company.

Their provision for the Sea consisted of a cask of water and a bag of the
flour of Cassada which they call Farinha de Pao or wooden flour, a very
proper name for it which indeed tastes more like powderd chipps than any
thing else.

Their method of drinking out of their cask of water was truely primitive
and pleasd me much. The cask was large, as broad as the boat and exactly
fitted a place in the Ballast made for it, they consequently could not get at
the bottom of it to put in a tap by which the water might be drawn out. To
remedy this dificulty they made use of a cane about three feet long hollow
and open at each end; this the man who wanted to drink desired his
neighbour to fill for him, which he did by putting it into the cask, and
laying the palm of his hand over the uppermost hole hinderd the water
from running out of the other, to which the drinker applyd his mouth and
the other taking off his hand lett the liquor run into the drinkers mouth till
he was satisfied.

Soon after we came on board a Sphynx was taken which provd to be
quite a new one, and a small bird also who was the Tanagra Jacarini of
Linn; it seemd however from Linnaeus description as well as Edwards's
and Brissons that neither of them had seen the Bird which was in reality a
Loxia nitens.

The fish Brought on board provd to be Scomber anxia and Falcatus,
Coryphoena Hipparis Sparus pagrus and Sciaena rubens; the second and
last not being before describd we calld them by these names.

Afternoon the wind came about South and South by East and it soon
came on to blow fresh which we were not at all accustomd to, so we
Boarded it along shore without gaining much.


1768 November 9.

This morn wind continued South and South by west but is more
moderate, but still more sea than we should chuse were we directors of the
winds and waves.

We however stood in with the land till we found ourselves in a large bay
the shores of which were very flat; in the middle of this bay were some
large hills which lay far inland and made the prospect very remarkable, as
expressd in the view. At this time we were by guess within five miles of
the shore and our water had decreasd gradualy till we had less than five
fathom; it was about four in the Evening so our Captain thought proper to
put about and stand off to sea; in the Evening the wind freshend a little but
was not near so troublesome as last night.


1768 November 10.

Wind more moderate this morn; we stood in with the land and made it
nearly in the same place as we left it last night, our soundings being from
15 to 10 fathoms.

After dinner the wind came more to the Eastward and freshend, and little
peices of Seaweed now came floating by the ship which we took and it
provd to be Sargaso fucus natans, which is generaly supposd to increase
upon the surface of the sea in the same manner as duck weed Lemna does
on fresh water without having any root; this however plainly shewd that it
had been rooted in the Coral rock on the bottom, as two specimens
particularly had large lumps of the coral still adhering to their bottoms.
Among the weed we got were some few animals but scarcely worth
mentioning, one Balistes but quite a fry so young that it was impossible to
referr it to its species; a worm also was in it which provd to be Neireis
pelagica.

In the course of this night we ran over a small bank on which the water
suddenly shoald to 7 fathom and kept thereabouts for some time, it
however deepend gradualy.


1768 November 11.

Light breezes to day, the wind much more fair than it has been so that we
began to get to the Southward. The Thermometer today was no more than
72, so that we felt cold or cool at least, tho we could [not] prevail on
ourselves to shut the cabbin windows as we are soon to come into much
warmer weather.

Just before dark the Land was seen ahead which we supposed to be an
Island off Cape Frio so we hoped to be the lengh of Cape Frio by tomorrow
morn.


1768 November 12.

This morn we were abreast of the land which proved as we thought last
night to be the Island just without Cape Frio, which is calld in some maps
the Isle of Frio; the wind was fair and we passd it with a pleasant Breeze
hoping tomorrow to get into the harbour. About noon we saw the hill calld
Sugar Loaf which is just by the harbours mouth, but it was a long way off
yet so there were no hopes of reaching it this night.

The shore from Cape Frio to this place has been one uninterruptd beach
of the whitest Colour I ever saw which they tell me is a white sand.

This Evening wind still continued fair but very little, we now saw the
Sugar Loaf very plain but could not tonight reach it, so shortend sail; we
had seen for some time a small vessel under the land which seemd to steer
into the harbour as well as we.

The Land all along this Coast has been exceedingly high inland except in
the bay mentiond on the 7th: the mountains seen now about Rio Janeiro
were immensely high so that some of our people compared them with the
Pike of Tenerife, tho I do not myself think they deserve a comparison so
much higher is the Pike. Notwithstanding the hills are high and begin to
rise near the shore the beach is sandy and appears to be of a firm sand.

In the Course of this Evening we aproachd very near the Land and found
it very cold, to our feelings at least; the Thermometer at ten O'Clock stood
at 68¼ which gave us hopes that the countrey would be cooler than we
should expect from the accounts of travellers, especially Mr Biron who
says that no business is done here from 10 till 2 on account of the intense
heat.


1768 November 13.

This Morn the Harbour of Rio Janeiro was right ahead about 2 leagues
off but it being quite Calm we made our aproaches very slowly. The sea
was inconceveably full of small vermes which we took without the least
dificulty; they were almost all new except Beroe labiata, Medusa radiata,
fimbriata and Chrystallina, Dagysa []. Soon after that a fishing boat Came
a board and sold us three Scombers which proved to be new and were calld
Salmoneus; his baites were Clupea Chinensis of which we also procurd
specimens.

As soon as we came well into the River the Captn sent Mr Hicks his first
Leutenant with a midshipman to get a pilot and stood up the river
expecting him down very soon. He did not nor did the boat till we were on
the point of dropping an anchor just under the town; the boat then came
without either of our officers, in exchange for whom came a Subaltern
Portugese who seemd to have no kind of Business with us; the Cockswain
brought word from the Leutenant that he was detaind on shore till the
Captain should go off. Soon after we came to an anchor a ten Oard boat
came alongside the ship with 12 or 14 soldiers in it who rowed round us
without taking any notice of us or saying a word; a quarter of an hour after
came a boat in which was a Disembargador and a Colonel of a Portugese
rejument who askd us many questions which at first seemd to discourage
our stay, as telling us that the Governor would furnish us with any quantity
of water in two days. In the conclusion however he was immensely civil
telling us that the Governor would give us every assistance in his power;
that the Leutenant had not been confind but on account of the Practica had
not been allowd to go on shore, he should now however be sent on board
immediately; that the Captain was welcome to go on shore now but he
wishd the rest of the crew might remain on board till the Paper they drew
up had been delivered.


1768 November 14.

This morn Captn Cooke went ashore, Dr Solander and myself
impatiently waiting for his return which he promisd should be the moment
he had spoke with the viceroy, who would no doubt tell him that the
practica paper had been deliverd and we were all at liberty to come ashore
when we pleasd. About twelve he came on board with a Portugese officer
in his boat who had been put there by order of the viceroy, out of a
compliment as he termd it, and an English gentleman Mr Forster by name a
Leutenant in the Portugese service. The Captn told us that we could not be
allowd to have a house or sleep ashore, so the Viceroy had told him, but
Mr Forster told us that he had given orders that no person but the Captn
and such common sailors as were requird to be upon duty should be
permitted to go ashore, and that we the passengers were probably
particularly objected to. We however in the Evening dress'd ourselves and
attempted to go ashore under pretence of a visit to the Viceroy, but were
stopd by the Guard boat whose officer told us that he had particular orders,
which he could not transgress, to Lett no officer or Passenger except the
Captain pass the boat; after much conversation to no purpose we were
obligd to return on board and the Captn went ashore to remonstrate to the
viceroy about it, but could get no answer but that it was the King of
Portugals orders and consequently must be.


1768 November 15.

This morn the Captn went again ashore and told the viceroy that it was
nescessary to give the ship a heel, in which case it would be almost
impossible for the gentlemen who were passengers to stay on board her;
the viceroy as I suppose misunderstood him, and supposing that he wanted
to have the ship hove down said that if the ship was reported by one of his
carpenters ( who should be sent on board) to want such repairs he would
give her all nescessaries for so doing; in that case the Gentlemen should
have a house ashore, but gave him to understand that a centinel would be
put at the door with orders not to let us stir out or any one come in on any
pretence whatever.


1768 November 16.

The Captn went ashore again and remonstrated particularly against the
Centinel that was put in his boat whenever he landed or came aboard,
which he was told was a compliment but now found to be a guard. He
received no satisfactory answers or rather none at all but that it is the King
of Portugals orders.


1768 November 17.

Tird with waiting and remonstrating only in words, both the Captn and
myself sent ashore written memorials (of which mine is subjoind as well as
another with the answers) which complain of his excellency the viceroys
behaviour to us as a Kings ship as almost a breach of treaty.


1768 November 18.

Answers to our memorials came on board in which the Captn is told that
he has no reason to complain, as such usage as he has receivd has been
constantly the custom of the Ports of Brasil and that the Viceroy himself
servd an English ship just in the same manner at Bahia; as for me I am told
that as I have not brought proper credentials from the Court of Lisbon it is
impossible that I can be permitted to land.


1768 November 19.

Both the Captn and myself sent answers to his excellencys memorials
this morn by the Leutenant, who had orders not to suffer a guard to be put
into his boat but if the Guard boat insisted upon it to return on board. The
boat let him pass, but the viceroy as soon as he heard that he had come
ashore without a guard orderd Centinels to be put into the boat, and on the
Leutenant refusing to go on board unless the Centinels are taken out,
orderd the boats crew to be taken into custody, the boat detaind and the
leutenant to be sent on board in a guard boat under care of an officer.
When he came on board he reported what he has seen, that the men in our
pinnace made not the least resistance, notwithstanding which the soldiers
who took them into custody behavd with great indecency, striking them
many times and thrusting them out of the boat. The same guard boat also
brought back the letters unopend.

This Evening it blew very hard at about South, Puffs coming off about
three minutes distant from each other, which seldom lasted above half a
minute but in that time were as violent as I ever saw.

At this time Our long boat came on board with 4 cask of rum in her, she
with difficulty fetchd the ship and soon after by some mismanagemen[t]
which I cannot account for broke adrift, carrying with her my small boat
which was made fast to her; we had now no boat on board but a small 4
oard yawl, which was immediately sent after her and took her in tow, but
notwithstanding all that could be done by the people who rowd in the long
boat and those who towd in the yawl she was very soon out of sight, and
we were under the greatest uneasiness well knowing that she drove directly
upon the reef of Rocks which Runns out from the point of Ilhoa das
Ferreiras, just to Leward of where we lay. After remaining in this situation
till two in the morning our people cam[e] onboard and told us that the
Long boat was sunk, but that they had left her riding to her grapling tho
full of water; as for my boat they had in returning to the ship faln in with a
reef of rocks, in which dangerous situation they had been obligd to cut her
adrift: this was poor comfort tho we were glad to find the people safe, yet
the Loss of our long boat which we much feard was perhaps the greatest
misfortune that could happen to people who were going as we were upon
discoverys.

I should have mentiond that on the detainder of our boats crew a petty
officer was sent ashore with the memorials and a letter from the Captn
demanding the Boat and men, who was sufferd quietly to go ashore on
taking a soldier out of the guard boat; the only answer he got was verbal
that the affair could not be settled as yet.


1768 November 20.

This morn the yawl, now the only boat we had, was sent ashore to ask
assistance: they returnd about nine and brought with her our boat and crew
that had been detaind, as well as another of the Viceroys which had orders
to assist us in searching for our boats.

The people who came in the Pinnace declard that they never made the
least resistance but said that the soldiers struck them often, that they were
confind in a loathsome dungeon where their companions were cheifly
Blacks who were chaind, but the Cockswain purchasd a better apartment
for seven petacks (about as many shilling English).

Our situation this whole day was better imagind than describd: the Shore
boat came onboard at noon that the people might have their victuals but
brought no news of the Longboat. Tird with expectation I confess I had
almost given over all hopes of ever seeing her again, when Just at dark
night the pinnace came bringing with her both the boats and all their
contents: we now immediately passd from our disagreable though[t]s to a
situation as truly happy, and concluded with defying the Viceroy and all
that he could do to us.


1768 November 21.

Letters came from the Viceroy to both the Captn and myself, in which he
told me very politely that it is not in his power to permit to go ashore; in
the captns he raises some doubts of our ship being a Kings ship, so I who
could ground my pretensions to going ashore on no other Foundation
thought it best to drop them, hoping that by and by when things were more
quiet I might have an opportunity of smugling myself ashore.


1768 November 22.

This morn I sent my servants ashore at day break who stayd till dark
night and brought off many plants and insects.


1768 November 23.

The viceroys answer to the Captns last memorial came on board in which
the Captn is accusd of smugling, which made us all angry but our venting
our spleen against the Viceroy will be of very little service to us.


1768 November 24.

My servants went ashore again and brought off many plants etc.


1768 November 25.

This morn Dr Solander went into the town as surgeon of the Ship, to visit
a friar who had desird that the surgeon might be sent to him; he receivd
civilities from the people rather more than he could expect.


1768 November 26.

I myself went ashore this morn before day break and stayd till dark night;
while I was ashore I met several of the inhabitants who were very civil to
me, taking me to their houses where I bought of them stock for the ship
tolerably cheap, a porker midlingly fat for 11 shill, a muscovy duck
something under two shils etc.

The countrey where I saw it abounded with vast variety of Plants and
animals, mostly such as have not been describd by our naturalists as so few
have had an opportunity of coming here; indeed no one that I know of even
tolerably curious has been here since Marcgrave and Piso about the year
1640, so it is easy to guess the state in which the nat hist of such a countrey
must be.

To give a Cataloge of what I found would be a trouble very little to the
purpose, as every particular is mentiond in the general catalogues of this
place. I cannot however help mentioning some which struck me the most
and consequently gave me particular pleasure: these were cheifly the
parasitick plants especialy renealmias, for I was not fortunate enough to
see one epidendron, and the different species of Bromelia, many not before
describd had I been fortunate enough to see fructifications which I did of
very Few. B. Karratas I saw here growing on the decayd trunk of a tree 50
feet high at least, which it had so intirely coverd that the whole seemd to be
a tree of Karratas. The growth of the [] also pleasd me much tho I had
before got a very good Idea of it from Rumphius, who has a very good
figure of the tree in his Herb: Amboin. Tab: Add to these the whole Contrey
Coverd with the Beatifull blossom of Malpigias, Bannisterias, Pasifloras,
not to Forget Poinciana and Mimosa sensitiva and a beatifull species of
Clutia of which I saw great plenty, in short the wildest Spotts here were
varied with a greater quantity of Flowers as well as more beatifull ones
than our best devisd gardens, a sight infinitely pleasing to the Eye for a
short time tho no doubt it would soon tire with the continuance of it.

The birds of many species especialy the smaller ones sat in great
abundance on the bough's, many of them coverd with most Elegant
plumage. I shot Loxia Brasiliensis and saw several specimens of them. In
sects also were here in great abundance, many species very fine but much
more Nimble than our Europaeans especialy the Butterflies, which almost
all flew near the topps of the trees and were very difficult to come at except
when the sea breeze flew fresh, which kept them low down among the
trees where they might be taken. Humming birds I also saw of one species
but could not shoot them.

The banks of the Sea and more remarkably all the Edges of small brooks
were coverd with innumerable quantities of small Crabbs, cancer vocans
Linn, one hand of which is very large. Among these were many both
whose hands were remarkably small and of equal size: these my black
servant told me were females of the others, and indeed all I examind,
which were many, provd to be females tho whether realy of the same
species with vocans I cannot determine on so short an acquaintance.

I saw but little cu[l]tivation and that seemd to be taken but little pains
with; grass land was the cheif on which were many Lean cattle feeding and
lean they might well be, for almost all the species of grass which I observd
here were creepers, and consequently so close to the ground that tho there
might be upon them a sufficient bite for horses or sheep yet how horned
cattle could live at all was all that appeard extraordinary to me.

I also saw their gardens or small patches in which they cultivate many
sorts of European garden stuff as Cabbage, peas, beans, kidney beans,
turnips, white raddishes, pumkins, etc. but all much inferior to ours except
perhaps the last; here also they grow water melons and pine apples the only
Fruits which I have seen them cultivate. The water melons are very good
but the Pines much inferior to those I have tasted in Europe; hardly one I
have yet had could have been reckond among the midling sort, many were
worse than I have seen sent from table in England where nobody would Eat
them, tho in general they are very sweet they have not the least flavour; but
more of their Fruits by and by.

In these gardens grow also Yamms and Mandihoca or Cassada which
supplys the place of Bread here, for as our Europaean bread corn will not
grow here all the Flour they have is brought from Portugal at a large
expence, too great for even the midling people to purchase much more the
inferior ones.


1768 November 27.

This morn when the Boats returnd from watering they brought word that
they heard it said in the town that people were sent out in search of some of
our people who were ashore without leave: this we concluded meant either
Dr Solander or myself which made it nescessary for us to go no more
ashore while we stayd.


1768 November 28-30.

These three days nothing material hapned, Every thing went on as usual
only we if possible increasd our haste to be gone from this place.


1768 December 1.

This Morn our boat returning from shore brought us the very disagreable
news that Mr Forster, who I before mentiond, was taken into custody
chargd with having smuggled things ashore from our ship: this charge tho
totaly without foundation was lookd upon as a sufficient reason for his
being put into prison, but we beleive the real cause to be his having shewn
some countenance to his Countrey men, as we heard at the same time that
five or six Englishmen residing in the town and a poor Portugese who used
to assist our people in buying things were all put into prison also without
any reason being given.


1768 December 2.

This Morn thank god we have got all we want from these illiterate
impolite gentry, so we got up our anchor and saild to the point of Ilhoa dos
cobras, where we were to lay and wait for a fair wind which shoud come
every night from the Land. We were fortunate in the arrival of a Spanish
Brig comeing from Buenos Ayres with Letters for Spain which arrivd
about a week ago; her officers were receivd ashore with all possible
politeness and allowd to take a house without the least hesitation. The
Captn Don Antonio de Monte Negro y Velasco with all possible politeness
offerd to take our letters to Europe which we accepted of as a very
Fortunate circumstance and sent them on board this morn.


1768 December 3-4.

We remaind without any Sea breeze.


1768 December 5.

This Morn early a dead calm, we attemptd to tow down with our boats
and came near abreast of Sta Cruz their cheif Fortification, when to our
great surprize the Fort fird two shot at us one of which went just over our
Mast: we immediately brought to and sent ashore to enquire the reason,
were told that no order had come down to allow us to pass without which
no ship was ever sufferd to go below that fort. We were now obligd to send
to town to know the reason of such extraordinary behavior, the Answer
came back about 11 that it was a mistake, for the Brigadier had forgot to
send the letter which had been wrote some days: it was however sent by
the boat and we had leave to proceed. We now began to weigh our anchor
which had been droppd in foul ground when we were fird at, but it was
hung so fast in a rock that it could not be got out while the Land breeze
blew, which today continued almost till four in the Even; as soon as the
Sea breeze came we filld our sails and carrying the ship over the anchor
tripd it but were obligd to sail back almost as far as we had towd the ship in
the Morn.

This day and yesterday the air was crowded in an uncommon manner
with Butterflies cheifly of one sort, of which we took as many as we pleasd
on board the ship, their quantity was so large that at some times I may say
many thousands were in view at once in almost any direction you could
look, the greatest part of them much above our mast heads.


1768 December 6.

No land breeze today so we are confind in our disagreable situation
without a possibility of moving: many curses were this day expended on
his excellence.


1768 December 7.

This morn weighd and stood out to sea. As soon as we came to Sta Cruz
the pilot desired to be dischargd and with him our enemy the guard boat
went off, so we were left our own masters and immediately resolved to go
ashore on one of the Islands in the mouth of the harbour: their ran a great
swell but we made shift to land on one calld Raza, on which we gatherd
many species of Plants and some insects. Alstromeria salsilla was here in
tolerable plenty and Amarillis mexicana, they were the most specious
plants; we stayd till about 4 oClock and then came aboard the ship heartily
tired, for the desire of doing as much as we could in a short time had made
us all exert ourselves in a particular manner tho exposd to the hottest rays
of the sun just at noonday.

Now we are got fairly to Sea and have intirely got rid of these
troublesome people I cannot help spending some time in describing them
tho I was not myself once in their town, yet my intelligence coming from
Dr Solander who was, and our Surgeon Mr Monkhouse a very sensible
man who was ashore every day to buy our provisions, I think cannot err
much from truth.

The town of Rio de Janiero the capital of the Portugese dominions in
America situate on the banks of the River of that name, both are call'd I
apprehend from the Roman saint Januarius accord[in]g to the Spanish and
Portugese custom of naming their discoveries from the Saint on whose
feast they are made.

It is regular and well built after the fashion of Portugal, every house
having before its windows a Lattice of wood behind which is a little
balcony. For size it is much larger and I could have thought, probably little
inferior to any of our Countrey towns in England Bristol or Liverpool not
excepted; the streets are all straight intersecting each other at Right angles
and have this peculiar Convenience, that much the greater number lay in
one direction and are commanded by the Gunns of their citadel calld St
Sebastian which is situate on the top of a hill over looking the town.

It is supplyd with water by an aqueduct which brings it from the
neighbouring hills upon two stories of arches, said in some places to be
very high; the water that this brings is conveyd into a fountain in the great
square immediately opposite the Governors palace, which is guarded by a
sentry who has sufficient work to keep regularity and order among so
many as are always in waiting at this place; there is also water laid into
some other part of the town but how it is brought there I could not hear,
only that it was better than the fountain which is exceedingly indifferent, so
much so as not to be likd by us tho we had been two months at sea in
which time our water was almost continualy bad.

The Churches here are very fine dressd out with more ornaments even
than those in Europe, and all parts of their religion is carried on with more
shew; their processions in particular are very extrordinary, every day one
or other of the parishes go in solemn order with all the insignia of their
church, altar, host etc. through their parish, begging for what they can get
and praying in all form at every Corner of a street.

While we were there one of the largest churches in the town was
rebuilding and for that reason the parish belonging to it had leave to walk
through the whole City, which they did once a week and collected much
money for the carrying on of their Edifice: at this ceremony all boys under
a certain age were obligd to attend nor were the gentlemens sons ever
excusd. Each of these were dressd in a Black cassock with a short red
Cloak reaching half way down their shoulders, and carried in his hand a
Lanthorn hung on the End of a pole about 6 or 7 feet long, the light caused
by this (for there were always at least 200 Lights) is greater than can be
imagind; I myself who saw it out of the cabbin windows call[d] together
my mess mates and shewd it to them imagining that the town was on fire.

Besides this traveling religion a man who walks the streets has
opportunity enough to shew his attachment to any saint in the Calendar, for
every corner and almost every house has before it a little cupboard in
which some Saint or other keeps his Residence, and least he should not see
his votaries in the night he is furnishd with a small lamp which hangs
before his little glass window: to these it is very customary to pray and sing
hymns with all the vociferation imaginable, as may be imagind when I say
that I and every one Else in the Ship heard it very distinctly every night tho
we lay at least half a mile from the town.

The Goverment of this place Seems to me to be much more despotick
even than that of Portugal tho many precautions have been taken to render
it otherwise. The Cheif Magistrates are the Viceroy, the Governour of the
town and a Council whose number I could not Learn, but only that the
Viceroy had in this the casting vote: without the consent of this Council
nothing material should be done, yet every day shews that the Viceroy and
Governour at least if not all the rest do the most unjust things without
consulting any one. Puting a man into prison without giving him a hearing
and keeping him there till he is glad at any rate to get out without asking
why he was put in, or at best sending him to Lisbon to be tried there
without letting his family here know where he is gone to, is very common.

This we experien[c]d while here, for every one who had interpreted for our
people, and some who had only assisted in buying provisions for them,
were put into Jail merely I suppose to shew us their power. I should
however except from this one John Burrish an officer in their customs, a
man who has been here 13 years and is so compleatly become a Portugese
that he is known by no other name than Don John: he was of service to our
people, tho what he did was so clogd with a suspicious fear of offending
the Portugese as renderd it disgustfull. It is nescessary that any one who
should Come here should know his Character, which is mercenary tho
contented with a little as the present given to him demonstrated, which
consisted of 1 dozn of beer 10 galls of Brandy 10 peices of ships beef and
as many of Pork: this was what he himself askd for, and sent on board the
Cagg for the spirit and with this he was more than satisfied.

They have a very extrordinary method of keeping people from traveling
--to hinder them I suppose from going into any districk where gold or
diamonds may be found, as there are more of such than they can possibly
guard, which is this: there are certain bounds beyond which no man must
go, these vary every month at the discretion of the Vic[e]roy, sometimes
they are a few sometimes many Leagues Round the City: Every man must
in consequence of this come to town to know where the Bounds are, for if
he is taken by the guards who constantly patrole on their edges he is
infallibly put in prison, even if he is within them, unless he can tell where
they are.

The inhabitants here are very numerous, they consist of Portugese,
negroes, and Indians aborigines of the countrey. The township of Rio,
whose extent I could not learn but was only told that it was but a small part
of the Capitanea or province, is said to contain 37,000 whites and about 17
negroes to each white, which makes their numbers 629,000 and the number
of inhabitants in all 666,000. As for the Indians they do not live in this
neighbourhood tho many of them are always here doing the Kings work,
which they are obligd to do by turns for small pay for which purpose they
come from their habitations at a distance. I saw many of them as the guard
boat was constantly rowd by them, they are of a light copper colour with
long lank black hair; as to their policy or manner of living when at home I
could not learn any thing about it.

The military here consist of 12 regiments of Regulars, 6 Portugese and 6
Creolians and as many of Provincial militia who may be assembled upon
occasion. To the regulars the inhabitants shew great deference, for as Mr
Forster an English Gentleman in their service told me, if any of the people
were not to pull off their hatts when they meet an officer he would
immediately knock them down, which custom renders the people
remarkably Civil to strangers who have at all a gentlemanlike appearance.
All the officers of these regiments are expected three times a day to attend
at the Sala or Viceroys levee, where they formaly ask for commands,
where their constant answer is there is nothing new: this policy is Intended
as I have been told to prevent them from going into the countrey which it
most effectualy does.

This town as well as all others in South America belonging either to
Spanyards or Portugese has long been infamous for the unchastity of its
women; the people who we talkd with here confirmd the accounts
declaring, especialy Mr Forster, that he did not beleive there was one
modest woman in the township, which I must own appeard to me a most
wonderfull assertion but I must take it for granted as I had not even the
least opportunity to go among them. Dr Solander who was ashore declares
however that as soon as it was night the windows were every one furnishd
with one or more women, who as he walkd along with two more gentlemen
gave nosegays to which ever of them each preferrd, which Complement the
gentlemen returnd in kind, notwithstanding which each of them threw
away whole hatfulls of flowers in their walk tho it was not a long one.

Assassinations are I fancy more frequent here than in Lisbon as the
churches still take upon them to give protection to criminals: one accident
of the kind happned in the sight of S. Evans our Cockswain, a man who I
can depend upon, who told me he saw two people talking together to all
appearance in a freindly manner, when one on a sudden drew a knife and
stabbd the other twice and ran away pursued by some negroes who saw the
fact likewise, but what the farther Event of this was I could not learn.

Thus much for the town and its inhabitants. I shall now speak of the
countrey which I know rather more of than of the other as I was ashore one
whole day: in that time I saw much Cleard ground but cheifly of an
indifferent quality, tho doubtless there is such as is very good as the sugar
and tobacco which is sent to Europe from hence plainly testifies; but all
that I saw was employd in Breeding cattle of which they have great plenty,
tho their pastures are the worst I ever saw on account of the shortness of
the grass, and consequently the beef sold in the market tho it is tolerably
cheap is so lean that an Englishman can hardly Eat it. I likewise saw great
plantations of Iatropha manikot, which is calld in the West Indies Cassada
and here Farina de Pao, i.e. wooden meal, a very proper name, for the
cakes they make with it taste as if they were made of Sawdust and yet it is
the only bread which is Eat here--for European bread is sold at nearly the
rate of a shilling a pound, and is also exceeding bad on account of the flour
which is generaly heated in its passage from Europe.

The Countrey produces many more articles but as I did not see them or
hear them mentiond I shall not set them down, tho doubtless it is capable of
bringing any thing that our West India Islands do, notwithstanding this
they have neither Coffee or chocolate but import both from Lisbon.

Their fruits however I must not pass over in Silence, they have several I
shall particularly mention those that were in season while we were there,
which were Pine apples, Melons, water melons, oranges, Limes, Lemons,
sweet Lemons, citrons, Plantanes, Bananes, Mangos, Mamme apples,
acajou apples and nutts, Jamboira, another sort which bears a small black
fruit, Coco nutts, Palm nuts of two kinds, Palm berries. Of these I must
seperately give my opinion, as no doubt it will seem strange to some that I
should assert that I have eat many of them and especialy pine apples better
in England than any I have met with here. Begin then with the pines as the
Fruit from which I expected the most, they being I beleive natives of this
countrey, tho I cannot say I have seen or even heard of their being at this
time wild any where in this neighbourhood: they are cultivated much as we
do cabbages in Europe or rather with less care, the plants being set between
bedds of any kind of garden stuff and sufferd to take their chance, the price
of them in the Market is seldom above and generaly under a vintain which
is 3 halfpence. All that Dr Solander and myself tasted we agreed were
much inferior to those we had eat in England; tho in general they were
more Juicy and sweet yet they had no flavour but were like sugar melted in
water. Their Melins are still worse from the Specimen we had, for we got
but one, which was perfectly mealy and insipid; their water melons
however are very good for they have some little flavour or at least a degree
of acid which ours have not. Oranges are large and very juicy, we thought
them good, doubtless better than any we had tasted at home, but probably
Italy and Portugal produce as good had we been there in the time of their
being in perfection. Lemons and limes are like ours, Sweet Lemons are
sweetish and without flavour, Citrons have a sickly faint taste otherwise
are like them. Mangos were not in perfection but promisd to be a very fine
fruit, they are about the size of a peach, full of a melting yellow pulp not
unlike that of a summer peach which has a very gratefull flavour, but in all
we had it was spoild by a taste of turpentine which I am told is not found in
the ripe ones. Bananas are in shape and size like a small thick sausage,
coverd with a thick yellow rind, which is peeld off and the fruit within is of
a consistence which might be expected from a mixture of Butter and flour
but a little Slimey, its taste is sweet with a little perfume. Plantanes differ
from these in being longer and thinner and having less lusciousness in their
taste: both these fruits were disagreable to most of our people but after
some use I became tolerably fond of them. Acajou or casshou is shapd like
an apple but larger, he taste very disagreab[l]e sourish and bitter, the nut
grows at the top of them. Mamme apples are bigger than a Codlin in
England, Coverd with a deep yellow skin, the pulp on the inside is very
insipid or rather disagreable to the taste, and full of small round seeds
coverd with a thick mucilage which continualy Cloy your mouth. Jamboira
is the same as I saw at Madeira, a fruit calculated more to please the smell
than the taste; the other sort are small and black and resemble much the
taste of our English bilberries. Coco nutts are so well known in England
that I need only say I have tasted as good there as any I met with here.
Palm nutts of two sorts, one long and shapd like dates the other round, both
these are rosted before their kernels are Eatable and Even then they are not
so good a[s] Coco nuts. Palm berries appear much like Black grapes, they
are the fruit of Bactris minor, but for Eating have scarce any pulp covering
a very large stone and what there is has nothing but a light acid to
recommend it. Here are also the fruits of several species of prickle pears
which are very insipid. Of Europaean Fruits I saw apples but very mealy
and insipid and one peach which was also a very bad one.

Tho this Countrey should produce many and very valuable druggs we
could not find any in the apothecarys shops but Pareira Brava and Balsam
Copivi, of both which we bought at excessive cheap prices and had very
good of the sort. I fancy the drug trade is cheifly carried on to the
northward as is that of the Dying woods, at least we could hear nothing of
them here.

For manufactures I know of none carried on here except that of Cotton
hammocks, which are usd for people to be carried about in as we do Sedan
chairs, these are made cheifly by the Indians. But the cheif riches of the
countrey comes from the mines, which are situated far up in the countrey,
indeed no one could tell me how far, for even the situation of them is as
carefully as possible conceald and Troops are continualy employd in
guarding the Roads that lead to them, so that it is next to impossible for
any man to get a sight of them except those who are employd there; at least
no man would attempt it from mere curiosity for every body who is found
on the road without being able to give a good account of himself is hangd
immediately.

From these mines a great quantity of gold certainly comes but it is
purchasd at a vast expence of lives; 40,000 negroes are annualy imported
on the Kings accompt for this purpose, and notwithstanding that the year
before last they dyed so fast that 20,000 more were obligd to be draughted
from the town of Rio.

Pretious stones are also found here in very large quantities, so large that
they do not allow more than a certain quantity to be collected in a year,
which is done thus: a troop of people are sent into the Countrey where they
are found and orderd to return when they have collected a certain quantity,
which they sometimes do in a month more or less, then they return and
after that it is death for any one to be found in the Countrey on any
pretence whatever till the next year.

Diamonds Topazes of several different qualities and amethysts are the
stones that are cheifly found. Of the first I did not see any but was told that
the viceroy had by him large quantities and would sell them on the King of
Portugals account, but in that case they would not be at all cheaper than
those in Europe. Topazes and amethysts I bought a few of for specimens;
the former were divided into three sorts of very different value, Calld here
pinga dogua Qualidade premeiro and segondo, and chrystallos ormerilles;
they were sold large and small good and bad together by octavos or the
eighth part of an ounce, the first sort 4sh:9d; 2[nd sort] 4:0; 3[rd sort] [] .
Amethysts [] [] [] . But it was smugling in the highest degree to have any
thing to do with them formerly there were Jewelers here who wo[r]kd
stones, but about 14 months ago orders came from the Court of Portugal
that no more stones should be wrought here except on his account; the
Jewellers were immediately orderd to bring all their tools to the Viceroy
which they were obligd to do, and from that time to this have not been
sufferd to do any thing for their support. Here are however a number of
slaves who work stones for the King of Portugal.

The Coin current here is either that of Portugal especialy 36 shill peices,
or Coin made here which is much debasd, especialy the silver which are
calld petacks, of which there are two sorts one of less value than the other,
easily distinguishable by the number of rees markd on the outside, but they
are little used; they also have Copper coin like that in Portugal, 5 and 10
rey peices, two of the latter are worth 3 halfpence, 40 petacks are worth 36
shillings.

The harbour of Rio de Janeiro is certainly a very good one: the Entrance
is not wide but the Sea breeze which blows every morning makes it easy
for any ship to go in before the wind, and when you get abreast the town it
increases in breadth prodigiously so that almost any number of ships might
lay in 5 or 6 fathom water oozey bottom. It is defended by many works,
especialy the entrance where it is narrow, there is their strongest
fortification calld Sta Cruz and another opposite it; there is also a platform
mounting about 22 gunns without that just under the Sugar Loaf on the sea
side, but that seems intirely calculated to hinder the Landing of an Enemy
in a sandy bay from whence there is a passage to the back part of the town,
which is intirely void of Defence except that the whole town is open to the
Gunns of the Citadel St Sebastian as I said before. Between Sta Cruz and
the town are several small batteries of 5 to 10 gunns and one pretty large
one calld Berga Leon. Immediately before the town is Ilhoa dos Cobras, an
Island fortified all round, which seems incapable of doing much mischeif
from its immense size, at least it would take more men to defend it even
tolerably in case of an attack than could Possibly be spard from a town
totaly without Lines or any defence round itself. As for Sta Cruz, their
cheif fortification on which they most rely seems very incaple of making
any great resistance if smartly attackd by shipping: it is a stone fort which
mounts many gunns indeed, but they lie tier above tier and are
consequently very open to the atack of a ship which may come within 2
cable lengh's or less of them. Besides they have no supply of water there
but what they have from a cistern in which they catch rain, or in times of
Drouth are supplyd from the adjacent countrey; this they have been obligd
to build above ground Least the water should taint by the heat of the
climate, which a free access of air prevents; a shot consequently which
fortunately should break that cistern would reduce the defenders to the
utmost nescessity.

I was told by a person who certainly knew and I beleive meant to inform
me right, that a little to the southward just without the South head of the
harbour was a bay in which boats might land with all facility without an
obstruction, as there is no kind of work there, and from this bay it is not
above three hours march to the town, which you aproach on the Back part
where it is as defenceless as the Landing place; but this seems incredible
yet I am inclind to beleive it of these people whose cheif policy consists in
hindering people from looking about them as much as possible. It may
therefore be as my informer said that the existence of such a bay is but
lately found out, indeed was it not for that policy I could beleive any thing
of their stupidity and ignorance, when the Governor of the town Brigadier
General Don Pedro de Mendoza y Furtado ask'd the Captain of our ship
whether the transit of Venus which we were going to observe was not the
passing of the North star to the South pole, which he said he always
understood it to be.

The river and indeed the whole coast abounds with greater variety of Fish
than I have ever seen; seldom a day passd in which we had not one or more
new species brought to us, indeed the bay is the most convenient place for
fishing I have ever seen for it abounds with Islands between which there is
shallow water and proper beaches for drawing the Seine. The sea also
without the bay is full of Dolphins and large mackrell of several sorts who
very readily bite at hooks which the inhabitants tow after their boats for
that purpose, in short the Countrey is Capable with a very little industry of
producing infinite plenty both of nesscessaries and luxuries: was it in the
hands of Englishmen we should soon see its consequence, as things are
tolerably plentifull even under the direction of the Portugese, who I take to
be without exception the laziest as well as the most ignorant race in the
whole world.

The Climate here is I fancy very good, the Countrey certainly is very
wholesome, during our whole stay the Thermometer was never above 83.
We had however a good deal of Rain and once it blew very hard. I am
rather inclind to think that this countrey has rather more rain than those in
the same northern Latitude are observd to have, not only from what
happend during our short stay but from Marcgrave who gives us
metereological observations on this Climate for 3 years: you may observe
that it raind here in those years almost every other Day throughout the
year, but more especialy in May and June in which months it raind along
without Ceasing.


1768 December 8.

This morn at day break a dolphin was taken and soon after a shark
appeard who took the bait very readily, and during the time that we were
playing him under the cabbin window it cast something out of his mouth
that either was or appeard very like its stomack, this it threw out and drew
in again many times. I have often heard from seamen that they can do it but
never before saw anything like it before. (this circumstance which by
mistake is attributed to this shark belongs to one taken the 11th).


1768 December 9.

A very heavy swell last night and this morn: we Judge that it has blown
very hard to the Southward and in this particular think ourselves obligd to
the viceroy of Brasil who by his dilatoryness in supplying us kept us out of
it, the swell however carried away our fore top galant mast. The sea is
today coulord with infin[it]e small Particles the same as those seen Novr
7th and laying like them in broad streaks.


1768 December 10.

Today also we see large quantities of the same small particles.


1768 December 11.

This morn took a shark who cast up his stomack when hookd or at least
appears so to do, it proves to be a female and on being opend 6 young ones
were taken out of her, five of which were alive and swam briskly in a tub
of water, the 6th was dead and seemd to have been so for some time.


1768 December 12.

Wind fair today, no events.


1768 December 13.

Fair wind today likewise, at night a squall with thunder and lightning
which made us hoist the Lightning chain.


1768 December 14.

Wind Foul, blew fresh all day, in the evening saw a sail standing to the
northward.


1768 December 15.

Less wind but a great swell.


1768 December 16.

Wind fair.


1768 December 17.

Wind foul, blew rather fresh, so the ship heeld much which made our
affairs go on rather uncomfortably.


1768 December 18.

Calm at night, wind to the northward; we began to feel ourselves rather
cool tho the thermometer was at 76 and shut two of the Cabbin windows,
all which have been open ever since we left Madeira.


1768 December 19.

Charming fair wind and fine weather; the people were employd in
preparing a new suit of sails for the bad weather we are to expect. Therm
70.


1768 December 20.

Fair wind today and rather warmer than it has been. During the course of
last night we had a very heavy squall which tho it did not last above 10
minutes yet in that time blew as hard as it has done since we have been on
board the ship.


1768 December 21.

Foul wind and little of it.


1768 December 22.

This morn quite calm. A very large shoal of Porpoises came close to the
ship, they were of a kind different from any I have seen but so large that I
dared not throw the gig into any of them, some were 4 yards long, their
heads quite round but their hinder parts compressd, they had one fin upon
their backs like a porpoise and white lines over their eyes also a spot of
white behind the fin; they stayd above ½ an hour about the ship. When
they were gone Dr Solander and myself went out in the boat and shot one
species of Mother Careys chickens and two shearwaters, both provd new,
Procellaria Gigantea and sandaliata. The Carey was one but ill describd by
Linnaeus, Procellaria fregata. While we were out the people were
employed in bending the new set of sails for Cape Horn.


1768 December 23.

This morn calm again: went out shooting, killd another new procellaria,
aequorea, and many of the sorts we had seen yesterday; caught Holothuria
angustata, a species of floating helix much smaller than those under the
line, Phyllodoce velella very small, sometimes not so large as a silver
penny ye: I beleive the common species; in the evening went out again,
killd an albatross Diomedaea exulans, who measurd 9 ft 1 inch between the
tipps of his wings, and struck one turtle testudo caretta.


1768 December 24.

Fair wind and steady tho but little of it.


1768 December 25.

Christmas day; all good Christians that is to say all hands get abominably
drunk so that at night there was scarce a sober man in the ship, wind thank
god very moderate or the lord knows what would have become of us.


1768 December 26.

Blows fresh today. A vast many birds are about the ship cheifly
procellarias, all that we shot last week and one more who is quite Black
without spot or speck that can be seen as he flies. Towards even many beds
of seaweed came past the ship which the seamen call rockweek, but none
near enough to the ship for us to catch them tho we were constantly
prepard.


1768 December 27.

Blows strong this evning, at night came to under a balancd mizzen till
day light when it grows more moderate. The water has been discoulerd all
day 50 fathom. All this day I have smelt a singular smell from windward
tho the people in the ship did not take notice of it, it was like rotten
seaweed and at some times very strong.

During the whole of this gale we had many procellarias about the ship,
at some times immense numbers, who seemd perfectly unconcernd at the
badness of the weather or the hight of the sea but continued often flapping
near the surface of the water as if fishing.


1768 December 28.

Less wind, the sea soon falls; the water both yesterday and today has
been a good deal discolourd. Sound and find 48 fathom.


1768 December 29.

Fair wind, water very white, sounded 46 fathom, about 4 in the Even 44.
We observd now some feathers and peices of reed to float by the ship
which made us get up the hoave net to see what they were; soon after some
drowned Carabi and Phalaenae came past which we took and employd the
hoave till dark night taking many specimens. Lat. 41:48. This morn a large
sphinx [] came off probably from the land and was taken.


1768 December 30.

This morn fine weather, water whiter than ever almost of a clay colour;
sounded 47 fathom. Plenty of insects passd by this morn, many especialy
of the carabi, alive, some grylli and one Phalaena. I stayd in the main
chaians from 8 till 12 dipping for them with the hoave and took vast
numbers. In the evening Many Phalenae and two papilios came flying
about the ship, of the first took about 20 but the last would not come near
enough to be taken and at last flew away; they appeard Large. We have
also both yesterday and today taken several Ichneumons flying about the
rigging. All the seamen say that we cannot be less than 20 leagues from the
land, but I doubt Grylli especialy coming so far alive as they must float all
the way upon the water. They ground their opinion cheifly on the sounding
[s] which have been all along sand of different colours, which had we been
nearer the land would have been intermixd with shells; their experience on
this coast must however be but slight.

This whole day the evening especialy has been a series of calms and
squalls, towards night a thunderstorm in which the lightning was
remarkably bright, and rangd in long streaks sometimes horizontal and
sometimes perpendicular, the thunder was not loud but continued an
immence while with a noise in some claps so like the flapping of sails that
had I not been upon dcek I should not have beleivd it to be thunder. Just
before the storm we had an appearance of land to the westward which all
who had not been in these latitudes before imagind to be real; it made like
a long extent of lowish land and two Islands to the Northward of it, the
South end was buried in the clouds; this lasted about ½ an hour and then
rose gradualy up and disapeard.

Lat. 42:31. A sea lion was enterd in the log book of today as being seen
but I did not see him. I saw however a whale coverd with barnacles as the
seamen told me, he appeard of a reddish colour except his tail which was
black like those to the Northward.


1768 December 31.

No insects seen today; the water changed to a little better colour. On
looking over those taken yesterday find 31 species of land insects all so
like in size and shape to those of England etc. that they are scarcely
distinguishable, probably some will turn out identicaly the same. We ran
among them 160 miles by the log without reckoning any part of last night,
tho they were seen till dark, and most of this southing. Our latitude made
us nearly opposite Baye Sans Fond near which place Mr Dalrymple
supposes there to be a passage quite through the Continent of America. It
should seem by what we have seen that there should be at least a very large
river, and that probably at this time much flooded: if even that could have
so great an effect as (supposing us to be 20 leagues from the land)
discolouring the water to almost a clay Colour and bringing of insects who
never fly 20 yards such as grylli and one aranea.

I lament much not having tasted the water at the time which never
occurrd to me, but probably the difference of saltness would have been
hardly perceptible to the taste and my Hydrostatick balance being broke I
had no other method of trying it.


1769 January 1.

New years day today made us pass many Compts and talk much of our
hopes for success in the year 69. Many whales were about the ship today
and much sea weed in large lumps but none near enough to be caught.

In the Evening rather squally; the true sea green colour upon the surface
of the water was often to be seen now between the squalls, or rather under
the black clouds when they were about half a mile from the ship. I had
often heard of it before but never seen it in any such perfection, indeed
most of the seamen said the same, it was very bright and perfectly like the
stone calld aquamarine.


1769 January 2.

Fresh breezes today. In the Evening, Lat. about 45:30, met with some
small shoals of the red lobsters which have been seen by almost every one
who has pass'd these seas. They were however so far from couloring the
sea red as Dampier and Cowley say that I may affirm that we never saw
more than a few hundreds of them at a time, we took however several in
the Casting and hoave netts and describd them by the name of Cancer
Gregarius.


1769 January 3.

Lat: 47:17, all hands looking out for Pepys's Island; about observing time
an appearance was seen to the westward so like an Island that we bear
away after it almost assurd that it is Land as the midshipman at the mast
head declard; for half an hour, which time he had steadily lookd at it, it did
not alter its appearance at all, however about 4 we were convincd that we
were in chace of Cape fly away as the seamen call it, no signs of Island or
any thing else appearing where it ought to have been.

This Evening many large bunches of sea weed came by the ship; we
caught some of it with hooks, it was of an immense size every leaf 4 feet
long and the stalk about twelve, the footstalk of each leaf was swelld into a
long air vessel. Mr Gore tells me that he has seen this weed grow quite to
the top of the water in 12 fathom, if so the swelld footstalks are probably
the trumpet grass or weed of the Cape of Good Hope; we describd it
however as it appeard and calld it Fucus Giganteus. Here were also this
Evening large quantities of a small bird somewhat like Mother Careys
chickens but rather larger and grey on the back, and plenty of Albatrosses
indeed we have seen more or less of them every day for some time.


1769 January 4.

Blew fresh today and night: the officer of the watch told me that in the
night the sea was very much illuminated in patches of many Yards wide
which appeard of a pale light colour.


1769 January 5.

Fair wind: the sea very light at night more so than ever I had seen it, so
that the ships course and every curl of a wave was of a light colour, but
none of the light patches seen last night were now observd, which were
cheifly remarkable as the animals there must have shone without being
agitated. In some of the water taken up observd a small insect of a conical
figure, very nimble, who movd himself with a kind of whorl of legs or
tentacula round the base of the cone; we could not find any nereides or
indeed any other insect than this in the water but were not able to prove
that he causes the light so deferrd our observations on him till the morning.


1769 January 6.

Blew fresh foul wind, forcd to throw away the insects taken last night
from the ship having so much motion. The Southeast wind now became
very cold, to us at least so lately come from the Torrid Zone. Therm at
noon 48. All hands bend their Magellan Jackets (made of a thick woolen
stuff allowd them by the goverment calld fearnought) and myself put on
flannel Jacket and waistcoat and thick trousers. In the Evening blew strong,
at night a hard gale, ship brought too under a mainsail; during the course of
this my Bureau was overset and most of the books were about the Cabbin
floor, so that with the noise of the ship working, the books etc. running
about, and the strokes our cotts or swinging beds gave against the top and
sides of the Cabbin we spent a very disagreable night. We this morn
expected to have made Falklands Islands where we intended to put in for a
small time, so the missing of them which we much fear was a great
disapointment to me, as I fear I shall not now have a single oppertunity of
observing the produce of this part of the world.


1769 January 7.

Blew strong, yet the ship still Laying too, now for the first time saw some
of the Birds calld Penguins by the southern navigators; they seem much of
the size and not unlike alca pica but are easily known by streaks upon their
faces and their remarkably shrill cry different from any sea bird I am
acquainted with. We saw also several seals but much smaller than those
which I have seen in Newfoundland and black, they generaly appeard in
lively action leaping out of the water like porpoises, so much so that some
of our people were deceivd by them mistaking them for fish.

About noon weather much more moderate; set the lower sails; before
night sea quite down tho the wind still stood at south east. The sea rises
and falls quicker in these latitudes than it does about England, which we
have observd Ever since we came into variable winds way to the South of
the tropicks. During this whole gale we observed vast plenty of birds about
us, Procellarias of all the kinds we have before mentiond, the grey ones of
the 3d of this month and a kind? all black, procell. aquinoctialis? Linn. but
could not discern whether or not their beaks were yellow, and plenty of
Albatrosses; indeed I have generaly observd a much greater quantity of
birds upon wing in gales of wind than in moderate weather, owing perhaps
to the tossing of the waves which must render swimming very uneasy; in
this situation they must be oftener seen than when they set on the water.

The ship during this gale has shewn her excellence in laying too
remarkably well, shipping scarce any water tho it blew at times vastly
strong; the seamen in general say that they never knew a ship lay too so
well as this does, so lively and at the same time so easy.


1769 January 8.

Smooth water and fair wind: many Seals and Penguins about the ship, the
latter leaping out of the water and diving instantly so that a person unusd to
them might easily be deceivd and take them for fish; plenty also of
Albatrosses and whales blowing very near the ship. We were now too sure
that we had missd Fauklands Islands and probably were to the Westward of
them.

The ship has been observd to go much better since her shaking in the last
gale of wind, the seamen say that it is a general observation that ships go
better for being what they call Loosnen in their Joints, so much so that in
chase it is often customary to knock down Stantions etc. and make the ship
as loose as possible.


1769 January 9.

Clouds to the westward appear so like land this morn that even our first
Lieutenant who prided himself on His judgement in this particular was
deceivd. Wind vereable and calmer, many seals and some Albatrosses but
none of those whitish birds which we saw in the gale of wind.


1769 January 10.

Fine weather: Seals plentifully today and a kind of birds different from
any we have before seen, they were black and a little larger than pidgeons,
plump like them and easily known by their flapping their wings quick as
they fly contrary to the custom of sea birds in general. This evening a shoal
of Porpoises swam by the ship different from any I have seen, spotted with
large dabbs of white and white under the belly, in other respects as
swimming etc. like common porpoises only they leap rather more nimbly,
sometimes lifting their whole bodys out of the water.


1769 January 11.

This morn at day break saw the land of Terra del Fuego, by 8 O'Clock we
were well in with it, the weather exceedingly moderate. Its appearance was
not near so barren as the writer of Ld Ansons voyage has represented it, the
weather exceedingly moderate so we stood along shore about 2 Leagues
off, we could see trees distinctly through our glasses and observe several
smokes made probably by the natives as a signal to us. The captain now
resolved to put in here if he can find a conv[en]ient harbour and give us an
opportunity of searching a countrey so intirely new.

The hills within land seemd to be high and on them were many patches
of snow, but the sea coast appeard fertile especialy the trees of a bright
verdure, except in places exposd to SW wind which were distinguishable
by their brown appearance; the shore itself sometimes beach and
sometimes rock. At 4 in the evening wind came on shore so stood off.


1769 January 12.

This morn make the land again soon after which it dropd calm, in which
time we took Beroe incrassata, Medusa limpidissima and plicata and
obliquata, Alcyonium anguillare, probably the thing that Shelvocke
mentions in his Voyage round the world page 60, Alcyonium frustrum.
After dinner a small breeze sprung up and to our great Joy we discoverd an
opening into the land and stood in for it in great hopes of finding a harbour;
however after having ran within a mile of the shore were obliged to stand
off again as there was no appearance of shelter and the wind was on shore.

When we were nearest in we could plainly discover with our glasses
spots in which the colour of white and yellow were predominant which we
judg'd to be flowers, the white were in large clusters almost every where,
the yellow in small spots or patches on the side of a hill coverd with a
beautifull verdure; the trees could now be distinguishd very plainly and
seemd to be 30 or 40 feet high with flat bushy tops, their trunks in many
places were bare and resembled rocks a good deal till the glasses cleard up
the deception.

Among the things taken today observd ulva intestinalis and corrallina
officin[alis]. The wind very vereable all day, at nine this even the Three
Brothers and Sugar Loaf were in sight and we stood gently along shore in
hopes to be at the streights mouth by the Morning.

About 6 this even the gentlemen upon deck observd the Sugar Loaf
coverd with a cloud for a short time which left it intirely white, they judgd
it to have been a fall of snow upon the hill but as I did not myself see it I
cannot give my opinion.


1769 January 13.

This morn at day break we were at the streights mouth and stood in a
little way, but the tide turning against us soon set us out again; at ½ past 8
tide again turnd in our favour but soon after wind came foul so were forcd
to turn to windward; the wind soon freshning made us pitch most violently,
so much that our Gib netting was quite under water. At 12 today Lat:
54:42. Staten land is much more craggy than Terra del Fuego tho the view
of it in Ld Ansons Voyage is exaggerated. About 4 it blew very hard and
the tide turning against us quickly drove us out of the streights the second
time. At night less wind tho still South West, stood into the Streights the
third time and had another violent pitching bout, the tide turnd against us
before we are half through so in the morning.


1769 January 14.

we found ourselves the third time drove out, wind SSW, Short sea and
ship pitching most violently. The Captn stood into a bay just without Cape
St Vincent and while the ship plyd off and on Dr Solander and myself went
ashore in the boat and found many plants, about 100, tho we were not
ashore above 4 hours; of these I may say every one was new and intirely
different from what either of us had before seen. The countrey about this
bay was in general flat, here is however good wood and water and vast
plenty of fowl and in the cod of the bay a flat coverd with grass where
much hay might be made. The bay itself is bad affording but little shelter
for shipping and in many Parts of it the bottom rocky and foul. This
however may be always known in these Countreys by the beds of Fucus
Giganteus which constantly grow upon the rock and are not seen on sand
or owse; they are of an immence lengh, we sounded upon them and had 14
fathom water; as they seem to make a very acute angle with the bottom in
their situation on the water it is difficult to guess how long they may be,
but probably they are not less than one half longer than the depth of the
water, which gives their lengh to be 126 feet, a wonderfull lengh for a stalk
not thicker than a mans thumb.

Among other things the bay affords there is plenty of winters bark, easy
to be known by its broad leaf like a laurel of a light green colour and
blueish underneath, the bark is easily stripd off with a bone or stick as ours
are barkd in England; its virtues are so well known that I shall say little
except that it may be us'd as a spice even in culinary matters and is found
to be very wholesome. Here is also plenty of wild celery apium
antescorbuticum, scurvy grass cardamine antescorbutica, both which are as
pleasant to the taste as any herbs of the kind found in Europe and I beleive
possess as much virtue in curing the scurvy.

The trees here are cheifly of one sort, a Kind of Birch Betula antarctica
with very small leaves, it is a light white wood and cleaves very straight;
sometimes the trees are 2 or 3 feet in diameter and run 30 or 40 feet in the
bole; possibly they might in cases of nescessity supply topmasts. Here are
also great plenty of cranberries both white and red, Arbutus rigida.
Inhabitants I saw none but found their hutts in two places, once in a thick
wood and again close by the beach; they are most unartificaly made,
Conical but open on one side where was marks of fire so that probably the
fire servd them instead of a door.


1769 January 15.

Stopd tide this morn in a bay on the Terra del Fuego side of the water,
probably Prince Maurice's Bay, which servd our purpose very well; at 10
tide turnd and we stood out and by dinner came to an anchor in the Bay of
Good Success. Several Indians were in sight near the Shore.

After dinner went ashore on the starboard side of the bay near some
rocks which make smooth water and good landing. Before we had walkd
100 yards many Indians made their appearance on the other side of the bay,
at the End of a sandy beach which makes the bottom of the bay, but on
seeing our numbers to be ten or twelve they retreated. Dr Solander and
myself then walkd forward 100 yards before the rest and two of the Indians
advanc'd also and set themselves down about 50 yards from their
companions. As soon as we came up they rose and each of them threw a
stick he had in his hand away from him and us, a token no doubt of peace,
they then walkd briskly towards the other party and wavd to us to follow,
which we did and were receivd with many uncouth signs of freindship. We
distributed among them a number of Beads and ribbands which we had
brought ashore for that purpose at which they seem'd mightily pleasd, so
much so that when we embarkd again aboard our boat three of them came
with us and went aboard the ship. Of these one seemd to be a Preist or
conjuror or at least we thought him to be one by the noises he made,
possibly exorcising every part of the ship he came into, for when any thing
new caught his attention he shouted as loud as he could for some minutes
without directing his speech either to us or to any one of his countreymen.

They eat bread and beef which we gave them tho not heartily but carried
the largest part away with them, they would not drink either wine or spirits
but returnd the glass, tho not before they had put it to their mouths and
tasted a drop; we conducted them through the greatest part of the ship and
they lookd at every thing without any marks of extrordinary admiration,
unless the noise which our conjurer did not fail to repeat at every new thing
he saw might be reckond as such.

After having been aboard about 2 hours they expressd a desire of going
ashore and a boat was orderd to carry them. I went with them and landed
them among their countreymen, but I can not say that I observd either the
one party curious to ask questions or the other to relate what they had seen
or what usage they had met with, so after having stayd ashore about ½ an
hour I returnd to the ship and the Indians immediately marchd off from the
shore.


1769 January 16.

This morn very early Dr Solander and myself with our servants and two
Seamen to assist in carrying baggage, accompanied by Msrs Monkhouse
and Green, set out from the ship to try to penetrate into the countrey as far
as we could, and if possible gain the tops of the hills where alone we saw
places not overgrown with trees. We began to enter the woods at a small
sandy beach a little to the westward of the watering place and continued
pressing through pathless thickets, always going up hill, till 3 o'Clock
before we gaind even a near view of the places we intended to go to. The
weather had all this time been vastly fine much like a sunshiny day in May,
so that neither heat nor cold was troublesome to us nor were there any
insects to molest us, which made me think the traveling much better than
what I had before met with in Newfoundland.

Soon after we saw the plains we arrivd at them, but found to our great
disapointment that what we took for swathe was no better than low bushes
of birch about reaching a mans middle; these were so stubborn that they
could not be bent out of the way, but at every step the leg must be lifted
over them and on being plac'd again on the ground was almost sure to sink
above the anckles in bog. No traveling could possibly be worse than this
which seemd to last about a mile, beyond which we expected to meet with
bare rock, for such we had seen from the tops of lower hills as we came:
this I particularly was infinitely eager to arrive at expecting there to find
the alpine plants of a countrey so curious. Our people tho rather fatigued
were yet in good spirits so we pushd on intending to rest ourselves as soon
as we should arrive at plain ground.

We proceeded two thirds of the way without the least difficulty and I
confess I thought for my own part that all difficulties were surmounted
when Mr Buchan fell into a fit. A fire was immediately lit for him and with
him all those who were most tird remaind behind, while Dr Solander Mr
Green Mr Monkhouse and myself advancd for the alp which we reachd
almost immediately, and found according to expectation plants which
answerd to those we had found before as alpine ones in Europe do to those
which we find in the plains.

The air was here very cold and we had frequent snow blasts. I had now
intirely given over all thoughts of reaching the ship that night and though[t]
of nothing but getting into the thick of the wood and making a fire, which
as our road lay all down hill seemd very easy to accomplish, so Msrs Green
and Monkhouse returnd to the people and appointed a hill for our general
rendevous from whence we should proceed and build our wigwam. The
cold now increased apace, it might be near 8 O'Clock tho yet exceedingly
good daylight so we proceeded for the nearest valley, where the short
Birch, the only thing we now dreaded, could not be ½ a mile over. Our
people seemd well tho cold and Mr Buchan was stronger than we could
have expected. I undertook to bring up the rear and se[e] that no one was
left behind. We passd about half way very well when the cold seemd to
have at once an effect infinitely beyond what I have ever experienced. Dr
Solander was the first who felt it, he said he could not go any fa[r]ther but
must lay down, tho the ground was coverd with snow, and down he laid
notwithstanding all I could say to the contrary. Richmond a black Servant
now began also to lag and was much in the same way as the dr: at this
Juncture I dispatchd 5 forwards of whom Mr Buchan was one to make
ready a fire at the very first convenient place they could find, while myself
with 4 more staid behind to persuade if possible the dr and Richmond to
come on. With much persuasion and intreaty we got through much the
largest part of the Birch when they both gave out; Richmond said that he
could not go any further and when told that if he did not he must be Froze
to death only answerd that there he would lay and dye; the Dr on the
contrary said that he must sleep a little before he could go on and actualy
did full a quarter of an hour, at which time we had the welcome news of a
fire being lit about a quarter of a mile ahead. I then undertook to make the
Dr Proceed to it; finding it impossible to make Richmond stir left two
hands with him who seemd the least affected with Cold, promising to send
two to releive them as soon as I should reach the fire. With much difficulty
I got the Dr to it and as soon as two people were sufficiently warmd sent
them out in hopes that they would bring Richmond and the rest; after
staying about half an hour they returnd bringing word that they had been
all round the place shouting and hallowing but could not get any answer.
We now guess'd the cause of the mischeif, a bottle of rum the whole of our
stock was missing, and we soon concluded that it was in one of their
Knapsacks and that the two who were left in health had drank
immoderately of it and had slept like the other.

For two hours now it had snowd almost incessantly so we had little hopes
of seeing any of the three alive: about 12 however to our great Joy we
heard a shouting, on which myself and 4 more went out immediately and
found it to be the Seaman who had wakd almost starvd to death and come a
little way from where he lay. Him I sent back to the fire and proceeded by
his direction to find the other two, Richmond was upon his leggs but not
able to walk the other lay on the ground as insensible as a stone. We
immediately calld all hands from the fire and attempted by all the means
we could contrive to bring them down but finding it absolutely impossible,
the road was so bad and the night so dark that we could scarcely ourselves
get on nor did we without many Falls. We would then have lit a fire upon
the spot but the snow on the ground as well as that which continualy fell
renderd that as impracticable as the other, and to bring fire from the other
place was also impossible from the quantity of snow which fell every
moment from the branches of the trees; so we were forc'd to content
ourselves with laying out our unfortunate companions upon a bed of
boughs and covering them over with boughs also as thick as we were able,
and thus we left them hopeless of ever seeing them again alive which
indeed we never did.

In these employments we had spent an hour and a half expos'd to the
most penetrating cold I ever felt as well as continual snow. Peter Briscoe,
another servant of mine, began now to complain and before we came to the
fire became very ill but got there at last almost dead with cold.

Now might our situation truely be calld terrible: of twelve our original
number 2 were already past all hopes, one more was so ill that tho he was
with us I had little hopes of his being able to walk in the morning, and
another very likely to relapse into his fitts either before we set out or in the
course of our journey: we were distant from the ship we did not know how
far, we knew only that we had been the greatest past of a day in walking it
through pathless woods: provision we had none but one vulture which had
been shot while we were out, and at the shortest allowance could not
furnish half a meal: and to compleat our misfortunes we were caught in a
snow storm in a climate we were utterly unaquainted with but which we
had reason to beleive was as inhospitable as any in the world, not only
from all the accounts we had heard or read but from the Quantity of snow
which we saw falling, tho it was very little after midsummer: a
circumstance unheard of in Europe for even in Norway or Lapland snow is
never known to fall in the summer.


1769 January 17.

The Morning now dawnd and shewd us the earth coverd with snow as
well as all the tops of the trees, nor were the snow squalls at all less
Frequent for seldom many minutes were fair together; we had no hopes
now but of staying here as long as the snow lasted and how long that would
be God alone knew.

About 6 O'Clock the sun came out a little and we immediately thought of
sending to see whether the poor wretches we had been so anzious about
last night were yet alive, three of our people went but soon returnd with the
melancholy news of their being both dead. The snow continued to fall tho
not quite so thick as it had done; about 8 a small breeze of wind sprung up
and with the additional power of the sun began (to our great Joy) to clear
the air, and soon after we saw the snow begin to fall from the tops of the
trees, a sure sign of an aproaching thaw. Peter continued very ill but said
he thought himself able to walk. Mr Buchan thank god was much better
than I could have expected, so we agreed to dress our vulture and prepare
ourselves to set out for the ship as soon as the snow should be a little more
gone off: so he was skinnd and cut into ten equal shares, every man
cooking his own share which furnishd about 3 mouthfulls of hot meat, all
the refreshment we had had since our cold dinner yesterday and all we
were to expect till we should come to the ship.

About ten we set out and after a march of about 3 hours arrivd at the
beach,, fortunate in having met with much better roads in our return than
we did in going out, as well as in being nearer to the ship than we had any
reason to hope; for on reviewing our track as well as we could from the
ship we found that we had made a half circle round the hills, instead of
penetrating as we thought we had done into the inner part of the cuntrey.
With what pleasure then did we congratulate each other on our safety no
one can tell who has not been in such circumstances.


1769 January 18.

Peter was very ill today and Mr Buchan not at all well, the rest of us
thank god in good health tho not yet recoverd from our fatigue.

It blew fresh without and made such a heaving swell in the bay that no
one could go ashore and even the ship was very uncumfortable, rolling so
much that one could scarcely stand without holding.


1769 January 19.

The swell still continued and we were again hinderd from going ashore
tho the loss of two days out of the short time we had to stay here made the
Dr and myself ready to venture any risk. The officer who was sent to
attempt landing returnd bringing word that it was absolutely impossible
without great danger of staving the boat, if even that would do. Both
yesterday and today a good deal of snow fell in squalls.


1769 January 20.

Last night the weather began to moderate And this morn was very fine,
so much so that we landed without any difficulty in the bottom of the bay
and spent our time very much to our satisfaction in collecting shells and
plants. Of the former we found some very scarce and fine particularly
limpits of several species: of these we observd as well as the shortness of
our time would permit that the limpit with a longish hole at the top of his
shell is inhabited by an animal very different from those which have no
such holes. Here were also some fine whelks, one particularly with a long
tooth, and infinite variety of Lepades, Sertularias, Onisci etc. etc. etc. much
greater variety than I have any where seen, but the shortness of our time
would not allow us to examine them so we were obligd to content
ourselves with taking specimens of as many of them as we could in so
short a time scrape together.

We returnd on board to dinner and afterwards went into the Countrey
about two miles to see an Indian town which some of our people had given
us intelligence of; we arrived at it in about an hour walking through a path
which I suppose was their common road tho it was sometimes up to our
knees in mud. The town itself was situate upon a dry Knowl among the
trees, ,which were not at all cleard away, it consisted of not more than
twelve or fourteen huts or wigwams of the most unartificial construction
imaginable, indeed no thing bearing the name of a hut could possibly be
built with less trouble. They consisted of a few poles set up and meeting
together at the top in a conical figure, these were coverd on the weather
side with a few boughs and a little grass, on the lee side about one eighth
part of the circle was left open and against this opening was a fire made.
Furniture I may justly say they had none: a little, very little dry grass laid
round the edges of the circle furnishd both beds and chairs, and for
dressing their shell Fish (the only provision I saw them make use of) they
had no one contrivance but broiling them upon the Coals. For drinking
indeed I saw in a corner of one of their hutts a bladder of some beast full of
water: in one side of this near the top was a hole through which they drank
by elevating a little the bottom which made the water spring up into their
mouths.

In these few hutts and with this small share or rather none at all of what
we call the nescessaries and conveniences of life livd about 50 men women
and children, to all appearance contented with what they had nor wishing
for any thing we could give them except beads; of these they were very
fond preferring ornamental things to those which might be of real use and
giving more in exchange for a string of Beids than they would for a knife
or a hatchet.

As this is to be the last time of our going ashore on this Island I take this
opportunity to give an account of such things the shortness of my stay
allowd me to observe.

Notwithstanding almost all writers who have mentiond this Island have
imputed to it a want of wood, soon after we first saw it even at the distance
of some leagues, we plainly distinguish'd that the largest part of the
countrey particularly near the sea coast was coverd with wood, which
observation was verified in both the bays we put into, in either of which
firing might have been got close by the beach in any quantity, and some
trees which to all appearance might be fit for repairing a vessel or even in
case of necessity to make masts.

The hills are high tho not to be calld mountains, the tops of these
however are quite bare and on them frequent patches of snow were to be
seen, tho the time of the year when we were there answerd to the beginning
of July in England. In the valleys between these the Soil has much the
appearance of Fruitfullness and is in some places of a considerable depth;
at the bottom of almost every one of these runs a brook the water of which
in general has a reddish Cast like that which runs through turf bogs in
England but is very well tasted.

Quadrupeds I saw none in the Island, exept the Seals and Sea lions which
we often saw swimming about in the bay might be calld such, but Dr
Solander and myself when we were on the top of the highest hill we were
upon observ'd the footsteps of a large beast imprinted on the surface of a
bog, but could not with any probability guess of what kind it might be.

Land birds there are very Few. I saw none larger than an English
blackbird except hawks and a vulture, but water fowl are much more
plentyfull; in the first bay we were in I might have shot any quantity of
ducks or geese but would not spare the time from gathering plants. In the
other we shot some but probably the Indians in the neighbourhood had
made them shy as well as much less plentiful, at least so we found them.

Fish we saw few nor could with our hooks take any fit to eat. Shell fish
however are in the greatest abundance, limpits, muscles, Clams etc. none
of them delicate yet such as they were we did not despise them.

Insects there are very few and not one species either hurtfull or
troublesome; all the time we have been here we have seen neither gnat nor
musqueto a circumstance which few if any uncleard countrey but this can
boast of.

Of Plants here are many species and those truly the most extrordinary I
can imagine, in stature and appearance they agree a good deal with the
Europaean ones only in general are less specious, white flowers being
much more common among them than any other colours. But to speak of
them botanicaly, probably No botanist has ever enjoyd more pleasure in
the contemplation of his Favourite pursuit than Dr Solander and myself
among these plants; we have not yet examind many of them, but what we
have have turnd out in general so intirely different from any before
describd that we are never tird with wondering at the infinite variety of
Creation, and admiring the infinite care with which providence has
multiplied his productions suiting them no doubt to the various climates for
which they were designd. Trees here are very Few, Birch Betula antarctica,
Beach Fagus antarcticus, winters bark Winterana aromatica, the two first
for timber the other for its excellent aromatick bark so much valued by
Physicians are all worth mentioning; and of Plants we could not ascertain
the virtues not being able to converse with the Indians who may have
experiencd them, but the Scurvy grass Cardamine antescorbutica and wild
Celery Apium antarcticum may easily be known to contain antescorbutick
virtues capable of being of great service to ships who may in futurity touch
here. Of these two therefore I shall give a short description. Scurvy grass is
found plentifully in damp places near springs, in general every where near
the beach especialy at the watering place in the Bay of Good Success;
when young and in its greatest perfection it lays flat on the ground, having
many bright green leaves standing in pairs opposite each other with an odd
one at the end which makes in general the 5th on a footstalk; after this it
shoots up in stalks sometimes 2 feet high at the top of which are small
white blosoms which are succeeded by long podds. The whole plant much
resembles that that is calld Ladys Smock or Cuckold flower in England
only that the flowers are much smaller. Wild Celery resembles much the
Celery in our gardens only that the leaves are of a deeper green, the flowers
like it stand in small tufts at the tops of the Branches and are white; it
grows plentifully near the Beach, generaly in the first soil which is above
spring tides, and is not easily mistaken as the taste resembles Celery or
parsley or rather is between. Both these herbs we us'd plentifully while we
stayd here putting them in our soup etc., and found the benefit from them
which seamen in general find from vegetable diet after having been long
deprivd of it.

The inhabitants we saw here seemd to be one small tribe of Indians
consisting of not more than 50 of all ages and sexes. They are of a reddish
Colour nearly resembling that of rusty iron mixd with oil: the men large
built but very clumsey, their hight from 5ft 8 to 5ft 10 nearly and all very
much of the same size, the women much less seldom exceeding 5ft. Their
Cloaths are no more than a kind of cloak of Guanicoe or seal skin thrown
loose over their shoulders and reaching down nearly to their knees; under
this they have nothing at all nor any thing to cover their feet, except a few
of them had shoes of raw seal hide drawn loosely round their instep like a
purse. In this dress there is no distinction between men and women, except
that the latter have their cloak tied round their middle with a kind of belt or
thong and a small flap of leather hanging like Eve's fig leaf over those parts
which nature teaches them to hide; which precept tho she has taught to
them she seems intirely to have omitted with the men, for they continualy
expose those parts to the view of strangers with a carelessness which
thoroughly proves them to have no regard to that kind of decency.

Their ornaments of which they are extreemly fond consist of necklaces or
rather Solitaires of shells and braceletts which the women wear both on
their wrists and legs, the men only on their wrists, but to compensate for
the want of the other they have a kind of wreath of brown worsted which
they wear over their Foreheads so that in reality they are more ornamented
than the women.

They paint their faces generaly in horizontal lines just under their eyes
and sometimes make the whole region of their eyes white, but these marks
are so much varied that no two we saw were alike: whether as marks of
distinction or mere ornaments I could not at all make out.

They seem also to paint themselves with something like a mixture of
grease and soot for particular occasions, as when we went to their town
there came two out to meet us who were dawb'd with black lines all
manner of ways so as to form the most diabolical countenance imaginable,
and these two seemd to exorcise us or at least made a loud and long
harangue which did not seem to be address'd either to us or any of their
countreymen.

Their language is guttural especialy in some particular words which they
seem to express much as an Englishman when he hawks to clear his throat,
but they have many words that sound soft enough. During our stay among
them I could learn but two of their words, Nalleca which signified beads, at
least so they always said when they wanted them instead of the ribbands or
other trifles which I offerd them, and oouda which signified water, or so
they said when we took them ashore from the ship and by signs ask'd
where water was: oouda was their answer, making the sign of drinking and
pointing to our casks as well as to the place where we put them ashore and
found plenty of water.

Of Civil goverment I saw no signs, no one seemd to be more respected
than another nor did I ever see the least appearance of Quarreling or words
between any two of them. Religion also they seemd to be without, unless
those people who made strange noises that I have mentiond before were
preists or exorcisers which opinion is merely conjectural.

Their food at least what we saw them make use of was either Seals or
shell fish. How they took the former we never saw but the latter were
collected by the women, whose business it seemd to be to attend at low
water with a basket in one hand, a stick with a point and barb in the other,
and a satchel on their backs which they filld with shell fish, loosning the
limpits with the stick and putting them into the basket which when full was
emty'd into the satchel.

Their arms consisted of Bows and arrows, the former neatly enough
made the latter neater than any I have seen, polishd to the highest degree
and headed either with glass or flint very neatly; but this was the only neat
thing they had and the only thing they seemd to take any pains about. Their
houses which I have describd before are the most miserable ones
imaginable and furniture they have none.

That these people have before had intercourse with Europaeans was very
plain from many instances: first from the Europaean Commodities of
which we saw Sail Cloth, Brown woolen Cloth, Beads, nails, Glass etc.,
and of them especialy the last (which they used for pointing their arrows) a
considerable quantity; from the confidence they immediately put in us at
our first meeting tho well acquainted with our superiority; and from the
knowledge they had of the use of our guns which they very soon shewd,
making signs to me to shoot a seal who was following us in the boat which
carried them ashore from the ship. They probably travel and stay but a
short time at a place, so at least it should seem from the badness of their
houses which seem intirely built to stand but for a short time; from their
having no kind of household furniture but what has a handle adapted to it
either to be carried in the hand or on the back; from the thinness of their
Cloathing which seems little calculated even to bear the summers of this
countrey much less the winters; from their food of shell fish which must
soon be exhausted at any one place; and from the deserted huts we saw in
the first bay we came to where people had plainly been but a short time
before, probably this spring.

Boats they had none with them but as they were not sea sick or
particularly affected when they came onboard our ship, possibly they might
be left at some bay or inlet which passes partly but not all the way through
this Island from the Streights of Magellan, from which place I should be
much inclind to beleive these people have come as so few ships before us
have anchord upon any part of Terra del Fuego.

Their dogs which I forgot to mention seem also to indicate a commerce
had some time or other with Europaeans, they being all of the kind that
bark, contrary to what has been observd of (I beleive) all dogs natives of
America.

The weather here has been very uncertain tho in general extreemly bad:
every day since the first more or less snow has fallen and yet the glass has
never been below 38: unseasonable as this weather seems to be in the
middle of summer I am inclind to think it is generaly so here, for none of
the plants appear at all affected by it, and the insects who hide themselves
during the time a snow blast lasts are the instant it is fair again as lively
and nimble as the finest weather could make them.


1769 January 21.

Saild this morn, the wind Foul, but our keeping boxes being full of new
plants we little regarded any wind provided it was but moderate enough to
let the draughtsmen work, who to do them justice are now so used to the
sea that it must blow a gale of wind before they leave off.


1769 January 22.

Weather pleasant but a little cold wind came to the Northward and we get
a little westing.


1769 January 23.

At day break this morn there was land almost all round us, which we
judged to be Terra del Fuego not far from the streights and attributed the
little way we had made to the streng[t]h of the current setting us to the
Eastward. Our old Freind the Sugar Loaf was now in sight who seemd to
have followd us, for he was certainly much nearer to us now than he was
when we saw him last on the other side of the streights.


1769 January 24.

Many Islands about us today: weather very moderate: one of the Islands
was surrounded by small pointed rocks standing out of the water like the
Needles.

Ever since we left the streights the albatrosses that have flown about the
ship have either been or appeard much larger than those seen before we
enterd them, but the weather has never been moderate enough to give us an
opportunity of getting out a boat to shoot any of them.


1769 January 25.

Wind today Northwest: stood in with some Islands which were large, we
could not tell for certain whether we saw any part of the main. The little
Island mentiond yesterday was in view, and beyond that the land made in a
bluf head, within which another appeard tho but faintly which was farther
to the Southward; possibly that might be Cape Horn, but a fog which
overcast it almost immediately after we saw it hinderd our making any
material observations upon it, so all we can say is that it was the
Southermost land that we saw and does not ill answer to the description
[of] Cape Horn given by the French, who place it upon an Island and say
that it is composd of two bluff headlands: v. Navigat aux terres australes
tom 1. pag. 356.


1769 January 26.

Weather vastly moderate today, wind foul so we were sorry that we had
ran away from the land last night.


1769 January 27.

Wind came to the northward and we got some little westing, possibly
today we were to the westward of the cape, at least a great swell from the
NWt makes it certain that we were to the Southward of it. Many large
albatrosses d. exulans were about the ship whose backs were very white; at
noon a shag Pelecanus antarcticus came on board the ship and was taken.
Soon after dinner saw an Island to the northward possibly Diego Ramires.


1769 January 28.

Pleasant breezes but a heavy swell from NNW continued and made it
likely that we were past the Cape, tho we had made but little westing.


1769 January 29.

Wind still Foul and swell continued; today at noon lat. 59.00.


1769 January 30.

At noon today Lat 60.04: near calm: almost all navigators have met with
Easterly winds in this Lat. so we were in hopes to do the same: towards
Even wind got to the Southward.


1769 January 31.

Wind SE: stood to the westward with very fine weather.


1769 February 1.

Calm this morn: went out in the boat and Killd Diomedea antarctica,
Procellaria antarctica and turtur. Diomedaea antarctica the Black billd
albatross is much like the common but differs from him in being scarce
half as large and having a bill intirely black. Procellaria lugens the
Southern shear water differs from the common one in being less and darker
colourd on the back, but is easily distinguishd by his flight which is heavy,
and two fascia or streaks of white under his wings which are very
conspicuous when he flies. Procellaria turtur Mother Careys dove is of the
peteril kind about the size of a barbary dove, of a light silvery blue upon
the back which shines beautifully as he flies which he does very swiftly
keeping generaly near the surface of the water; more or less of these birds
have been seen very often since we left the lat. of Fauklands Island where
in a gale of wind we saw immense quantities of them.


1769 February 2.

This morn calm and Foggy much like the weather on the Banks of
Newfoundland; after dinner went in the boat and shot Procellaria
fuliginosa, Turtur, gigantea and Fregata. I saw also a small bird not larger
than a blackbird who flew quick flapping his wings like a partridge, but
was not able to get a shot at him, probably he was of the alca tribe.


1769 February 3.

Calm again: went out and shoot Diomedaea Exulans Albatross or
Alcatrace, differing from those seen to the Northward of Streights of La
Maire in being much larger and often quite white on the back between the
wings, tho certainly the same species; Diomedaea antarctica Lesser black
billd Albatross; diomedaea profuga Lesser Albatross with a party colourd
bill, differing from the last in few things except the bill the upper and under
sides of which were yellow and between them black; and Procellaria
vagabunda. Therm. 41.


1769 February 4.

Blew brisk today, made some northing and westing; we now began to
account ourselves certainly past the cape and the Captain (as in his orders
was recommended) resolvd to stand as far to the westward as the winds
will allow him to do. Two crabs were taken today in the cloaths that hang
overboard to tow.

I had been unwell these three or four days and today was obligd to keep
the Cabbin with a bilious attack, which tho quite slight alarmd me a good
deal, as Captn Wallis had in the Streights of Magellan such an attack which
he never got the better of throughout the whole voyage.


1769 February 5.

All but calm today: myself a little better than yesterday, well enough to
eat part of the Albatrosses shot on the third, which were so good that every
body commended and Eat heartily of them tho there was fresh pork upon
the table. The way of dressing them is thus: Skin them overnight and soak
their carcases in Salt water till morn, then parboil them and throw away the
water, then stew them well with very little water and when sufficiently
tender serve them up with Savoury sauce.


1769 February 6.

Foul wind, myself something better.


1769 February 7.

Myself better again, in the evening ship made a little westing.


1769 February 8.

Fair wind, blew fresh.


1769 February 9.

Blew fresh all last night which has given us a good deal of westing. This
morn some sea weed floated past the ship and my servant declares that he
saw a large beetle fly over her: I do not beleive he would deceive me and
he certainly knows what a beetle is, as he has these 3 years been often
employd in taking them for me.


1769 February 10.

During all last night the ship has pitchd very much so that there has been
no sleeping for land men. Today misty with little wind.


1769 February 11.

Fair wind, stand to the westward.


1769 February 12.

Foul wind, but prodigious fine weather and smooth water makes amends
to us at least.


1769 February 13.

Wind still Foul and blew fresh, at night a little mended.


1769 February 14.

Wind South, water soon became smooth, at night little wind.


1769 February 15.

Calm this morn: went in the boat and killd Procellaria velox, Nectris
munda and fuliginosa, which two last are a new genus between Procellaria
and Diomedea: this we reckon a great acquisition to our bird collection.
My stay out today was much shortned by a breeze of wind which brought
me aboard by 11 o clock and before night blew very fresh.


1769 February 16.

All last night and this morn it has blown very fresh, wind South, so that
we have 3 reefs in the topsails for the first time since we left the streights
of La Maire.


1769 February 17.

Blew fresh yet and wind stood, so we went well to the westward. In the
evening more moderate; I ventur'd upon deck for the first time and saw
several porpoises without any pinna dorsalis, black on the backs, under the
belly and on the noses white; also a kind of Albatross different from any I
have seen, he being black all over except the head and bill which were
white.


1769 February 18.

Fair weather, ship stood NW.


1769 February 19.

Went very slowly through the water tho pleasan[t]ly for the ship had
scarcely any motion.


1769 February 20.

Wind still foul but very moderate and the ship almost without motion.


1769 February 21.

Still no swell from the west tho the ship had fresh way through the water.
A bird not seen before attended the ship about the size of a pidgeon, black
above and light colourd underneath, darting swiftly along the surface of the
water in the same manner as I have observd the Nectris to do of which
genus he is probably a species.


1769 February 22.

This morn settled rain and scarce any wind, the whole evening small
puffs of wind and rain and calms succeeded each other.


1769 February 23.

Calm: went out in the boat, shott Procellaria velox, fuliginosa and
velificans. At night wind came to the east tho very little of it, it was
however a matter of comfort to have any as we have not had the name of
East in the wind since 31st of Janry.


1769 February 24.

At 12 last night the wind settled at NE; this morn found studding Sails set
and the ship going at the rate of 7 knotts, no very usual thing with Mrs
Endeavour.


1769 February 25.

Almost calm so that we trembled for the continuance of our east wind
and soon after noon it left us; at night Rain and dirty weather wind N.


1769 February 26.

Blew fresh, before dinner handed all topsails. Albatrosses began to be
much less plentifull than they have been. Lat. 41.8'.


1769 February 27.

Moderate and fine, the weather began to feel soft and comfortable like
the spring in England.


1769 February 28.

Weather fine with a pleasant breeze. In the evening a great many
Porpoises of a very large size came about the ship; they differ'd from any I
have seen before in being very much larger, in having their back fins a
great deall higher in proportion, and in every one having a white spot on
each side of his face as large as the crown of a hat but of an oval shape.


1769 March 1.

Fine weather and very pleasant, began the new month by pulling off an
under waistcoat.


1769 March 2.

Rather squally this morn and had been so all night: it did not however
blow up to a gale tho the ship had a good deal of motion, indeed I began to
hope that we were now so near the peacefull part of the Pacifick ocean that
we may almost cease to fear any more gales.


1769 March 3.

Calm: went in the boat and killd Procellaria velox, 2 velificans, 3
sordida, 4 melanopus, 5 lugens, agilis and Diomedaea exulans. The
Albatross very brown exactly the same as the first I killd, which if I
mistake not was nearly in the same latitude on the other side of the
continent. Caught Holothuria obtusata, Phillodoce velella exactly the same
as those taken on the other side of the continent except in size, which in
these did not exceed that of an English sixpence. Also Dagysa vitrea the
same as that taken off Rio de Janeiro; now however we had an opportunity
of seeing its ext[r]ordinary manner of breeding which is better to be
understood from the drawing than any description I can give; suffice it
therefore to say that the whole progeny 15 or 20 in number hung in a chain
from one end of the mother, the oldest only or the largest adhering to her
and rest to each other.

While in the boat among a large quantity of birds I had killd, 69 in all,
caught 2 Hippoboscas forest flies, both of one species different from any
described. More than probably these belongd to the birds and came off
with them from the land. I found also this day a large Sepia cuttle fish
laying on the water just dead but so pulld to peices by the birds that his
Species could not be determind; only this I know that of him was made one
of the best soups I ever eat. He was very large, differd from the Europaeans
in that his arms instead of being (like them) furnished with suckers were
armd with a double row of very sharp talons, resembling in shape those of
a cat and like them retractable into a sheath of skin from whence they
might be thrust at pleasure.

The weather is now become pleasan[t]ly warm and the Barnacles upon
the ships bottom seemd to be regenerate, very few only of the old ones
remaining alive but young ones without number scarce bigger than Lentils.


1769 March 4.

Fine weather, the ship goes 5 knotts without rowling or pitching which
she has not done this great while; this we attribute to the empty water cask
[s] in the fore hold having been filld with salt water yesterday.

There were several bonitos about the ship or at least fish something like
them.


1769 March 5.

Fine weather but foul wind, it now begins to be very hot. Therm. 70 and
damp, with prodigious dews at night greater than any I have felt, this
renews our uncomfortably damp situation, every thing beginning to mould
as it did about the aequinoctial line in the Atlantick.


1769 March 6.

Weather wind and heat continued, dew to night as strong as ever.


1769 March 7.

Wind weather heat and dew as yesterday. No Albatrosses have been seen
since the 4th, and for some days before that we had only now and then a
single one in sight so conclude we have parted with them for good and all.


1769 March 8.

Rains today with uncommonly large and heavy drops, accompanied with
calms and small puffs of wind all round the Compass; in the Evening a SE
wind took the ship aback and before night blew brisk.


1769 March 9.

Fine weather wind right aft. A tropick bird was seen by some of the
people but myself did not see him.


1769 March 10.

Fine weather continued, wind aft and very pleasant.


1769 March 11.

Wind and weather much the same as yesterday. Tho it had blown a
steady breeze of wind these three days no sea at all was up, from whence
we began to conclude that we pass'd the Line drawn between the Great
South Sea and the Pacifick ocean by the Council of the Royal Society,
notwithstanding we are not yet within the tropicks.


1769 March 12.

Wind continued fair but in the even flaggd a little; we began to imagine
that it must be the trade, at least if it continues we resolv'd [to] call it so.


1769 March 13.

Almost calm to day tho not quite enough for going out in the boat. I saw
a tropick bird for the first time hovering over the ship but flying very high;
if my eyes did not deceive me it differd from that describd by Linnaeus,
Phaeton aethereus, in having the long feathers of his tail red and his
crissum black.

Towards even set the servants to work with a dipping net who took
Mimus volutator and Phyllodoce velella, both exactly the same as those we
have seen in the Atlantick ocean. Lat. 30.45, Long. 126.23.45.


1769 March 14.

Very light winds today shifting from South to East: at noon an alarm of
Land being seen which proved at night to be no more than a fog bank tho it
certainly remaind many hours without any change in its appearance.

The tropick birds this Evening made a noise as they flew over the ship
not unlike some gulls.


1769 March 15.

All but calm all this day: many tropick birds were about the ship. The sea
today was remarkably quiet so that the ship had little or no motion.

This night happend an occultation of Saturn by the moon, which Mr
Green observ'd but was unlucky in having the weather so cloudy that the
observation was good for little or nothing.


1769 March 16.

Calm almost, but the ship stole through this remarkably smooth water so
that I do not think it worth while to have a boat hoisted out; by observation
to day they find that she has gone these two days much faster than the log
which they tell me is very often the case in light winds when the ship goes
before them.

Our water which was taken aboard at Terra del Fuego has remaind till
this time perfectly good without the least change, an instance which I am
told is very rare, especialy as in our case when water is brought from a cold
climate into a hot one. This however has stood it without any damage and
now drinks as brisk and pleasant as when first taken on board, or better, for
the red colour it had at first is subsided and it is now as clear as any
English spring water.


1769 March 17.

Most of this day as yesterday almost calm, at night a small breeze came
on from ENE so that the ship went 4 knotts.


1769 March 18.

Squally weather all night with heavy rain: this morn much the same, the
rain so heavy that the Cabbin was twice baild of more than a bucket full at
a time, all which came in at the crevises of the weather quarter window, for
there was no leak of any consequence in any other part of the cabbin. The
Wind was at N and brought with it a hot damp air which affected (I may
safely say) every man in the ship more or less; towards even however it
shifted towards the west and was much dryer.


1769 March 19.

Pleasant breeze, ship went N by W. Some flying fish were seen this morn
and several procellarias cheifly of the brown sorts as sordida.


1769 March 20.

Very fine as yesterday: many tropick birds were about the ship, as indeed
there has been every day since I first mentiond them but still more of them
as the weather was finer. Lat. today [] . Long. [] . When I look on the
charts of these Seas and see our course, which has been Near a streight one
at NW since we left Cape Horne, I cannot help wondering that we have not
yet seen land. It is however some pleasure to be able to disprove that which
does not exist but in the opinions of Theoretical writers, of which sort most
are who have wrote any thing about these seas without having themselves
been in them. They have generaly supposd that every foot of sea which
they beleivd no ship had passd over to be land, tho they had little or
nothing to support that opinion but vague reports, many of them mentiond
only as such by the very authors who first publishd them, as for instance
the Orange Tree one of the Nassau fleet who being separated from her
Companions and drove to the westward reported on her joining them again
that she had twice seen the Southern continent; both which places are laid
down by Mr Dalrymple many degrees to the eastward of our track, tho it is
probable that he has put them down as far to the westward as he thought it
possible that she could go.

To streng[t]hen these weak arguments another Theory has been started
which says that it is Nescessary that so much of the South sea as the
authors of it call land should be so, otherwise this wor[l]d would not be
properly bal[a]nc'd as the quantity of Earth known to be situated in the
Northern hemisphere would not have a counterpoise in this. The number of
square degrees of their land which we have already chang'd into water
sufficiently disproves this, and teaches me at least that till we know how
this globe is fixd in that place which has been since its creation assignd to
it in the general system, we need not be anxious to give reasons how any
one part of it counterbalances the rest.


1769 March 21.

Calm this morn: went out in the boat and shot Tropick bird Phaeton
erubescens, and Procellaria atrata, velox and sordida. Took Turbo fluitans
floating upon the water in the same manner as Helix Janthina, Medusa
Porpita exactly like those taken on the other side of the continent, and a
small Cimex? which also was taken before but appears to be a larva, if so
probably of some animal that lives under water, as I saw many but none
that appeard perfect tho they were enough so to propagate their species or
copulate at least. In examining the Phaetons found that what appeard to me
a black crissus as they flew was no other than their black feet; on them was
plenty of a very curious kind of acarus Phaetintis which either was or
appeard to be viviparous.

Besides what was shot today there were seen Man of war birds pelecanus
aquilus, and a small bird of the Sterna? kind calld by the seamen egg birds,
which were white with red beaks about the size of sterna hirundo. Of these
I saw several just at night fall who flew very high and followd one another
all standing towards the NNW; probably there is land on that point as we
were now not far from the Lat and Longitude in which Quiros saw his
southermost Islands Incarnation and St Jno Baptist.


1769 March 22.

Fresh breeze of wind today, the ship layd no better than west so we were
forcd to give over our hopes on the NNW point. Many man of war birds
were about the ship today and some egg birds, I shot 3 of the first but none
of them fell onboard the ship. All today the weather very hot and damp,
Thermometer 80, which it never was at sea before except in the calms
under the line.


1769 March 23.

Most troublesome weather, calms and squalls with very heavy rain but
the wind will not stirr. Many Egg birds seen today and some few Tropick.


1769 March 24.

Blew fresh still, wind as foul as ever. The officer of the watch reported
that in the middle watch the water from being roughish became on a
sudden as smooth as a mill pond, so that the ship from going only 4 knotts
at once increasd to six, tho there was little or no more wind than before
this, and a log of wood which was seen to pass by the ship by several
people made them beleive that there was land to windward.

At 8 when I came on deck the signs were all gone, I saw however two
birds which seemed to be of the sterna? kind both very small, one quite
white and another quite black who from their appearance probably could
not venture far from Land.

Today by our reckoning we crossed the tropick.


1769 March 25.

Wind continued much the same but more moderate, few or no birds were
about the ship but some sea weed was seen by some of the people, only
one bed.

This even one of our marines threw himself overboard and was not
miss'd till it was much too late even to attempt to recover him. He was a
very young man scarce 21 years of age, remarkably quiet and industrious,
and to make his exit the more melancholy was drove to the rash resolution
by an accident so trifling that it must appear incredible to every body who
is not well accquainted with the powerfull effects that shame can work
upon young minds.

This day at noon he was sentry at the Cabbin door and while he was on
that duty one of the Capts servants being calld away in a hurry left a peice
of seal skin in his charge, which it seems he was going to cut up to make
tobacco pouches some of which he had promisd to several of the men; the
poor young fellow it seems had several times askd him for one, and when
refus'd had told him that since he refusd him so trifling a thing he would if
he could steal one from him, this he put in practise as soon as the skin was
given into his charge and was of course found out immediately as the other
returnd, who was angry and took the peice he had cut off from him but
declard he would not complain to the officers for so trifling a cause.

In the mean time the fact came to the ears of his fellow soldiers, who
stood up for the honour of their Core 13 in number so highly that before
night, for this hapned at noon, they drove the young fellow almost mad by
representing his crime in the blackest coulours as a breach of trust of the
worst consequence: a theft committed by a sentry upon duty they made
him think an inexcusable crime, especialy when the thing stole was given
into his charge: the Sargeant particularly declard that if the person acgreivd
would not complain he would, for people should not suffer scandal from
the ill behaviour of one. This affected the young fellow much, he went to
his hammock, soon after the Sargeant went to him calld him and told him
to follow him upon deck. He got up and slipping the Sargeant went
forward, it was dusk and the people thought he was gone to the head and
were not convincd that he was gone over till half an hour after it hapned.


1769 March 26.

This whole day calms succeeded by hard squalls with much rain, which
weather the seamen call trolly lollys; the wind went more than once round
the Compass which made us hope that we were near the trade at least. Few
or no birds and no tropick birds.


1769 March 27.

Weather much like yesterday, no birds, at night a little more setled.


1769 March 28.

Calm today: one tropick bird was seen this morn. After dinner a Shark
came the first we had seen in these seas, he greedily took the bait but the
line being old broke, very soon he however returnd with the hook and
chain hanging out of his mouth but would not take the second bait.


1769 March 29.

Calm again. Bent a new shark line in the even a shark alongside took the
bait but broke the new line just as we were going to hoist him in, I am told
by the people that common fishing line will never last above a year if ever
so much care is taken of it.


1769 March 30.

Some birds and bonitos seen this morn but none after I came upon deck.


1769 March 31.

Pleasant breeze of wind which is the trade: some few tropick birds seen
this morn. Myself not quite well a little inflammation in my throat and
swelling of the glands.


1769 April 1.

Something better today. As my complaint has something in it that at least
putts me in mind of the scurvy I took up the lemon Juice put up by Dr
Hulmes direction and found that which was concentrated by evaporating 6
Galls into less than 2 has kept as well as any thing could do. The small
Cagg in which was lemon juice with one fifth of brandy was also very
good tho large part of it had leak'd out by some fault in the Cagg; this
therefore I began to make use of immediately drinking very weak punch
made with it for my common liquor.


1769 April 2.

Many birds today about noon passd by the ship making a noise
something like gulls, they were black upon the back and white under the
belly probably of the sterna kind; in company with them were 20 or 30
Men of war birds soaring over the flock, probably the whole were in
pursuit of a shoal of fish.


1769 April 3.

Several of the same kinds of birds seen today as were seen yesterday,
also many Egg-birds; the trade continued to blow fresh with very pleasant
weather.


1769 April 4.

At 10 this morn my servant Peter Briscoe saw the Land which we had
almost passd by, we stood towards it and found it to be a small Island
(Lagoon Island) about 1½ or 2 miles in lengh. Those who were upon the
topmast head distinguishd it to be nearly circular and to have a Lagoon or
pool of water in the middle which occupied much the largest part of the
Island. About noon we were Close to it within a mile or thereabouts and
distinctly saw inhabitants upon it of whoom we counted 24. They appeard
to us through our glasses to be tall and to have very large heads or possibly
much hair upon them, 11 of them walkd along the beach abreast of the ship
with each a pole or pike as long again as himself in his hand and every one
of them stark naked and appearing of a brown copper colour; as soon
however as the ship had fairly pass'd the Island they retird higher up on the
beach and seemd to put on some cloaths or at least cover themselves with
something which made them appear of a light colour.

The Island was coverd with trees of many very different verdures; the
Palms or Cocoa nut trees we could plainly distinguish particularly two that
were amazingly taller than their fellows and at a distance bore a great
resemblance to a flag. The land seemd all very low tho at a distance several
parts of it appeard high yet when we came near them they provd to be
clumps of Palms. Under the shade of these were the houses of the natives
in places cleard of all underwood so that pleasanter groves can not be
imagind, at least so they appeard to us whose eyes had so long been unus'd
to any other objects than water and sky.

After dinner land was again seen which we came up with at sunset; it
provd a small Island not more than ¾ of a mile in lengh but almost round,
we ran within less than a mile of it but saw no signs of inhabitants nor any
Cocoa nut trees, or indeed any that bore the least resemblance to Palms tho
there were many sorts of trees or at least many varieties of verdure.

In the neighbourhood of both this and the other Island were many birds,
man of war birds and a small black sort of sterna? with a white spot on his
head which the seamen calld Noddies but said that they were much smaller
than the West Indian Noddies.

While we were near the Island a large fish was taken with a towing line
baited with a peice of Pork rind cut like a swallows tail []the seamen calld
it a King fish Scomber lanceolatus.


1769 April 5.

Less wind this morn than yesterday with some showers of rain. While we
were at dinner word was brought down that there was land in sight from
the mast head, and found it a low Island but of much greater extent than
either of those seen yesterday being from 10 to 15 leagues in
circumference. Myself remaind at the mast head the whole evening
admiring its extrordinary structure: in shape it appeard to be like a bow the
wood and string of which was land and the parts within occupied by a large
lake of water, which bore about the same proportion to the land as the void
space within the bow does to the string and wood. The string of the bow
was a flat beach without any signs of vegetation on it but heaps of sea
weed laying in ridges as higher or lower tides had left them; this was 3 or 4
Leagues long and appeard not more than 200 yards wide in any part tho
doubtless as flat objects foreshorten themselves so much it might be much
more. The Horns or angles of the bow were two large tufts of Cocoa nut
trees and much the largest part of its arch was filld up likewise with trees
of different hights and appearances, a small part of it however was in my
opinion low and like the string. Here some thought there was an opening
into the Pool in the center and myself cannot say there was not, indeed it
was at so great a distance that all must be conjecture.

Along the low beach or bowstring we saild within less than a league of
the shore till sunsett when we judg'd ourselves about half way between the
two horns, we then brought too and sounded, 130 fathom of line out and no
ground; night which came on here almost instantly after sunset made us
lose sight of the land before the line was well hauld in. We then steerd by
the sound of the breakers which were very distinctly heard in the ship till
we were clear of all.

That this land was inhabited appeard clearly by three smoaks in different
parts of the Island which we saw repeated several different times, probably
as signals from one to the other of our aproach. Our 2nd Lieutenant
affirmed that he saw from the deck many inhabitants in the first clump of
Trees, that they were walking to and fro as if on their ordinary business
without taking the least notice of the ship, he saw also many houses and
Canoes hauld up under the trees. To this I only say that I did not see them
or know that any one else had till the ship had passd the place ½ an hour.


1769 April 6.

Pleasant breeze, at ½ past 11 land in sight again, at 3 came up with it,
proved to be two distinct Islands with many small ones near them Joining
by reefs under water.

The Islands themselves were long thin strips of land ranging in all
directions sometime ten or more miles in lengh but never more than a
quarter of a mile broad; upon them were many Cocoa nut and other trees
and many inhabitants several of whoom came out in Canoes as far as the
reefs but would not come without them; 6 particularly who for some time
walkd along shore abreast of the ship, on our passing the end of the Island
launchd two Canoes with great quickness and dexterity and 3 getting into
each the[y] put off as we thought intending to come to us. The ship was
brought to and we waited some time but they like their fellows came no
farther than the reef, where they stoppd and waited for two messengers
who we saw dispatchd from the great canoes wading and swimming
towards them along the reef, they met and after a council I suppose resolvd
not to come off. The ship after waiting some time stood off and when 2 or
3 miles from the shore was followd by a canoe with a sail, but not thinking
it worth while to bring too for her she soon gave over the chase and returnd
to the reef.

The people seemd as well as we could judge (who were a good ½ mile
from the shore) to be about our size and well made, of a dark brown
complexion, stark naked, wearing their hair tied back with a fillet which
passd round their head and kept it sticking out behind like a bush. The
greatest number of them carried in their hands two weapons, one a slender
pole from 10 to 14 feet in lengh at one end of which was a small knob or
point not unlike the point of a spear, the other not above 4 feet long made
much like a paddle as possibly it was intended, for their canoes were very
different in size. The two which we saw them launch seemd not intended to
carry more than barely the 3 men who got into each of them, others there
were which had 6 and some 7 men; one of these hoisted a sail which did
not seem to reach above 6 feet high above the boat, this (as soon as they
came to the reef and stoppd their boat) they took down and converted into
a shed to shelter them from a small shower of rain which then fell. The
Canoe which followd us to sea hoisted a sail not unlike an English lugsail
and near as lofty as an English boat of the same size would have carried.

The people on the shore made many signals but whether they meant to
frighten us away or invite us ashore is dificult to tell: they wavd with their
hands and seemd to beckon us to them but they were assembld together
with clubs and staves as they would have done had they meant to oppose
us. Their signs we answerd by waving our hats and shouting which they
answerd by shouting again. Our situation made it very improper to try them
farther, we wanted nothing, the Island was too trifling to be an object worth
taking possession of; had we therefore out of mere curiosity hoisted out a
boat and the natives by attacking us oblige us to destroy some of them the
only reason we could give for it would be the desire of satisfying a useless
curiosity. We shall soon by our connections with the inhabitants of
Georges Island (who already know our strengh and if they do not love at
least fear us) gain some knowledge of the customs of these savages; or
possibly persuade one of them to come with us who may serve as an
interpreter and give us an opportunity hereafter of landing where ever we
please without running the risk of being obligd to commit the cruelties
which the Spaniards and most others who have been in these seas have
often brought themselves under the dreadfull nescessity of being guilty of,
for guilty I must call it.


1769 April 7.

This morn at day break Land in sight again, by 8 O'Clock came up with
an Island made up like the last of narrow slips of land and reefs of rocks,
the greatest part of the land lookd green and pleasant but it was without
cocoa nut trees or any sign of inhabitants.

I purposely omit to mention the size of these Islands as it is almost
impossible to guess at, and very dificult to give an idea of the contents of
narrow strips of land which run one within another as a ribband thrown
carelessly down would do. If you measure the lengh of it, it 4 or 5 times
exceeds the space of sea that it occupies, if the circumference, such land of
100 Leagues in circumference would scarce contain 100 square miles; if
the Space of sea that they occupy you err as much, for of that 20, 40 nay
sometimes 100 parts are sea for one of land, tho that sea is so shut in by
banks and reefs that no ship can get into it.


1769 April 8.

Pleasant breeze but we have as yet found the trade hardly so strong as it
was in the Atlantick. At 2 O'Clock Land was seen from the masthead, the
ship stands for it and about sunset came abreast of it distant 2 leagues. It
prove'd an Island larger than any we had seen as it extended 6 or 7 leagues,
it was every where coverd with plenty of large trees probably Cocoa nuts
and it is also inhabited as we judge from a smoak rising from among the
trees; in everything it appeard exactly of the same nature with the rest
which we have seen. We could plainly distinguish it in some places broken
off into reefs behind which we saw distant land and thence judg'd that there
was a lagoon within it; the land however appeard to be broader than any
we had seen before.


1769 April 9.

Fine weather and pleasant breeze. It is now almost night and time for me
to wind up the clue of my this days lucubrations, so as we have found no
Island I shall employ the time and paper which I had allotted to describe
one in a work which I am sure will be more usefull at, if not more
entertaining to all future navigators, by describing the method which we
took to cure Cabbage in England; which Cabbage we have eat every day
since we left Cape Horne and have now good store of, remaining as good
at least to our palates and full as green and pleasing to the eye as if it was
bought fresh every morning at Covent Garden market. Our Steward has
given me the receipt which I shall copy exactly false spelling exceptd.

Take a strong Iron bound cask for no weak or wooden bound one should
ever be trusted in a long voyage, take out the head and when the whole is
well cleand cover the bottom with salt. Then take the Cabbage and
stripping off the outside leaves take the rest leaf by leaf till you come to the
heart which cut into four; these leaves and heart lay upon the Salt about 2
or 3 inches thick and sprinkle Salt pretty thick over them and lay cabbage
upon the salt stratum super thick till the cask is full. Then lay on the head
of the cask with a weight which in 5 or 6 days will have pressd the cabbage
into a much smaller compass. After this fill up the cask with more cabbage
as before directed and Head it up. N.B. the Cabbage should be gatherd in
dry weather some time after sun rise that the dew may not be upon it.
Halves of cabbages are better for keeping than single leaves.


1769 April 10.

Last night a halo was observ'd round the moon which was followd by a
very disagreable night, the wind being all round the compass and
sometimes blowing very fresh with severe thunder and lightning and very
heavy rain.

This morning the wind from N to NW, the weather very hazey and thick.
About 9 it cleard up a little and showd us Osnabrug Island discoverd by the
Dolphin in her last voyage, it was distant about 6 leagues and appeard like
a very short cone. Very light winds NW. About one land was seen ahead in
the direction of Georges Land, it was however so faint that very few could
see it. Soon after it was seen off the deck kin the same faint manner but
appearing high. Our distance when it was first seen was 25 leagues. At sun
set the ship was nearly abreast Osnabrug Island 2 or 3 leagues from it, it
appeard to have many trees upon it but in some parts the rocks were quite
bare.

At this time it remaind in dispute whether what had been so long seen to
the Westward was realy land or only vapours; myself went to the Masthead
but the sunset was cloudy and we could see nothing of it.

As soon as I came down a shark att the stern attackd the net in which
tomorrows dinner was towing to freshen, we hookd and took him just as it
became dark.


1769 April 11.

Up at 5 this morn to examine the shark who proves to be A blew Shark
Squalus glaucus, while we were doing it 3 more came under the Stern of
which we soon caught 2 which were common grey Sharks Squalus
Carcharias, on one of whom were some sucking fish Echinus remora. The
seamen tell us that the blew shark is worst of all sharks to eat, indeed his
smell is abominably strong so as we had two of the better sort he was hove
overboard.

Little wind and variable with Squalls from all points of the Compass
bringing heavy rain. Georges Island in sight appearing very high in the
same direction as the land was seen last night, so I found the fault was in
our eyes yesterday tho the non-seers were much more numerous in the ship
than the seers.

Today and yesterday many birds were about the ship among which a bird
which I took to be the common tropick bird Phaeton aethereus was one, he
was about the size of our tropick bird but differd from him in having black
barrs upon his back and the long feathers in his tail white, so much I say
but the weather was so uncertain that I could not go out to shoot one.

Calm this even, at sunset Georges Land appeard plain tho we had not
neard it much: since the clouds went from the tops of the hills it appeard
less high than it did tho it certainly is very high.

As I am now on the brink of going ashore after a long passage thank god
in as good health as man can be I shall fill a little paper in describing the
means which I have taken to prevent the scurvy in particular.

The ship was supplyd by the Admiralty with Sower crout which I eat of
constantly till our salted Cabbage was opend which I preferd as a pleasant
substitute. Wort was servd out almost constantly, of this I drank from a pint
or more every evening but all this did not so intirely check the distemper as
to prevent my feeling some small effects of it. About a fortnight ago my
gums swelld and some small pimples rose in the inside of my mouth which
threatned to become ulcers, I then flew to the lemon Juice which had been
put up for me according to Dr Hulmes method describd in his book and in
his letter which is inserted here: every kind of liquor which I usd was made
sour with the Lemon juice No 3 so that I took near 6 ounces a day of it.
The effect of this was surprizing, in less than a week my gums became as
firm as ever and at this time I am troubled with nothing but a few pimples
on my face which have not deterrd me from leaving off the juice intirely.


1769 April 12.

Very nearly calm all last night, Georges Land was now but little nearer to
us than last night, the tops of the hills were wrap'd in clouds. About 7 a
small breze sprung up and we saw some Canoes coming off to us, by ten or
eleven they were up with us. I forbear to say any thing about either people
or canoes as I shall have so many better opportunities of observing them:
we however bought their cargoes consisting of fruits and cocoa nuts which
were very acceptable to us after our long passage.


1769 April 13.

This morn early came to an anchor in Port Royal bay King George the
thirds Island. Before the anchor was down we were surrounded by a large
number of Canoes who traded very quietly and civily, for beads cheifly, in
exchange for which they gave Cocoa nuts Bread fruit both roasted and raw
some small fish and apples. They had one pig with them which they refus'd
to sell for nails upon any account but repeatedly offerd it for a hatchet; of
these we had very few on board so thought it better to let the pig go away
than to give one of them in exchange, knowing from the authority of those
who had been here before that if we once did it they would never lower
their price. As soon as the anchors were well down the boats were hoisted
out and we all went ashore where we were met by some hundreds of the
inhabitants whose faces at least gave evident signs that we were not
unwelcome guests, tho they at first hardly dare aproach us, after a little
time they became very familiar. The first who aproachd us came creeping
almost on his hands and knees and gave us a green bough the token of
peace, this we receivd and immediately each gatherd a green bough and
carried in our hands. They march'd with us about ½ a mile then made a
general stop and scraping the ground clean from the plants that grew upon
it every one of the principals threw his bough down upon the bare place
and made signs that we should do the same: the marines were drawn up
and marching in order dropd each a bough upon those that the Indians had
laid down, we all folowd their example and thus peace was concluded. We
then walkd into the woods followd by the whole train to whoom we gave
beads and small presents. In this manner we walkd for 4 or 5 miles under
groves of Cocoa nut and bread fruit trees loaded with a profusion of fruit
and giving the most gratefull shade I have ever experienced, under these
were the habitations of the people most of them without walls: in short the
scene we saw was the truest picture of an arcadia of which we were going
to be kings that the imagination can form.

Our pleasure in seeing this was however not a little allayd by finding in
all our walk only 2 hogs and not one fowl. The Dolphins people who were
with us told us that the people who we saw were only of the common sort
and that the bettermost had certainly removd, as a proof of this they took us
to the place where the Queens palace formerly stood of which there was no
traces left. We howev[e]r resolved not to be discouraged at this but to
proceed tomorrow morning in search of the place to which these superior
people had retreated, in hopes to make the same peace with them as we
have done with our freinds the blackguards.


1769 April 14.

This morn several Canoas came on board among which were two in
which were people who by their dress and appearance seemd to be of a
rank superior to those who we had seen yesterday. These we invited to
come on board and on coming into the Cabbin each singled out his freind,
one took the Captn and the other me, they took off a large part of their
cloaths and each dress'd his freind with them he took off: in return for this
we presented them with each a hatchet and some beads. They made many
signs to us desiring us to go to the places where they livd to the SW of
where we lay; the boats were hoisted out and we took them with us and
immediately proceeded according to their directions.

After rowing about a league they beckon'd us in shore and shewd us a
long house where they gave us to understand that they livd; here we landed
and were met by some hundreds of inhabitants who conducted us into the
long house. Matts were spread and we were desired to set down fronting an
old man who we had not before seen, he immediately orderd a cock and
hen to be brought which were presented to Captn Cook and me, we
accepted of the present. Then a peice of Cloth was presented to each of us
perfumd after their manner not disagreably which they took great pains to
make us understand. My peice of Cloth was 11 yards long and 2 wide: for
this I made return by presenting him with a large lacd silk neckcloth I had
on and a linnen pocket handkercheif, these he immediately put on him and
seemd to be much pleasd with.

After this ceremony was over we walkd freely about several large houses
attended by the ladies who shewd us all kind of civilities our situation
could admit of, but as there were no places of retirement, the houses being
intirely without walls, we had not an opportunity of putting their politeness
to every test that maybe some of us would not have faild to have done had
circumstances been more favourable; indeed we had no reason to doubt
any part of their politeness, as by their frequently pointing to the matts on
the ground and sometimes by force seating themselves and us upon them
they plainly shewd that they were much less jealous of observation than we
were.

We now took our leave of our freindly cheif and proceeded along shore
for about a mile when we were met by a throng of people at the head of
whoom appeard another cheif. We had learn'd the ceremony we were to go
through which was to receive the green bough which was always brough[t]
to us at every fresh meeting and to ratifie the peace of which that was the
emblem by laying our hands on our breasts and saying Taio, which I
imagine signifies freind. The bough was here offerd and accepted and in
return every one of us said Taio. The cheif then made us signs that if we
chose to eat he had victuals ready: we accepted the offer and dind heartily
on fish and bread fruit with plantains etc. dressd after their way, raw fish
was offerd to us which it seems they themselves eat. The adventures of this
entertainment I much wish to record particularly, but am so much hurried
by attending the Indians ashore almost all day long that I fear I shall scarce
understand my own language when I read it again.

Our cheifs own wife (ugly enough in conscience) did me the honour with
very little invitation to squat down on the mats close by me: no sooner had
she done so than I espied among the common croud a very pretty girl with
a fire in her eyes that I had not before seen in the countrey. Unconscious of
the dignity of my companion I beckond to the other who after some
intreatys came and sat on the other side of me: I was then desirous of
getting rid of my former companion so I ceas'd to attend to her and loaded
my pretty girl with beads and every present I could think pleasing to her:
the other shewd much disgust but did not quit her place and continued to
supply me with fish and cocoa nut milk. How this would have ended is
hard to say, it was interupted by an accident which gave us an opportunity
of seeing much of the peoples manners. Dr Solander and another
gentleman who had not been in as good company as myself found that their
pockets had been pickd, one had lost a snuff box the other an opera glass.

Complaint was made to the cheif, and to give it weight I started up from
the ground and striking the but of my gun made a rattling noise which I had
before used in our walk to frigh[t]en the people and keep them at a
distance. Upon this as a signal every one of the common sort (among
whom was my pretty girl) ran like sheep from the house leaving us with
only the cheif his 3 wives and two or three better dressd than the rest
whose quality I do not yet guess at. The cheif then took me by the hand to
the other end of the house where lay a large quantity of their cloth, this he
offerd to me peice by peice making signs that if it would make me amends
I might take any part or all. I put it back and by signs told him that I
wanted nothing but our own which his people had stole. On this he gave
me into charge of my faithfull companion his wife who had never budged
an inch from my elbow; with her I sat down on the mat and convers'd by
signs for near ½ an hour after which time he came back bringing the snuff
box and the case of the opera glass, which with vast pleasure in his
countenance he returnd to the owners, but his face soon changed when he
was shewn that the case was empty which ought to have been full. He then
took me by the hand and walkd along shore with great rapidity about a
mile. By the way he receivd a peice of cloth from a woman which he
carried in his hand. At last we came to a house in which we were receivd
by a woman; to her he gave the cloth he had and told us to give her some
beads. The cloth and beads were left on the floor by us and she went out,
she stayd about ¼ of an hour and then returnd bringing the glass in her
hand with a vast expression of joy on her countenance, for few faces have I
seen which have more expression in them than those of these people. The
beads were now returnd with a positive resolution of not accepting them
and the Cloth was as resolutely forcd upon Dr Solander as a recompence
for his loss. He then made a new present of beads to the lady and our
ceremonies ended we returnd to the ship admiring a policy at least equal to
any we had seen in civilizd countries, excercisd by people who have never
had any advantage but meer natural instinct uninstructed by the example of
any civilizd countrey.


1769 April 15.

This morn we landed at the watering place bringing with us a small tent
which we set up. In doing this we were attended by some hundreds of the
natives who shewd a deference and respect to us which much amazd me. I
myself drew a line before them with the butt end of my musquet and made
signs to them to set down without it, they obeyd instantly and not a man
attempted to set a foot within it, above two hours were spent so and not the
least disorder being committed. We propos'd to walk into the woods and
see if today we might not find more hoggs etc. than when we last visited
them supposing it probable that a part of them at least had been drove away
on our arrival: this in particular tempted us to go away, with many other
circumstances, as our old man (an Indian well known to the Dolphins)
attempted by many signs to hinder us from going into the woods. The tent
was left in charge of a Midshipman with the marines 13 in number. We
marchd away and were absent above 2 hours. A little while before we
came back we heard several musquet shots. Our old man immediately calld
us together and by waving his hand sent away every Indian who followd us
except 3 every one of whoom took in their hands a green bough: on this we
suspected that some mischeif had happned at the tent and hastend home
with all expedition. On our return we found that an Indian had snatchd a
sentrys musquet from him unawares and run off; the midshipman (may be)
imprudently orderd the marines to fire. they did fire into the thickest of the
flying croud some hundreds in number several shot, and pursueing the man
who stole the musquet killd him dead but whether any others were killd or
hurt no one could tell. No Indian was now to be seen about the tent but our
old man, who with us took all pains to reconcile them again; before night
by his means we got together a few of them and explaining to them that the
man who sufferd was guilty of a crime deserving of death (for so we were
forcd to make it) we retird to the ship not well pleasd with the days
expedition, guilty no doubt in some measure of the death of a man who the
most severe laws of equity would not have condemnd to so severe a
punishment.


1769 April 16.

No canoes about the ship this morning, indeed we could not expect any
as it is probable that the news of our behaviour yesterday was now known
every where, a circumstance which will doubtless not increase the
confidence of our freinds the Indians. We were rather surprizd that the
Dolphins old man who seemd yesterday so desirous of making peace was
not come on board today; some few people were upon the beach but very
few in proportion to what we saw yesterday. At noon went ashore the
people rather shy of us as we must expect them to be till by good usage we
can gain anew their confidence.

Poor Mr Buchan the young man who I brought out as lanscape and figure
painter was yesterday attackd by an epileptick fit, he was today quite
insensible, our surgeon gives me very little hopes of him.


1769 April 17.

At two this morn Mr Buchan died, about nine every thing was ready for
his interment he being already so much changd that it would not be
practicable to keep him even till night. Dr Solander Mr Sporing Mr
Parkinson and some of the officers of the ship attended his funeral. I
sincerely regret him as an ingenious and good young man, but his Loss to
me is irretrevable, my airy dreams of entertaining my freinds in England
with the scenes that I am to see here are vanishd. No account of the figures
and dresses of men can be satisfactory unless illustrated with figures: had
providence spard him a month longer what an advantage would it have
been to my undertaking but I must submit.

Our two freinds the cheifs of the west came this morn to see us. One I
shall for the future call Lycurgus from the justice he executed on his
offending subjects on the 14th, the other from the large size of his body I
shall call Hercules. Each of these brought a hog and bread fruit ready
dressd as a present for which they were presented in return with a hatchet
and a nail each. Hercules's present is the largest he seems indeed to be the
richest man.

In the afternoon we all went ashore to measure out the ground for the
tents, which done Cap Cooke and Mr Green slept ashore in a tent erected
for that purpose after having observd an eclipse of one of the satellites of
Jupiter.


1769 April 18.

This morn at day break all hands were ashore and employd in getting up
the tents and making a defence round them. The ground we have pitchd
upon is very sandy which makes it nescessary to support it with wood, for
the doing of this our people cut the boughs of trees and the Indians very
readily assisted them in bringing them down to the place. Three sides of
our fort are to be thus guarded the other is bounded by a river on the banks
of which water cask[s] are to be placd.

The Indians brought down so much provision of Cocoa nuts and bread
fruit today that before night we were obligd to leave off buying and
acquaint them by signs that we should not want any more for 2 days; every
thing was bought for beads, a bead about as large as a pea purchasing 4 or
6 breadfruits and a like number of Cocoa nutts.

My tents were got up before night and I sept ashore in them for the first
time. The lines were guarded round by many Sentries but no Indian
atempted to come near them during the whole night.


1769 April 19.

This morn Lycurgus and his wife come to see us and bring with them all
their household furniture and even houses to be erected in our
neighbourhood, a circumstance which gave me great pleasure as I had
spard no pains to gain the freindship of this man who seemd more sensible
than any of his fellow cheifs we have seen. His behavior in this Instance
makes us not doubt of having gaind his confidence at least.

Soon after his arrival he took me by the hand and led me out of the lines,
signing that I should accompany him into the woods, this I made no
dificulty of dooing as I was desirous of knowing how near us he realy
intended to settle. I followd him about a quarter of a mile when we arrivd
at a small house or rather the awning of a canoe set upon the shore, which
seemd to be his occasional habitation; here he unfolded a bundle of their
cloaths and cloth'd me in two garments, one red cloth the other very pretty
matting, after this we returnd to the tents. He eat pork and bread fruit
which was brought him in a basket using salt water instead of sauce, and
then retird into my bedchamber and slept about half an hour.

About dinner time Lycurgus's wife brought a hansome young man about
22 to the tents whoom they both seemd to acknowledge as their son. At
night he and another chief who had also visited us went away to the
westward, but Lycurgus and his wife went towards the place I was at in the
morning which makes us not doubt of their staying with us for the future.

Mr Monkhouse our surgeon walkd this evening into the woods and
brought back an account of having seen the body of the man who was shot
on the 15th. It was placd on a kind of Bier supported by stakes and coverd
by a small hut which seemd to have been built for the purpose; the body
was wrappd up in cloth and near it were plac'd war instruments a hatchet
some hair a cocoa nut and a cup of water. Farther he did not examine on
account of the stench of the body which was intolerable. They also [saw]
two more huts of the same kind in one of which they saw the bones of the
person who had lain there quite dry. A custom so new as this appears to be
surprized us all very much, but whether all who die are thus disposd of or it
is a peculiar honour shewn to those who dye in war is to be cleard up by
future observation.


1769 April 20.

Raind hard all this day at intervals, so much so that we could not stir at
all, the people however went on briskly with the fortification in spite of
weather. Lycurgus dind with us, he imitates our manners in every instance
already holding a knife and fork more handily than a Frenchman could
learn to do in years. Notwistanding the rain some provisions are brought to
the market which is kept just without the lines; indeed ever since we have
been here we have had more breadfruit every day than both the people and
hogs can eat, but in the pork way we have been so poorly supplyd that I
beleive fresh pork has not been servd to the ships company above once.


1769 April 21.

Several of our freinds at the tents this morn, one whoom from his grim
countenance we have calld Ajax and at one time thought to be a great king.
He had on his canoe a hog but he chose rather to sell it at the market than
give it to us as a present; which we account for by his having in the
morning receivd a shirt in return for a peice of cloth, which made him fear
that had he given the hog it might have been taken into the bargain--a
conduct very different from that of our freind Lycurgus who seems in
every instance to place a most unbounded confidence in us.


1769 April 22.

Pleasant weather, our freinds as usual come early to visit us, Hercules
with two piggs and a Dolphins ax which he wishd to have repaird as it
acordingly was. Lycurgus brought 2 large fish an acceptable present as that
article has always been scarce with us. Trade brisk today; since our new
manufacture of hatchets has been set on foot we get some hogs tho our
tools are so small and bad that I only wonder how they can stand one
stroke.

The flies have been so troublesome ever since we have been ashore that
we can scarce get any business done for them; they eat the painters colours
off the paper as fast as they can be laid on, and if a fish is to be drawn there
is more trouble in keeping them off it than in the drawing itself.

Many expedients have been thought of, none succeed better than a
mosquito net which covers table chair painter and drawings, but even that
is not sufficent, a fly trap was nesscessary to set within this to atract the
vermin from eating the colours. For that purpose yesterday tarr and
molasses was mixt together but did not succeed. The plate smeard with it
was left on the outside of the tent to clean: one of the Indians observing
this took an opportunity when he thought that no one observd him to take
some of this mixture up into his hand, I saw and was curious to know for
what use it was intended, the gentleman had a large sore upon his backside
to which this clammy liniament was applyd but with what success I never
took the pains to enquire.

Hercules gave us today a specimen of the musick of this countrey: 4
people performd upon flutes which they sounded with one nostril while
they stopd the other with their thumbs, to these 4 more sang keeping very
good time but during ½ an hour which we stayd with them they playd
only one tune consisting of not more than 5 or 6 notes. More I am inclind
to think they have not upon their instruments which have only two stops.


1769 April 23.

Mr Green and myself went today a little way upon the hills in order to
see how the roads were. Lycurgus went with us but complaind much in the
ascent saying that it would kill him. We found as far as we went, possibly 3
miles, exceeding good paths and at the farthest part of our walk boys
bringing wood from the mountans, which we look upon to be a sure proof
that journey will be easy whenever we atempt to go higher.

In our return I visited the Tomb or Bier in which was deposited the body
of the man who was shot. I lifted up the cloth and saw part of the body
already dropping to peices with putrefaction about him and indeed within
all parts of his flesh were abundance of maggots of a species of Beetle very
comon here.

Such an advance of putrefaction in 8 days for it was no more since he
was shot is almost past credit but what will not a hot climate and plenty of
insects do.

We had this evening some conversation about an ax which was brought
in the morning by Hercules, it wanting grinding. Its make was very
different from that of our English ones, several gentlemen were of opinion
that it was a French one, some went so far as to give it as their opinion that
some other ship had been here since the Dolphin. The difficulty however
appeard to me at least easily solvd by supposing axes to have been taken in
the Dolphin as trade, in which case old ones might have been bought of the
make of any countrey, for many such I suppose there are in every old iron
shop in London.


1769 April 24.

Dr Solander and myself went along shore to the eastward in hopes of
finding something worth observation by inlarging our ground. For about 2
miles the countrey within us was flat and fertile, the hills then came very
near the waters edge and soon after quite into the sea so that we were
obligd to climb over them. This barren countrey continued for about 3
miles more when we came to a large flat full of good houses and wealthy
looking people; here was a river much more considerable than our own, it
came out of a very deep and beautifull valley and was where we crossd it
near 100 yards wide tho not quite at the sea. About a mile farther than this
river we went when the Land became again as barren as possible, the rocks
every where projecting into the sea, so we resolvd to return. Soon after this
resolution one of the natives made us an offer of refreshment which we
accepted. He was remarkable for being much the whitest man we had seen.

On examining him more nearly his skin was dead pale without the least
signs of Complexion in any part of it, some parts were lighter than others
but the darkest was lighter than any of our skins, his hair and eyebrows and
beard were as white as his skin, his eyes bloodshot, he apeard to be very
short sighted, his whole body was scurfy and dmaybe disease had been the
cause of his colour; if not we shall see more such. In our return met
Lycurgus who seem'd much rejoicd at seeing us as did all his women, to
shew their regard I suppose they all cry'd most heartily.


1769 April 25.

I do not know by what accident I have so long omitted to mention how
much these people are given to theiving. I will make up for my neglect
however today by saying that great and small cheifs and common men all
are firmly of opinion that if they can once get possession of any thing it
immediately becomes their own. This we were convincd of the very second
day we were here, the cheifs were employd in stealing what they could in
the Cabbin while their dependants took every thing that was loose about
the ship, even the glass ports not escaping them of which they got off with
2. Lycurgus and Hercules were the only two who had not yet been found
guilty, but they stood in our opinion but upon tickilish ground as we could
not well suppose them intirely free from a vice their countrey men were so
much given up to.

Last night Dr Solander lent his knife to one of Lycurgus's women who
forgot to return it, this morn mine was missing. I could give no account of
it so resolvd to go to Lycurgus and ask him whether or not he had stole it
trusting that if he had he would return it.

I went and taxd him with it. He denyd knowing any thing concerning it, I
told him I was resolvd to have it returnd. On this a man present produc'd a
rag in which was tied up 3 knives, one was Dr Solanders the other a table
knife the other no one laid claim to. With these he marchd to the tents to
make restitution while I remaind with the women who much feard that he
would be hurt; when come there he restord the two knives to their proper
owners and began immediately to search for mine in all the places where
he had ever seen it lay. One of my servants seeing what he was about
brought it to him, he had it seems laid it by the day before and did not
know of my missing it. Lycurgus then burst into tears making signs with
my knife that if he was ever guilty of such an action he would submit to
have his throat cut. He returnd immediately to me with a countenance
sufficiently upbraiding me for my suspicions; the scene was immediately
changd, I became the guilty and he the innocent person, his looks affected
me much. A few presents and staying a little with him reconcild him
intirely; his behavior has however given me an opinion of him much
superior to any of his countreymen.


1769 April 26.

Plenty of trade this morn indeed we have always had enough of bread
fruit and cocoa nuts, refreshments maybe more nescessary for the people
than pork tho they certainly do not like them so well.

Our freinds as usual at the tents today but do nothing worthy record.


1769 April 27.

The day passd as usual. Lycurgus and a freind of his (who eats most
monstrously) dind with us, we christend him Epicurus. At night they took
their leave and departed but Lycurgus soon returnd with fire in his eyes,
seizd my arm and signd to me to follow him. I did and he soon brought me
to a place where was our butcher, who he told me by signs had either
threatned or atempted to cut his wives throat with a reaphook he had in his
hand. I signd to him that the man should be punishd tomorrow if he would
only clearly explain the offence, for he was so angry that his signs were
almost unintelligible. He grew cooler and shewd me that the Butcher had
taken a fancy to a stone hatchet which lay in his house, this he offerd to
purchase for a nail: His wife who was their refus'd to part with it upon
which he took it and throwing down the nail threatned to cut her throat if
she atempted to hinder him; in evidence of this the hatchet and nail were
produc'd and the butcher had so little to say in his defence that no one
doubted of his guilt. After this we parted and he appeard satisfied but did
not forget to put me in mind of my promise that the butcher should
tomorrow be punished.

This day we found that our freinds had names and they were not a little
pleasd to discover that we had them likewise; for the future Lycurgus will
be calld Tübourai tamaide and his wife Tom'o and the three women who
commonly come with him Terapo, Terarü and Om'e. As for our names they
make so poor a hand of pronouncing them that I fear we shall be obligd to
take each of us a new one for the occasion.


1769 April 28.

Many of our freinds were with us very early even before day, some
strangers with them. Terapo was observd to be among the women on the
outside of the gate, I went out to her and brought her in, tears stood in her
eyes which the moment she enterd the tent began to flow plentifully. I
began to enquire the cause; she instead of answering me took from under
her garment a sharks tooth and struck it into her head with great force 6 or
7 times. a profusion of Blood followd these strokes and alarmd me not a
little; for two or 3 minutes she bled freely more than a pint in quantity,
during that time she talkd loud in a most melancholy tone. I was not a little
movd at so singular a spectacle and holding her in my arms did not cease to
enquire what might be the cause of so strange an action, she took no notice
of me till the bleeding ceas'd nor did any Indian in the tent take any of her,
all talkd and laugh'd as if nothing melancholy was going forward; but what
surpriz'd me most of all was that as soon as the bleeding ceas'd she lookd
up smiling and immediately began to collect peices of cloth which during
her bleeding she had thrown down to catch the blood. These she carried
away out of the tents and threw into the sea, carefully dispersing them
abroad as if desirous that no one should be reminded of her action by the
sight of them; she then went into the river and after washing her whole
body returnd to the tents as lively and chearfull as any one in them.

After breakfast Mr Molineux came ashore and the moment he enterd the
tent fixing his eyes upon a woman who was setting there declard her to be
the Dolphins Queen, she also instantly acknowledg'd him to be a person
who she had before seen. Our attention was now intirely diverted from
every other object to the examination of a personage we had heard so much
spoken of in Europe: she appeard to be about 40, tall and very lusty, her
skin white and her eyes full of meaning, she might have been hansome
when young but now few or no traces of it were left.

As soon as her majesties quality was known to us she was invited to go
on board the ship, where no presents were spard that were thought to be
agreable to her in consideration of the service she had been of to the
Dolphin. Among other things a childs dol was given to her of which she
seemd very fond. On her landing she met Hercules who for the future I
shall call by his real name Tootahah. She shewd him her presents: he
became uneasy nor was he satisfied till he had also got a doll given to him,
which now he seemd to preferr to a hatchet that he had in return for
presents, tho after this time the dolls were of no kind of value.

The men who visited us constantly eat with us of our provisions, but the
women never had been prevaild on to taste a morsel; today however they
retird sometime after dinner into the servants apartment and eat there a
large quantity of plantains, tho they could not be persuaded to eat with us,
a mystery we find it very dificult to account for.


1769 April 29.

My first business this morning was to see the promise I had made to
Tubourai and Tomio of the butchers being punishd performd, a promise
they had not faild to remind me of yesterday when the croud of people who
were with us hinderd it from being performd. In consequence of this I took
them on board of the ship where Capt Cooke immediately orderd the
offender to be punishd; they stood quietly and saw him stripd and fastned
to the rigging but as soon as the first blow was given interfered with many
tears, begging the punishment might cease a request which the Captn
would not comply with.

On my return ashore I proceeded to pay a visit to her majesty Oborea [as]
I shall for the future call her. She I was told was still asleep in her
Canoeawning, where I went intending to call up her majesty but was surprizd
to find her in bed with a hansome lusty young man of about 25 whose name
was Obadée. I however soon understood that he was her gallant a
circumstance which she made not the least secret of. Upon my arrival Her
majesty proceeded to put on her breeches which done she clothd me in fine
cloth and proceeded with me to the tents.

At night I visited Tubourai as I often did by candle light and found him
and all his family in a most melancholy mood: most of them shed tears so
that I soon left them without being at all able to find out the cause of their
greif. Ouwhá the Dolphins old man and another who we did not know had
prophesied to some of our people that in 4 days we should fire our guns:
this was the 4th night and the circumstance of Tubourai crying over me as
it was interpreted alarmd our officers a good deal. The sentrys are therefore
doubled and we sleep tonight under arms.


1769 April 30.

A very strict watch was kept last night as intended, at 2 in the morn
myself went round the point, found every thing so quiet that I had no kind
of doubts.

Our little fortification is now compleat, it consists of high breastworks at
each end, the front palisades and the rear guarded by the river on the bank
of which are placd full Water cask[s], at every angle is mounted a swivel
and two carraige guns pointed the two ways by which the Indians might
attack us out of the woods. Our sentrys are also as well releivd as they
could be in the most regular fortification.

About 10 Tomio came running to the tents, she seizd my hand and told
me that Tubourai was dying and I must go instantly with her to his house. I
went and Found him leaning his head against a post. He had vomited they
said and he told me he should certainly dye in consequence of something
our people had given him to eat, the remains of which were shewn me
carefully wrapd up in a leaf. This upon examination I found to be a Chew
of tobacco which he had begg'd of some of our people, and trying to
imitate them in keeping it in his mouth as he saw them do had chewd it
almost to powder swallowing his spittle. I was now master of his disease
for which I prescribd cocoa nut milk which soon restor'd him to health.


1769 May 1.

This morn in walking round the point I saw a canoe which I suppose to
have come from a distance by her having a quantity of fresh water in her in
Bamboes; in every other respect she is quite like those we have seen, her
people however are absolute strangers to us. Before noon our freinds visit
us as usual and the day passed without any events.


1769 May 2.

About 10 this morn the astronomical quadrant which had been brought
ashore yesterday was miss'd, a circumstance which alarmd us all very
much. It had been laid in Captn Cook's birth where no one slept, the
telescopes were in my tent safe. Every place was searchd aboard and
ashore but no such thing to be found. It appeard very improbable that the
Indians could have carried so large a thing out of the tents without being
observd by the sentries, our people might have stole [it] as it was packd up
in a deal case and might by them be suppos'd to contain nails or some kind
of traffick; a large reward was therefore offerd to any one who could find it
and all hands sent out to search round the fort, upon a supposition that the
Indians would immediately quit a prize that could be of so little use to
them. In about an hour all returnd, no news of the Quadrant. I now went
into the woods to get intelligence no longer doubting but that it was in the
hands of the Indians. Tubourai met me crossing the river and immediately
made with 3 straws in his hand the figure of a triangle: the Indians had
opend the cases. No time was now to be lost; I made signs to him that he
must instantly go with me to the place where it was, he agreed and out we
set acompanied by a midshipman and Mr Green, we went to the Eastward.
At every house we went past Tubourai enquird after the theif by name, the
people readily told him which way he had gone and how long ago it was
since he pass'd by, a circumstance which gave great hopes of coming up
with him. The weather was excessive hot, the Thermometer before we left
the tents up at 91 made our journey very tiresome. Sometimes we walk'd
sometimes we ran when we imagind (which we sometimes did) that the
chase was just before us till we arrivd at the top of a hill about 4 miles from
the tents: from this place Tubourai shew'd us a point about 3 miles off and
made us understand that we were not to expect the instrument till we got
there. We now considerd our situation, no arms among us but a pair of
pocket pistols which I always carried, going at least 7 miles from our fort
where the Indians might not be quite so submissive as at home, going also
to take from them a prize for which they had venturd their lives. All this
considerd we thought it proper that while Mr Green and myself proceeded
the midshipman should return and desire captn Cooke to send a party of
men after us, telling him at the same time that it was impossible we could
return till dark night. This done we proceeded and in the very spot
Tubourai had mentiond were met by one of his own people bringing part of
the Quadrant in his hand. We now stop'd and many Indians gatherd about
us rather rudely, the sight of one of my pistols however instantly checkd
them and they behav'd with all the order imaginable, tho we quickly had
some hundreds surrounding a ring we had markd out on the grass. The box
was now brought to us and some of the small matters such as reading
glasses etc. which in their hurry they had put into a pistol case, this I knew
belongd to me, it had been stole out of the tents with a horse pistol in it
which I immediately demanded and had immediately restord. Mr Green
began to overlook the Instrument to see if any part or parts were wanting,
several small things were, and people were sent out in search of them some
of which returnd and others did not; the stand was not there but that we
were informd had been left behind by the theif and we should have it on
our return, and answer which coming from Tubourai satisfied us very well;
nothing else was wanting but what could easily be repaird so we pack'd all
up in grass as well as we could and proceeded homewards. After walking
about 2 miles we met Captn Cooke with a party of marines coming after
us, all were you may imagine not a little pleasd at the event of our
excursion.

The Captn on leaving the Tents left orders both for the ship and shore,
which were that no canoes should be suffer'd to go out of the bay but that
nobodys person should be seizd or detaind, as we rightly guessd that none
of our freinds had any hand in the theft. These orders were obeyd by the
1st Lieutenant who was ashore, but the second aboard seeing some canoes
going along shore sent a boat to fetch them back; the boatswain
commander did so and with them brought Dootahah, the rest of their crews
leap'd overboard, he was sent ashore prisoner. The 1st Lieutenant of course
could not do less than confine him which he did to the infinite
dissatisfaction of all the Indians, this we heard from them 2 miles before
we reachd the tents on our return. Tubourai, Tomaio and every Indian that
we let in Joind in lamenting over Dootahah with many tears. I arrivd about
a quarter of an Hour before the Captn during which time this scene lasted;
as soon as he came he orderd him to be instantly set at liberty which done
he walkd off sulky enough tho at his departure he presented us with a pig.


1769 May 3.

Dr Solander and myself who have all along acted in the capacity of
market men attended this morn but no kind of provisions were brought,
indeed few Indians appeard except the servants of Dootahah who very
early took away his Canoe. Soon after Tubia (Obereas right hand man who
was with her in the Dolphins time) came and overhauld every part of her
canoe which had also been detaind, seemd satisfied with what he saw so
much so that he would not take it away. About noon several fishing boats
came abreast the tents, they however parted with very few fish. In the
course of the whole day a small quantity of bread fruit was got cheifly in a
present and 6 Cocoa nuts only were bought, a very disagreable change this
from our former situation; we have now no cocoa nuts and not ¼ enough
of bread fruit for the people, who have scarce ever before faild to turn
away the latter from the market and purchase of the other from 3 to 400 a
day.

In the course of the day I went into the woods. The Indians were civil but
every where complaind of the ill usage Dootahah had met with, they said
that he had been beat and pulld by the hair; I endeavour'd all I could to
convince them that no violence had been offerd to them but without
success, I fear the Boatswain has been rougher in his usage of him than he
chuses to acknowledge. Tupia stayd with us all day and at night slept in
Oboreas Canoe not without a bedfellow tho the gentleman cannot be less
than 45.


1769 May 4.

No trade this morn but a little fish so we are for the first time in distress
for nescessaries. I went into the woods to Tubourai and perswauded him to
give me 5 long baskets of bread fruit, a very seasonable supply as they
contain above 120 fruits. A very few Indians appear today before the fort,
fewer than yesterday. After dinner came a messenger from Dootahah
requesting a shirt and a hatchet (he had been here yesterday with the same
demand) I suppose in return for the hog he gave us on his release; the
Captn sent him back telling him that he would tomorrow visit him and
bring the things himself. In the Evening I went into the woods, found the
Indians as usual civil but complaining much of the treatment Dootahah had
met with on the 2nd.


1769 May 5.

This morn Obadée (her majesties bedfellow) came pretty early to visit us
or rather himself to take a view of her canoe. He carefully overhauld every
thing in it and complaind of the Loss of some trifling thing I could not
understand what; after this he brought every thing out of it and deliverd
them into my charge desiring that they might be taken care of, after which
he left us. A very small quantity of Bread fruit brought this morn. At
breakfast time came two messengers from Dootahah to put the captn in
mind of his promise of Visiting him. Accordingly at 9 the boat set out
carrying the Captn Dr Solander and myself. We arrivd in about an hour,
Eparre his residence being about 4 miles from the tents. An immence
throng of people met us on the shore crowding us very much tho they were
severely beat for so doing by a tall well looking [man] who lacd about him
with a long stick most unmercifully, striking all who did not get out of his
way without intermission till he had cleard us a path sufficient to go to
Dootahah, who was seated under a tree attended by a few grave looking
old men. With him we sat down and made our presents consisting of an ax
and a gown of Broad cloth made after their fashion and trimmd with tape,
with these he seemd mightily satisfied. Soon after this Oborea joind us and
with her I retird to a house adjacent where I could be free from the
suffocating heat occasiond by so large a crowd of people as were gatherd
about us. Here was prepard for our diversion an entertainment quite new to
us, a wrestling match at which the other gentlemen soon joind us. A large
court yard raild round with Bamboo about 3 feet high was the scene of this
diversion; at one end of this Dootahah was seated and near him was left
seats for us but we rather chose to range at large among the spectators than
confine ourselves to any particular spot.

The diversion began by the combatants some of them at least walking
round the yard with a slow and grave pace every now and then striking
their left arms very hard, by which they causd a deep and very loud noise,
which it seems was a challenge to each other or any one of the company
who chose to engage in the exercise. Within the house stood the old men
ready to give applause to the victor and some few women who seem'd to be
here out of compliment to us, as much the larger number absented
themselves upon the occasion.

The general challenge was given as I before said, the particular one soon
followd it by which any man singled out his antagonist, it was done by
joining the finger ends of both hands even with the breast and then moving
the Elbows up and down. If this was accepted the challenged immediately
returnd the signal and instantly both put themselves in an attitude to
engage, which they very soon did striving to seize each other by the hands
hair or the cloth they had round their middles, for they had no other dress.
This done they attempted to seize each other by the thigh which commonly
decided the contest in the fall of him who was thus taken at disadvantage;
if this was not soon done they always parted either by consent or their
freinds interferd in less than a minute, in which case both began to clap
their arms and seek anew for an antagonist either in each other or some one
else.

When any one fell the whole amusement ceasd for a few moments, in
which time the old men in the house gave their aplause in a few words
which they repeated together in a kind of tune.

This lasted about 2 hours, all which time the man who we observd at our
first Landing continued to beat the people who did not keep at a proper
distance most unmercifully. We understood that he was some officer
belonging to Dootahah and was calld his Tom'te.

The wrestling over the gentlemen informed me that they understood that
2 hoggs and a large quantity of Bread fruit etc. was cooking for our
dinners, news which pleasd me very well as my stomach was by this time
sufficiently prepard for the repast. I went out and saw the ovens in which
they were now buried, these the Indians readily shewd me telling me at the
same time that they would soon be ready and how good a dinner we should
have. In about half an hour all was taken up but now Dootahah began to
repent of his intended generosity; he thought I suppose that a hog would be
lookd upon as no more than a dinner and consequently no present made in
return, he therefore changd his mind and ordering one of the pigs into the
boat sent for us who soon collected together and getting our Knives
prepard to fall too, saying that it was civil of the old gentleman to bring the
provisions into the boat where we could with ease keep the people at a
proper distance, who in the house would have crouded us almost to death.
His intention was however very different from ours for instead of asking us
to eat he ask'd to go on board of the ship, a measure we were forcd to
comply with and row 4 miles with the pig growing cold under our noses
before he would give it to us. Aboard however we dind upon this same pig
and his majesty eat very heartily with us. After dinner we went ashore, the
sight of Dootahah reconcild to us acted like a charm upon the people and
before night bread fruit and cocoa nuts were brought to sell in tolerable
plenty.


1769 May 6.

Plenty of bread-fruit at market this morn but few cocoa nuts. After dinner
Dootahah visited the tents bringing 5 baskets of breadfruit and some cocoa
nuts; he went to the eastward and slept tonight at the long house. Trade
rather slack this morn, but we have so muc bread-fruit before hand from
the trade and presents of yesterday that [it] is immaterial whether we buy
any or not today.


1769 May 7.

After dinner Dootahah came in a double canoe, after him came another
bringing 4 hogs and one of these he orderd out of the boat with some bread
fruit. I undertook to coax him out of the rest but had not the success I could
have wishd, he would part with only one more and for that both the Captn
and myself were obligd to go aboard with him and give him a broad ax.


1769 May 8.

Msrs Molineux and Green went to the eastward today in the pinnace
intending to purchase hoggs. They went 20 miles, saw many hogs and one
turtle but the people would part with neither one nor the other, they
belongd they said to Dootahah and without his leave they could not sell
them. We now begin to think that Dootahah is indeed a great king much
greater than we have been usd to imagine him, indeed his influence upon
the late occasion as well as today has prov'd to be so great that we can
hardly doubt it. Mr Green measurd today a tree which he saw, it provd to
be 60 yards in circumference. He brought home some boughs of it but they
were thrown overboard before I could see them so the species of this
monstrous tree remains a doubt with us.

This morn I fix'd my little boat before the door of the Fort, it serves very
well for a place to trade in. Trade is not now as it has been, formerly we
usd to buy enough for all hands between sunrise and 8 O'Clock now
attendance must be given all day or little can be done.


1769 May 9.

Cocoa nuts have been for some days rather scarce, we are therefore
obligd for the first time to bring out our nails. Last night our smallest size
about 4 inches long were offerd for 20 Cocoa nutts, accordingly this morn
several came with that number so that we had plenty of them. Smaller lots
as well as bread fruit sold as usual for beads.

Soon after breakfast Came Oborea, Obadee and Tupia bringing a hog and
some breadfruit; they stayd with us till night then took away their canoe
and promisd to return in 3 days. We had to day 350 Cocoa nuts and more
bread fruit than we would buy so that we aproach our former plenty.


1769 May 10.

This morn Captn Cooke planted divers seeds which he had brought with
him in a spot of ground turnd up for the purpose. They were all bought of
Gordon at Mile End and sent in bottles seald up, whether or no that method
will succeed the event of this plantation will shew. Plenty of Bread fruit
and cocoanuts again today. Towards evening Tubourai and Tomio returnd
from the west and seemd extreemly glad to see all of us.

We have now got the Indian name of the Island, Otahite, so therefore for
the future I shall call it. As for our own names the Indians find so much
dificulty in pronouncing them that we are forcd to indulge them in calling
us what they please, or rather what they say when they attempt to
pronounce them. I give here the List: Captn Cooke Toote, Dr Solander
Torano, Mr Hicks Hete, Mr Gore Toárro, Mr Molineux Boba from his
Christian name Robert, Mr Monkhouse Mato, and myself Tapáne. In this
manner they have names for almost every man in the ship.


1769 May 11.

Cocoa nuts were brought down so plentifully this morn that by ½ past 6
I had bought 350: this made it nescessary to drop the price of them least so
many being brought at once we should exhaust the countrey and want
hereafter; notwistanding I had before night bought more than a thousand at
the rates of 6 for an amber coulourd bead, 10 for a white one, and 20 for a
fortypenny nail.


1769 May 12.

Cocoa nuts very plentifull this morning. About breakfast time Dootahah
visits us. Immediately after while I sat trading in the boat at the door of the
fort a double Canoe came with several women and one man under the
awning. The Indians round me made signs that I should go out and meet
them, by the time I had got out of the boat they were within ten yards of
me. The people made a lane from them to me. They stopd and made signs
for me to do the same. The man in company with them had in his hand a
large bunch of boughs; he advancd towards me bringing two, one a young
plantain the other [] . Tupia who stood by me acted as my deputy in
receiving them and laying them down in the boat: 6 times he passd
backwards and forwards in the same manner and bringing the same
present. Another man than came forward having in his arms a large bundle
of cloth, this he opend out and spread it peice by peice on the ground
between the women and me, it consisted on nine peices. Three were first
laid. The foremost of the women, who seemd to be the principal, then stepd
upon them and quickly unveiling all her charms gave me a most
convenient opportunity of admiring them by turning herself gradualy
round: 3 peices more were laid and she repeated her part of the ceremony:
the other three were then laid which made a treble covering of the ground
between her and me, she then once more displayd her naked beauties and
immediately marchd up to me, a man following her and doubling up the
cloth as he came forwards which she immediately made me understand
was intended as a present for me. I took her by the hand and led her to the
tents acompanied by another woman her freind, to both of them I made
presents but could not prevail upon them to stay more than an hour. In the
evening Oborea and her favourite attendant Othéothéa pay us a visit, much
to my satisfaction as the latter (my flame) has for some days been reported
either ill or dead.


1769 May 13.

Our Freinds with us this morn in very good time as they generaly are,
very shortly after sunrise plenty of cocoa nuts etc. at the market. After it
was over, about 10 O'Clock, I walkd into the woods with my gun, as I
generaly did to spend the heat of the day in the Indian houses where I could
be cool from the shade of the trees which every where grow about them. In
my return I met Tubourai near his house; I stopd with him, he took my gun
out of my hand, cockd it and holding it up in the air drew the trigger,
fortunately for him it flashd in the pan. Where he had got so much
knowledge of the use of a gun I could not conceive but was sufficiently
angry that he should attempt to exersise it upon mine, as I had upon all
occasions taught him and the rest of the Indians that they could not offend
me so much as even to touch it. I scolded him severely and even threatned
to shoot him. He bore all patiently but the moment I had crossd the river he
and his family bag and baggage movd of to their other house at Eparre.

This step was no sooner taken than I was informd of it by the Indians about
the fort. Not willing to lose the assistance of a man who had upon all
occasions been particularly usefull to us I resolv'd to go this evening and
bring him back, acordingly as soon as dinner was over I set out
acompanied by Mr Molineux. We found him setting in the middle of a
large circle of people, himself and many of the rest with most melancholy
countenances some in tears; one old woman on our coming into the circle
struck a sharks tooth into her head many times till it foamd with blood but
her head seemd to have been so often excersisd with this expression of
greif that it was become quite callous, for tho the crown of it was coverd
with blood enough did not issue from the wounds to run upon her cheeks.
After some few assurances of forgiveness Tubourai agreed to return with
us, in consequence of which resolution a double canoe was put off in
which we all returnd to the tents before supper time, and as a token of a
renewal of freindship both him and his wife slept in my tent all night.

About 11 one of the natives atempted to scale our walls intending no
doubt to steal whatever he could find, but seeing himself observd he made
off much faster than any of our people could follow him.


1769 May 14.

Our freinds Dootahah, Oborea, Otheothea etc. at the tents this morn as
usual. It being Sunday Captn Cooke proposd that divine service should be
celebrated but before the proper time of doing it most of our Indian freinds
were gone home to eat. I was resolvd however that some should be present
that they might see our behaviour and we might if possible explain to them
(in some degree at least) the reasons of it. I went therefore over the river
and brought back Tubourai and Tomio and having seated them in the tent
plac'd myself between them. During the whole service they imitated my
motions, standing setting or kneeling as they saw me do, and so much
understood that we were about something very serious that they calld to the
Indians without the fort to be silent; notwisthstanding this they did not
when the service was over ask any questions nor would they attend at all to
any explanation we attempted to give them. We have not yet seen the least
traces of religion among these people, maybe they are intirely without it.


1769 May 15.

In the course of last night one of the Indians was clever enough to steal
an Iron bound cask; it was indeed without the fort but so immediately
under the eye of the Sentry that we could hardly beleive the possibility of
such a thing having [happened] when we lookd at the place. The Indians
however acknowledg'd it and seemd inclind to give intelligence, in
consequence of which I set off in pursuit of it and tracd it to a part of the
bay where they told me it had been put into a canoe. The thing was not of
consequence enough to pursue with any great spirit so I returnd home
where I found Oborea, Otheothea, Obadee etc. At night Tubourai made
many signs that another cask would be stole before morning, and thinking I
suppose that we did not sufficiently regard them himself his wife and
family came to the place where the cask[s] lay and making their beds said
that they would themselves take care that no one should steal them. On
being told this I went to them and explaining to them that a Sentry was this
night put over those particular casks they agreed to come and sleep in my
tent, but insisted upon leaving a servant to assist the sentry in case the theif
came, which he did about 12 and was seen by the Sentry who fird at him
on which he retreated most expeditiously.


1769 May 16.

The morning wet and disagreable. We hauld the Seine in several parts of
the bay without the least success; the Indians are so fond of fish and so
expert in catching it, using almost every method we do in Europe, that our
want of success is not at all to be wonderd at. Tonight Tubourai, Tamio,
Oborea, Obadee and Otheothea slept in my tent. At midnight the water
casks were again atempted and two shot fird at the theif which alarmd my
bedfellows not a little, they were however soon quieted by my going out
and bringing back word of the reason of the firing.


1769 May 17.

Fine weather. Oborea and her freinds went early to Eparre as the rest of
our cheifs did yesterday in 18 double canoes, so that we are quite dull for
want of company in the tents. Tubourai and Tamio slept with me as usual.


1769 May 18.

Fine weather and good market, the apples begin now to be ripe and are
brought in in large quantities very cheap so that apple pies are a standing
dish with us.


1769 May 19.

This morning Tubourai who had slept [with] me as usual was observd by
my servant to have an uncommonly large nail under his Cloaths, this I was
informd of and knowing that no such had been either given or dispos'd of
in trade was obligd to suspect my freind of theft. I therefore went instantly
to his house and chargd him with it, he immediately confessd but atempted
to keep his booty by telling me that the nail was gone to Eparre. I became
much in earnest and a few threats soon produc'd the stolen goods. I was
more hurt at the discovery than he was, I firmly beleive he was the only
Indian I trusted and in him I had placd a most unbounded confidence, this
event shews more than he could bear: 7 of these nails lay in a basket in one
of the tents and on examining it 5 were missing. I thought it nesscessary
after this discovery to bring the offender to the tents to receive judgement
which I did. Every body there was of opinion that his fault was pardonable.
I confess that upon thinking over the circumstances I blam'd myself more
for leaving the nails in his way than him for stealing them. It was therefore
resolvd that if he brought back the other 4 he should be forgiven and his
fault forgot: this I told him and he agreed readily, but instead of performing
his part he and his family movd off before night taking with them all their
furniture.


1769 May 20.

Rain and very disagreeable weather so that we had but little trade. About
10 Oborea came to the fort and brough[t] a large present of bread fruit, she
had with her Otheothea and her other maids of honour as we call them but
Obadee her gentleman attendant was absent. We enquird the reason, she
told us that she had dismiss'd him; about 8 however he came by torch light
and going to the house in the woods where she slept slept with her.


1769 May 21.

Sunday, Divine service performd, at which was present Oborea,
Otheothea, Obadee, etc. all behav'd very decently. After dinner Obadee
who had been for some time absent returnd to the fort. Oborea desird he
might not be let in, his countenance was however so melancholy that we
could not but admit him. He lookd most piteously at Oborea, she most
disdainfully at him; she seems to us to act in the character of a Ninon
d'Enclos who satiated with her lover resolves to change him at all Events,
the more so as I am offerd if I please to supply his place, but I am at
present otherwise engag'd; indeed was I free as air her majesties person is
not the most desireable.


1769 May 22.

This morning showery and cool, seemingly a good opportunity of going
upon the hills. I went accompanied only by Indians, indeed all of them but
one soon left me, he however accompanied me during my whole walk. The
paths were very open and clear till I came to the woods but afterwards very
bad, so much so that I could not reach the top of the lowest of the two high
hills seen from the fort, which was all I intended. I was in some measure
however recompens'd by finding several plants which I had not before
seen, with which I returnd before sunset, and had Oborea, Obadee and
Otheothea to sleep with me in my tent.


1769 May 23.

Trade very slack today, so much so that we have only Cocoa nuts for the
sick, and the people are obligd to have bread servd them at dinner.


1769 May 24.

We had receivd repeated messages from Dootahah signifying that if we
would go and visit him we should have 4 hogs for our pains; in
consequence of this our first Lieutenant was sent today with orders to go to
him and try if by any civilities he could shew him he could procure them.
He found him removd from his old residence at Eparre to a place calld
Tettaháh about 5 miles farther. He was reciv'd with great cordiality, one
hog was immediately producd and he was told that the others should be
brough[t] somewhere from a distance if he would stay till next morning.
This he did not at all scruple, the morning came however without the hogs
so he was obligd to return with the one he had got over night not a little
dissatisfied with Dootahahs nonperformance of his promises.

Msrs Monkhouse and Green atempted this day to climb the same hill that
I attempted on the 22nd, with much the same success; they got however
higher than I did but could not reach the summit.


1769 May 25.

Tubourai and Tamio made their appearance at the fort for the first time
since the breach of the 19th, he in particular seemd much frightned nor did
my behavior to him give him much comfort. I had resolvd not to restore
him either to my freindship or confidence unless he restord the nails which
he seemd to have no intention of dooing; after staying a little time he went
home sulky as he came.


1769 May 26.

Mr Monkhouse who I think is rather too partial to Tubourai went this
morn to his house intending to persuade him to come to the tents. He made
many excuses, he was hungry, he must sleep, his head achd, in short he
would not nor did not come. Tamio however did but took alarm at my
being absent who was aboard of the ship and soon departed.


1769 May 27.

This day Mr Monkhouse went to Eparre with Tubourai and Tamio.
Market tolerable. Mr Hicks in his return from Dootahah brought word that
if the Captn would go over the 4 piggs would be given to him: this producd
a resolution of going tomorrow, tho we none of us much credited his
promise, yet we would leave no stone unturnd to keep him in good
humour. I omitted to mention on the 25th that the longboat being very
leaky was hauld dry and her bottom found to be eat intirely through by the
worm, which surprizes us much as the Dolphins boats met with no such
inconvenience: her bottom was payd with brimstone and tallow. The
pinnace which has been in the water as long as her is totaly untouchd
which we atribute to hers being painted with white lead and oil.


1769 May 28.

This morn the pinnace set out for the Eastward with the Captn Dr
Solander and myself. Dootahah was removd from Tettahah where Mr
Hicks saw him on the 24th to Atahourou, about 6 miles farther, a place to
which the boat could not go. We were resolv'd not to be disapointed so
walkd afoot. It was evening before we arrivd, we found him setting under a
tree with a vast croud about him as usual; we made our presents in due
form consisting of a yellow stuff peticoat etc. which were graciously
receivd, and a hog immediately [brought] with many promises of more in
the morning. Night came on apace, it was nescessary to look out for
lodgings; as Dootahah made no offer of any I repaird to my old Freind
Oborea who readily gave me a bed in her canoe much to my satisfaction. I
acquainted my fellow travelers with my good fortune and wishing them as
good took my leave. We went to bed early as is the custom here: I strippd
myself for the greater convenience of sleeping as the night was hot. Oborea
insisted that my cloths should be put into her custody, otherwise she said
they would certainly be stolen. I readily submitted and laid down to sleep
with all imaginable tranquility. About 11 I awakd and wanting to get up
felt for my clothes in the place in which I had seen them laid at night but
they were missing. I awakd Oborea, she started up and on my complaining
of the Loss candles were immediately lit. Dootahah who slept in the next
canoe came to us and both went in search of the theif, for such it seems it
was who had stolen my coat and waistcoat with my pistols powder horn
etc., they returnd however in about ½ an hour without any news of the
stolen goods. I began to be a little alarmd, my musquet was left me, but
that by my neglect the night before was not loaded; I did not know where
Captn Cooke or Dr Solander had disposd of themselves, consequently
could not call upon them for assistance; Tupia stood near me awakd by the
Hubbub that had been raisd on account of my Loss; to him I gave my
Musquet charging him to take care that the theif did not get it from him,
and betook myself again to rest, telling my companions in the boat that I
was well satisfied with the pains that Oborea and Dootahah had taken for
the recovery of my things. Soon after I heard their musick and saw lights
near me; I got up and went towards them, it was a heiva or assembly
according to their custom. Here I saw Captn Cooke and told my
melancholy story, he was my fellow sufferer, he had lost his stockins and
two young gentlemen who were with him had lost each a Jacket. Dr
Solander was away we neither of us knew where: we talkd over our losses
and agreed that nothing could be done toward recovering them till the
morning, after which we parted and went to our respective sleeping places.


1769 May 29.

At day break we rose according to the custom of our companions. Tupia
was the first man I saw, atending with my Musquet and the remainder of
my cloaths, his faith had often been tried, on this occasion it shone very
much. Oborea took care to provide me with cloth to supply the place of my
lost Jacket so that I made a motley apearance, my dress being half English
and half Indian. Dootahah soon after made his apearance; I pressd him to
recover my Jacket but neither he nor Oborea would take the least step
towards it so that I am almost inclind to beleive that they acted principals
in the theft. Indeed if they did it may be said in their excuse that they knew
I had in my pockets a pair of pistols, weopons to them more dreadfull than
a cannon to a man marching up to its mouth: could they get possession of
them they thought no doubt that they would be as usefull to them as to us;
self defence and preservation therefore in this case came in opposition to
the laws of hospitality, duties to which mankind usualy give the preference
in all cases.

About 8 Dr Solander returnd from a house about a mile off where he had
slept: he had met with more honest companions than we had for nothing of
his was missing. We spent the most of the morning in trying to persuade
our freinds either to restore our cloaths or give us some hogs acording to
promise, but neiether could we do, so we were forcd to set out for the boat
with only the pig got yesterday, dissatisfied enough with our expedition.

In our return to the boat we saw the Indians amuse or excersise
themselves in a manner truly surprizing. It was in a place where the shore
was not guarded by a reef as is usualy the case, consequently a high surf
fell upon the shore, a more deadfull one I have not often seen: no European
boat could have landed in it and I think no Europaean who had by any
means got into [it] could possibly have saved his life, as the shore was
coverd with pebbles and large stones. In the midst of these breakers 10 or
12 Indians were swimming who whenever a surf broke near them divd
under it with infinite ease, rising up on the other side; but their cheif
amusement was carried on by the stern of an old canoe, with this before
them they swam out as far as the outermost breach, then one or two would
get into it and opposing the blunt end to the breaking wave were hurried in
with incredible swiftness. Sometimes they were carried almost ashore but
generaly the wave broke over them before they were half way, in which
case the[y] divd and quickly rose on the other side with the canoe in their
hands, which was towd out again and the same method repeated. We stood
admiring this very wonderfull scene for full half an hour, in which time no
one of the actors atempted to come ashore but all seemd most highly
entertaind with their strange diversion.


1769 May 30.

Carpenters employd today in repairing the long boat which is eat in a
most wonderfull manner, every part of her bottom is like a honeycomb and
some of the holes 1/8th of an inch in diameter, such a progress has this
destructive insect made in six weeks.


1769 May 31.

The day of Observation now aproaches. The weather has been for some
days fine, tho in general since we have been upon the Island we have had
as much cloudy as clear weather, which makes us all not a little anxious for
success. In consequence of hints from Lord Morton the Captn resolves to
send a party to the eastward, and another to Imáo, an Island in sight of us,
thinking that in case of thick weather one or the other might be more
successfull than the observatory. The Carpenters work very hard to finish
the long boat. I resolve to go on the Imáo expedition.


1769 June 1.

The boat could not be got ready till after dinner when we set out; we
rowd most of the night and came to a grapling just under the land of Imáo.


1769 June 2.

Soon after day break we saw an Indian canoe and upon hailing her she
shewed us an inlet through the reef, into [which] we pulld and soon fixd
upon a Coral rock about 150 yards from the shore as a very proper
situation for our Observatory; it was about 80 yards long and 60 broad and
had in hte middle of it a bed of white sand large enough for our tents to
stand upon. The 2nd Lieutent and people therefore immediately set about it
while I went upon the main Island to trade with the inhabitants for
provisions, of which I soon bought a sufficient supply. Before night our
observatory was in order, telescopes all set up and tried etc. and we went to
rest anxious for the events of tomorrow; the evening having been very fine
gave us however great hopes of success.


1769 June 3.

Various were the Changes observd in the weather during the course of
last night, some one or other of us was up every half hour who constantly
informd the rest that it was either clear or Hazey, at day break we rose and
soon after had the satisfaction of seeing the sun rise as clear and bright as
we could wish him. I then wishd success to the observers Msrs Gore and
Monkhouse and repaird to the Island, where I could do the double service
of examining the natural produce and buying provisions for my
companions who were engagd in so usefull a work. About eight a large
quantity of provisions were procurd when I saw two boats coming towards
the place where I traded; these I was told belongd to Tarróa the King of the
Island who was coming to pay me a visit. As soon as the boats came near
the shore the people formd a lane; he landed bringing with him his sister
Nuna and both came towards the tree under which I stood. I went out and
met them and brought them very formaly into a circle I had made, into
which I had before sufferd none of the natives to come. Standing is not the
fashion among these people, I must provide them a seat,, which I did by
unwrapping a turban of Indian cloth which I wore instead of a hat and
spreading it upon the ground; upon which we all sat down and the kings
present was brought Consisting of a hog, a dog and a quantity of Bread
fruit Cocoa nuts etc. I immediately sent a canoe to the Observatory to fetch
my present, an adze a shirt and some beads with which his majesty seemd
well satisfied. Tubourai and Tamio who came with us now came from the
observatory; she said that she was related to Tarroa and brought him a
present, a long nail and a shirt, which she gave to Nuna. After the first
Internal contact was over I went to my Companions at the observatory
carrying with me Tarroa, Nuna and some of their cheif atendants; to them
we shewd the planet upon the sun and made them understand that we came
on purpose to see it. After this they went back and myself with them. I
spent the rest of the day in examining the produce etc. of the Island and
found it very nearly similar to that of Otahite, the people exactly the same,
indeed we saw many of the Identical same people as we had often seen at
Otahite, and every one knew well every kind of trade we had and the value
it bore in that Island. The hills in general came nearer to the water and flats
were consequently less, and less Fertile, than at Otahite--the low point
near which we lay was composd intirely of sand and coral. Here neither
Breadfruit nor any usefull vegetables would grow; it was coverd over with
Pandanus tectorius and with these grew several plants we had not seen at
Otahite, among them Iberis [] , which Mr Gore tells me is the plant calld by
the voyagers scurvy grass which grows plentifully upon all the low Islands.
At sunset I came off having purchasd another hog from the King. Soon
after my arrival at the tent 3 hansome girls came off in a canoe to see us,
they had been at the tent in the morning with Tarroa, they chatted with us
very freely and with very little perswasion agreed to send away their
carriage and sleep in [the] tent, a proof of confidence which I have not
before met with upon so short an acquaintance.


1769 June 4.

We prepard ourselves to depart, in spite of the intreaties of our fair
companions who persuaded us much to stay. What with presents and trade
our stock of Provisions was so large that we were obligd to give away a
large quantity. This done we put off and before night arrivd at the tents,
where we had the great satisfaction that the observation there had been
attended with as much success as Mr Green and the Captn could wish, the
day having been perfectly clear not so much as a cloud interveining. We
also heard the melancholy news that a large part of our stock of Nails had
been purloind by some of the ships company during the time of the
Observation, when every body was ashore who had any degree of comand.
One of the theives was detected but only 7 nails were found upon him our
of 100 Wt and he bore his punishment without impeaching any of his
acomplices. This loss is of a very serious nature as these nails if circulated
by the people among the Indians will much lessen the value of Iron, our
staple commodity.


1769 June 5.

During our absence at Imao an old woman of some consequence, a
relation of Tamio, was dead and was plac'd not far from the fort to rot
above ground as is the custom of the Island. I went this morn to see her. A
small square was neatly raild in with Bamboe and in the midst of it a
Canoe awning set up upon two posts, in this the body was laid coverd with
fine cloth. Near this was laid fish etc. meat for the gods not for the
deceasd, but to satisfie the hunger of the deitys least they shoud eat the
body, which Tubourai told us they would certainly do if this ceremony was
neglected. In the front of the square was a kind of stile or place lower than
the rest, where the relations of the deceasd stood when they cry'd or bled
themselves, and under the awning were numberless rags containing the
blood and tears they had shed. Within a few yards were two occasional
houses; in one of them some of the relations constantly remaind generaly a
good many; in the other the cheif male mourner resided and kept a very
remarkable Dress in which he performd a ceremony, both which I shall
describe when I have an opportunity of seeing it in perfection which
Tubourai promises me I shall soon have.

This day we kept the Kings birthday which had been delayd on account
of the absence of the two observing parties; several of the Indians dind
with us and drank his majesties health by the name of Kihiargo, for we
could not teach them to pronounce a word more like King George. Tupia
however to shew his Loyalty got most enormously drunk.


1769 June 6.

In walking into the woods yesterday I saw in the hands of an Indian an
Iron tool made in the shape of the Indian adzes, very different I was sure
from any thing that had been carried out or made either by the Dolphin or
this ship. This excited my curiosity, much the more so when I was told that
it did not come out of either of those ships but from two others which came
here together. This was a discovery not to be neglected. With much
dificulty and labour I at last got the following account of them, viz, that in
their month of Pepére which answers to our January 1768 2 Spanish ships
came here commanded by a man whoom they calld To Otterah; that they
lay 8 days in a bay calld Hidea, some leagues to the eastward of Matavie
where the ship now lies; that during their stay they sent tents ashore and
some slept in them; that they were cheifly connected with a cheif whose
name was Orétte, whose younger brother they carried away with them
promising to return in nine months; that they had on board their ships a
woman; and that on their departure they stood to the westward as long as
they were seen from the Island. I was very particular in these inquiries as
the Knowledge got by them may be of some consequence. The methods I
took to gain this account would be much too tedious to mention: one of my
greatest dificulties was to determine of what nation they were which was
done thus, I pointed to our colours and ask'd whether the ships had such or
not. No, was the answer when the question was thouroughly understood. I
opend a large sheet of Flaggs and askd which of them they had: Tubourai
lookd stedfastly over them and at last pitchd upon the Spanish ensign and
to that he adhered tho we tryd him over and over.


1769 June 7.

We were this morn visited by several of Dootahahs relations women
especialy, probably to sound us upon the score of our usage at Atahourou.
We had resolvd at that place rather to put up with our losses than to mattow
or frighten the Indians, the consequence of which we knew to be scarcity
of provisions; we therefore treated these people very well, making them
presents to tempt them to come again and bring Dootahah, king of the hogs
as we calld him and certainly have always found him.


1769 June 8.

Fresh proofs of the Spanish ships every day in thing[s] of theirs which
have been left here, among the rest a course shirt and a woolen jacket both
of manufacture different from any English.


1769 June 9.

Yesterday and today the Heiva no Meduah or funeral ceremony walkd.
My curiosity was raisd by his most singular dress. I was desirous of
knowing what he did during his walk; I askd Tubourai, at the same time
desird leave to atend him tomorrow which upon my consenting to perform
a character was readily granted. Tomorrow therefore I am to be smutted
from head to foot and to do whatever they desire me to do. Bread fruit has
for some time been scarce with us; about 10 days ago the trees were thinnd
all at once from their being a great shew of fruit; every one was employd in
making Mahie for about a week. Where the breadfruit we now have comes
from we cannot tell, but we have more than the woods in our neighbourhood
can supply us with. Probably our consumption has thinnd the trees in
this neighbourhood, as the Dolphins who came here about this time saw
great plenty all the time they stayd; if this is the case what we
now get may be brought from some neig[h]bouring place where the trees
are not yet exhausted.


1769 June 10.

This evening according to my yesterdays engagement I went to the place
where the medua lay, where I found Tubourai, Tamio, Hoona the Meduas
daughter and a young Indian prepard to receive me. Tubourai was the
Heiva, the three others and myself were to Nineveh. He put on his dress,
most Fantastical tho not unbecoming, the figure annexd will explain it far
better than words can. I was next prepard by stripping off my European
cloths and putting me on a small strip of cloth round my waist, the only
garment I was allowd to have, but I had no pretensions to be ashamd of my
nakedness for neither of the women were a bit more coverd than myself.
They then began to smut me and themselves with charcoal and water, the
Indian boy was compleatly black, the women and myself as low as our
shoulders. We then set out. Tubourai began by praying twice, one near the
Corps again near his own house. We then proceeded towards the fort: it
was nesscessary it seems that the procession should visit that place but they
dare not to do it without the sanction of some of us, indeed it was not till
many assurances of our consent that they venturd to perform any part of
their ceremonies. To the fort then we went to the surprize of our freinds
and affright of the Indians who were there, for they every where fly before
the Heiva like sheep before a wolf. We soon left it and proceeded along
shore towards a place where above 100 Indians were collected together.
We the Ninevehs had orders from the Heiva to disperse them, we ran
towards them but before we cam[e] within 100 yards of them they dispers'd
every way, running to the first shelter, hiding themselves under grass or
whatever else would conceal them. We now crossd the river into the woods
and passd several houses, all were deserted, not another Indian did we see
for about ½ an hour that we sepnt in walking about. We the Ninevehs
then came to the Heiva and said imatata, there are no people; after which
we repaird home, the Heiva undressd and we went into the river and
scrubbd one another till it was dark before the blacking would come off.


1769 June 11.

This Evening Tubourai came to the tents bringing a bow and arrows, in
consequence of a challenge Mr Gore had given him sometime ago to shoot.
This challenge was however misunderstood, Tubourai meant to try who
could shoot the farthest, Mr Gore to shoot at a mark and neither was at all
practisd in what the other valued himself upon. Tubourai to please us shot
in his way; he knelt down and drew the bow and as soon as he let slip the
string droppd the bow from his hand, the arrow however went 274 yards.


1769 June 12.

In my mornings walk today I met a company of traveling musicians; they
told me where they should be at night so after supper we all repaird to the
place. There was a large concourse of people round this band, which
consisted of 2 flutes and three drums, the drummers acompanying their
musick with their voices; they sung many songs generaly in praise of us,
for these gentlemen like Homer of old must be poets as well as musicians.
The Indians seeing us entertaind with their musick, askd us to sing them an
English song, which we most readily agreed to and receivd much applause,
so much so that one of the musicians became desirous of going to England
to learn to sing. These people by what we can learn go about from house to
house, the master of the house and the audience paying them for their
musick in cloth, meat, beads or any thing else which the one wants and the
other can spare.


1769 June 13.

Mr Monkhouse our surgeon met to day with an insult from an Indian, the
first that has been met with by any of us. He was pulling a flower from a
tree which grew on a burying ground and consequently was I suppose
sacred, when an Indian came behind him and struck him; he seiz'd hold of
him and attempted to beat him, but was prevented by two more who
coming up seizd hold of his hair and rescued their companion after which
they all ran away.


1769 June 14.

I lay in the woods last night as I very often did. At day break I was calld
up by Mr Gore and went with him shooting, from which party we did not
return till night when we saw a large number of Canoes in the river behind
the tents, of which we had this account. Last night an Indian was clever
enough to steal a Coal rake out of the fort without being perceivd. In the
Morning it was missing and Captn Cooke being resolvd to recover it, as
also to discourage such atempts for the future, went out with a party of men
and seizd 25 of their large sailing Canoes which were just come in from
Tethuroa, a neighbouring Island, with a supply of fish for the inhabitants of
this. The Coal rake was upon this soon brought back but Captn Cooke
thought he had now in his hands an opportunity of recovering all the things
which had been stolen: he therefore proclaimd to every one that till all the
things which had been stolen from us were brought back the boats should
not stir, a list of these was immediately drawn up and read several times to
the Indians, who readily promisd that every thing should be brought back.
Great application was made to me in my return that some of these might be
releasd. I did not till I got to the fort understand the reason of their being
detaind, and when I did nothing apeard so plain as that no one of them
should on any account be let go from favour, but the whole kept till the
things were [returnd] if ever they were, which I much doubted as the
Canoes pretty certainly did not belong to the people who had stolen the
things. I confess had I taken a step so violent I would have seizd either the
persons of the people who had stolen from us, most of whoom we either
knew or shrewdly suspected, or their goods at least instead of those of
people who are intirely unconcernd in the affair and have not probably
interest enough with their superiors (to whoom all valuable things are
carried) to procure the restoration demanded.


1769 June 15.

Some few presents today but no trade at all. We found ourselves today
involvd in an unexpected dificulty with regard to the boats: they were
loaded with provisions which their owners must live upon or starve, in
consequence of which they ask leave to go and take them out and are
allowd to do so as much as they can eat. We are not able however to
distinguish the true owners, so many avail themselves of this indulgence by
stealing their neighbours which we cannot prevent, indeed in a few days
more the whole consisting cheifly of fish (curd to keep about that time)
will be spoild.


1769 June 16.

Some presents today but no trade. Several petitions for canoes backd by
our principal freinds but none complied with. In the afternoon the body of
the old woman which lay near us was removd, but to what place or on what
account we could not learn.


1769 June 17.

This morn Mr Gore and myself went to Oparre to shoot Ducks, little
thinking what the consequence of our expedition would be; for before we
had half filld our baggs we had frigh[t]ned away Dootahah and all his
household and furniture, a matter of no small diversion to us to find his
majesty so much more fearfull than his ducks.


1769 June 18.

This morn the boat was sent to get Ballast for the ship; the officer sent in
her not finding stones convenient began to pull down a burying ground. To
this the Indians objected much and [a] messenger came to the tents saying
that they would not suffer it. I went with the 2nd Lieutenant to the place.
They had desird them to desist from destroying the burying ground they
had began upon, but shewd them another. The officer however though[t] it
best not to molest any thing of the kind and sent the people to the river
where they gatherd stones very Easily without a possibility of offending
anybody.


1769 June 19.

The fish in the Canoes stink most immoderately so as in some winds to
render our situation in the tents rather disagreable. This evening Oborea,
Otheothea and Tuarua came to visit us for the first time since the affair of
the Jacket; they were very desirous of sleeping in the fort but my Marque
[e] was full of Indians and no one else chose to entertain them, so they
were obligd to repair to their Canoes to sleep there rather out of humour.


1769 June 20.

This morn early Oborea and Co came to the tents bringing a large
quantity of provisions as a present, among the rest a very fat dog. We had
lately learnt that these animals were eat by the Indians and esteemed more
delicate food than Pork, now therefore was our oportunity of trying the
experiment. He was immediately given over to Tupia who finding that it
was a food that we were not acustomd to undertook to stand butcher and
cook both. He killd him by stopping his breath, holding his hands fast over
his mouth and nose, an operation which took up above a quarter of an hour;
he then proceeded to dress him much in the same manner as we would do a
pig, singing him over the fire which was lighted to roast him and scraping
him clean with a shell. He then opend him with the same instrument and
taking out his entrails pluck etc. sent them to the sea where they were most
carefully washd, and then put into Cocoa nut shells with what blood he had
found in him. The stones were now laid and the dog well coverd with
leaves laid upon them. In about two hours he was dressd and in another
quarter of an hour compleatly eat. A most excellent dish he made for us
who were not much prejudicd against any species of food; I cannot
however promise that an European dog would eat as well, as these scarce
in their lives touch animal food, Cocoa nut kernel, Bread fruit, yams etc.,
being what their masters can best afford to give them and what indeed from
custom I suppose they preferr to any kind of food.


1769 June 21.

This Morning came Oámo, a cheif we had not before seen; with him
came a boy and a young woman to whoom all the people present shewd a
most uncommon respect, every one taking their garments from their
shoulders and wrapping them round their breasts. We were upon this very
desirous of shewing them all the respect we could as well as learning who
they were: we could not however prevail upon the woman to come into the
tents tho she seemd very desirous of it, the people all joind in preventing
her by their advice at some times almost using force; the boy was in the
same manner kept without. Dr Solander met him by accident close by the
gate and laying hold of his hand he followd him in before the people were
aware; those in the tents however very soon sent him out again. Upon
inquiry we find that this boy is son to Oamo and Oborea who are husband
and wife, but have long ago been parted by a mutual consent which gives
both leave to enjoy the pleasures of this life without controul from their
former engagements. The girl about 16 is intended for his wife but he
being not more than 8 years old they have not yet cohabited together.


1769 June 22.

Our visiters returnd early this morn, Oborea, Otheothea, Oamo etc. etc.
The latter begins to shew himself a very sensible man by the shrewd
questions he asks about England its manners and customs etc. Much
interest is made to procure the release of the boats, indeed Captn Cooke is
now tird of keeping them as he finds that not the least motion is made
towards returning any of the stol'n goods; four of them are therefore set at
liberty.


1769 June 27.

Our Freinds with us as usual. One of our seamen a Portugese was last
night missing; as there was no news of him this Morning we concluded that
he was run away and meant to stay among the Indians. Captn Cooke
therefore offerd a hatchet to any man who would bring him back, one soon
offerd and returnd with him at night. He said that two Indians seizd him
and stopping his mouth forcd him away, but as he was out of the fort after
a woman this account apeard improbable, the man was however not
punishd.


1769 June 27.

Our freinds all went to the westward last night; nothing material happend
during our solitude. The market has been totaly stoppd ever since the boats
were seizd, nothing being offerd to sale but a few apples; our freinds
however are liberal in presents so that we make a shift to live without
expending our bread, which and spirits are the most valuable articles to us.
Late in the evening Tubourai and Tamio returnd from Eparre bringing with
them several presents, among the rest a large peice of thick cloth which
they desird that I would carry home to my Sister Opia, and for which they
would take no kind of return. They are often very inquisitive about our
families and remember any thing that is told them very well.


1769 June 27.

Prayers today it being sunday, soon after Potattow and Polotheara came
to see us.


1769 June 27.

At 3 O'clock this morn Captn Cooke and myself set out to the eastward in
the pinnace, intending if it was convenient to go round the Island, the
weather calm and pleasant. We rowd till 8 and then went ashore in a
district calld Oh'ana governd by a cheif calld Ah'o, who favourd us with his
company to breakfast. Here we saw our old acquaintances Titùboalo
Hoona, who carried me immediately to their House near which was placd
the body of the old woman which was removd from Matavie on the 16th.
This it seems was the estate which descended to Hoona by inheritance
from her and it was on that account nescessary that she should be brought
here. From hence we proceeded on foot, the boat atending within call, till
we came to Ahidea the place where the Spanyards were said to lay. We
met with the cheif their freind Orétte, whose brother Outorrou went with
them. Our inquiries here were very particular and we had the account I
have before given confirmd; they shewd us also the place where the ships
lay, which is situate on the west side of the great bay under the shelter of a
small Island calld Boooúrou near which is another calld Taawirry. The
breach in the reef was here very large but the shelter for ships indifferent.
We saw also the place where their tents were pitchd: they pointed out the
hole in which each pole stood and shewd one corner in which they set up a
cross I had made for them, and said Turu turu which in their language
signifies the knees. In searching about upon this spot I found a small peice
of potsheard or tile, a sure proof tho a small one that in place at least the
indians had not deceivd me.

Soon after this we took boat and askd Tituboaro to go with us. He refusd
and advisd us not to go: on the other side of the bay he said livd people
who were not subjects to Dootahah and who would kill him and us. On
seeing us put balls into our musquets he however consented to go with us.
We rowd till dark at which time we arrivd at the bottom of the deep bay;
we were not yet among our enemies, we might go ashore and sleep with
safety. We did so but found few houses, here were however some double
canoes whose owners were known to us; they provided us with supper and
lodgins, for my share of which I was indebted to Ourattooa a Lady
remarkable among us for the ceremonies she performd on the 12th of May
last.


1769 June 27.

At day break we turnd out to see a little of the countrey about us which
we did not arrive at last night till dark. We found the traces of Canoes
having been hauld inland and the people told us that the Island was in this
place very narrow and that they draggd their canoes quite across cheifly
over soft boggs.--We now prepard to set out for the other Kingdom for
so we are told it is, Calld Tiarreboo and governd by Waheatua, as ours is
called Oboreonoo and governd by Dootahah. Tituboalo is in better spirits
now than yesterday, they will not kill us he says but they have got no meat.
Indeed we had not since we came out seen a bit of breadfruit; we thought
that we might have exhausted it in this part of the Island but hop'd to find
plenty in the other, the people of which if enemies had certainly not traded
with us. After a few miles rowing we landed in a District calld Annuúhé,
the Name of the chief of which was Maraitátá (the burying place of men)
and his father Pahairedo (the stealer of boats) names which did not a little
confirm Tituboalos relation. These gentlemen however notwithstanding
their terrible titles receivd us with all manner of civility, gave us provisions
and after some delay sold us a very large hog for a hatchet. We saw among
the crowd only two people whose faces we knew and not one bead or
ornament which came out of our ship, tho there were several European
ones; in one of the houses lay 2 12 pound shot one of which was markd
with the English broad arrow, these they said had been given them by
Toottero the Spanish commander.--We now walkd forward on foot till
we came to the district which particularly belonged to Waheatua, it was
situate on the westernmost point of the large bay before mentiond, a large
and most fertile flat. On it was a river so large that we were obligd to ferry
over in a canoe and our Indian train to swim, which they did with as much
facility as a pack of hounds taking the water much in the same manner.
Here were no houses but ruind remains of very large ones. We proceeded
along shore and found at last Waheatua setting near some pretty Canoe
awnings which seemd to be intended to furnish him with lodgins, he was a
thin old man with very white hair and beard; with him was a well looking
woman of about 25 year old whose name was Toudidde, we had heard her
name mentiond very often and by what the people told she was a woman of
much consequence in this part of the Island, answering in some measure to
what Oborea is in the other. From this place Tearre son to Waheatua
acompanied us after having sold us a hog. The countrey we went through
was more cultivated than any thing we have seen in the Island; the brooks
were every where bankd into narrow channels with stone and the very sea
was confind by a wall of stone also. The houses were not very large or very
numerous but the large canoes which were hauld up every where along
shore almost innumerable; they were of a different built from those which
we have seen at Oboreonoo, longer and their heads and sterns higher. Upon
these were kind of crotches which we suppos'd were to support large
images many of which we saw hanging up in their houses; their awnings
also were supported on pillars. At almost every point was a morai or
burying place and many within land. They were like those of Oboreonoo
raisd into the form of the roof of a house, but these were cleaner and better
kept and also ornamented with many carvd boards set upright, on the tops
of which were various figures of birds and men; on one particularly a
figure of a cock painted red and yellow in imitation of the feathers of that
bird. In some of them were figures of men standing on each others heads
which they told me was the particular ornament of Burying grounds. --
But fertile as this countrey was we did no[t] get or even see a single
breadfruit, the trees were intirely bared, the people seemd to live intirely on
Ahee Fagifera which were plentifull here.

After tiring ourselves with walking we calld up the boat but both our
Indians were missing, they had it seems staid behind at Waheatuas,
depending upon a promise we had made to the old man of returning and
sleeping with him (a promise we were often forcd to make without any
intention of performing it). Tearee and another went with us. We rowd till
we came abreast a small Island calld Tuarrite when it became dark and our
Indians piloted us ashore to a place where they said that we might sleep; it
was a deserted house and near it was a very snug cove for the boat to lay,
so we wanted nothing but Victuals of which article we had met with very
little since morning. I went into the woods, it was quite dark so that neither
people nor victuals could I find except one house where I was furnishd
with fire, a breadfruit and a half and a few ahees, with which and a duck or
2 and a few curlews we were forcd to go to sleep, which I did in the
awning of a Canoe that followd us belonging to Tearee.


1769 June 28.

This morn at day break we rose and agreed to stay here an hour or two in
hopes to get some provision: salt beef we had with us but nothing of the
bread kind, for that we depended on the natives who had on all former
occasions been both able and willing to supply us with any quantity of
Breadfruit. I went out meaning to go among the houses; in my way I went
through several burying grounds (Marai) on the pavements of which I saw
several vertebrae and sculls of men laying about as if no care was taken to
bury them, in every thing else they were quite like what we had seen
before. In my excursion I could not procure the least supply of provision so
we were forcd to set out in hopes of meeting some countrey where
provision was less scarce. We walkd and the boat followd us. In about 3
miles we arrivd at a place where were several large canoes and a number of
people with them; we were not a little surprizd to find that these people
were our intimate acquaintance, several at least, who we had often seen at
the tents and other places, Towia who we were told was brother to
Towdidde, Roudero etc. Here we thought ourselves sure o getting a supply
of provisions and apply'd to our friends accordingly. They told us we
should have some if we would wait, we did till we were out of patience; we
then desird them to get us some cocoa nuts the kernels of which make a
substitute for bread, they said yes but nobody went up the trees. We were
resolvd to [have] them at least so calling for a hatchet we threatned to cut
down the trees if our demands were not complied with; nobody objected to
our doing so if we chose it, nor did any body atempt to climb the trees to
supply us. Just now however we luckily saw two men busy in stripping a
parcel of them, these we obligd to sell their stock consisting of 16, with
these we embarkd taking with us Tuah-w one of our Indians who had
returnd to us last night long after dark. When we in the boat talkd over this
behaviour of our freinds we were inclind to beleive that they were
strangers here, and consequently had not the disposal of the provisions;
indeed we never had before met with any dificulty in getting from them
any provisions of which they had enough.

The reef here was irregular and the ground very foul so that the boat was
continualy surroundd with breakers. We followd a canoe which led us to a
passage where by waiting for a slatch of still water we got out, tho not
without danger, for the sea broke quite across almost as soon as the boat
was clear. We were now off the SW end of the Island. The land apeard
very barren, no reef to shelter the coast and the hills every where butting
out to the sea without any flatts; here were however some houses and
inhabitants, and on ledges of the hills here and there a little breadfruit and
higher up large quantities of Faé. This lasted for about a League when we
again saw the reef and a flat on which we went ashore by the
recomendation of our Indian guide, who told us that the countrey was rich
and good. The name of this district or whennua was Ahowe: the cheif
Math'abo soon came down to us, he seemd a total stranger both to us and
our trade. His subjects brought down plenty of Cocoa nuts and about 20
breadfruits, which latter we bought at a very dear rate, while his majesty
sold us a pig for a glass bottle preferring that to any thing we could give
him. We saw here an English goose and a turkey cock which they told us
had been left by the Dolphin, both of them immensely fat and as tame as
possible, following the Indians every where who seemd immensely fond of
them. In a long house in this neighbourhood I saw a sight quite new to me:
15 underjaw bones of men were fastned to a semicircular peice of board
and hung up at one end of it, they appeard quite fresh, not one at all
damagd even by the Loss of a tooth. I askd many questions about them but
the people would not attend at all to me and either did not or would not
understand either words or signs upon that subject. On our departure from
hence Mathiabo desird leave to acompany us which was granted, he provd
a good pilot but persuaded us to land often, 5 or 6 times in as many miles.
In all these districts we saw nothing remarkable; the general face of the
countrey was greener than on our side of the Island and the hills were
coverd with wood almost down to the waters edge, the flats in general
small but fertile enough. At last we opend a large bay, which being
opposite to as large a one on the other side almost intersects the Island at
the place over which they drag their canoes; about 2 thirds down this bay
we resolvd to lodge at a large house which we saw and which Mathiabo
informd us belongd to a freind of his. From this place many Canoes came
off to meet us and in them some very hansome women who by their
behaviour seemd to be sent out to entice us to come ashore, which we most
readily did, and were receivd in a very freindly manner by Wiverou who
was cheif of the district which was calld Owiourou. He orderd his people
to assist us in dressing our provisions, of which we had now got a tolerable
stock about 30 breadfruit some plantains and fish, enough to last us two
days. I stuck close to the women hoping to get a snug lodging by that
means as I had often done; they were very kind, too much so for they
promisd more than I ask'd, but when they saw that we were resolvd to stay
they dropd off one by one and at last left me jilted 5 or 6 times and obligd
to seek out for a lodging myself. Supper was by this time ready and we
repaird to that part of the house where Wiverou was to eat it; he sent for his
at the same time and Mathiabo supping with us we made a snug party. As
soon as we had done we began to think of sleeping and askd for a bed. We
were shown a part of the house where we might lay; we then sent for our
cloaks and began to prepare ourselves, myself as my constant custom was
by stripping myself and sending my cloaths into the boat, covering myself
only with a peice of Indian cloth after their fashion which I have done ever
ever since I had my Jacket etc. stolen at Atahourou. Mathiabo complaind
of cold and a cloak was sent for for him also, Captn Cooke and myself
agreed that he had behavd so well to us that there was not the least doubt of
his honesty. We laid down, Mathiabo did not come, I imagin'd that he was
gone to wash as the Indians always do in the evening. I was almost asleep
when an Indian who was a stranger to me came and told me that he was
gone off with the Cloak, I did not beleive him but laid down again.

Tuahow our Indian then came and confirmd the report; I then found it was
high time to give chase so I leapd up and declard my case to the company,
shewing one of my pocket pistols which I always kept with me. They took
the alarm and began to walk of, I seizd however the best looking man I
could see and told him that if he did not find out where Mathiabo was I
would shoot him in his stead. The threat had the desird effect: he offerd to
accompany me in the chase: the Captn myself and him set out as hard as
we could run and in about ten minutes met a man bringing back the cloak;
but our freind Mathiabo was fled and by that means escapd a severe
thrashing which we had decreed to be a proper reward for his breach of
trust. When we returnd every body was gone from the house; we quickly
however made them sensible that our anger was intirely confind to
Mathiabo and they all returnd, Wiverou and his wife taking up their
lodging within 10 feet of us.


1769 June 29.

About 5 O'Clock our sentry awakd us with the alarming intelligence of
the boat being missing, he had he said seen her about ½ an hour before at
her grapling which was about 50 yards from the shore, but that on hearing
the noise of Oars he lookd out again and could see nothing of her. We
started up and made all possible haste to the waterside, the morn was fine
and starlight but no boat in sight. Our situation was now sufficiently
disagreable: the Indians had probably attackd her first and finding the
people asleep easily carried her, in which case they would not fail to attack
us very soon, who were 4 in number armd with one musquet and cartouch
box and two pocket pistols without a spare ball or charge of powder for
them. In about a quarter of an hour however we had the satisfaction to see
the boat return, which had drove from her grapling by some effect of the
tide probably as it was perfectly calm.

As soon as the boat returnd we got our breakfast and set out. The first
district on which we landed was the last in Tiarreboo, it was governd by
Omóe. He was employd in building a house for which purpose he wanted a
hatchet very much and was inclind to offer any price for it but our stock
was quite spent; after some conversation we found that he would not deal
for nails and put off the boat. He and his wife Whannoouda followd in a
canoe; we took them into the boat and after rowing about a league they
desird we would put ashore, which we did and found his people who had
brought a very large hog. We had much chafering about the price of it, it
was worth any ax we had in the ship but we had no ax at all in the boat. We
therefore told Omoe that if he would come to Matavie with his hog he
should have a large ax and a nail into the bargain for his trouble; which he
after having consulted his wife readily agreed to, and gave us a large peice
of cloth as a pledge of his intention to perform this agreement.

At this place we saw a singular curiosity, a figure of a man made of
Basket work, roughly but not ill designd; it was 7 feet high and two bulky
in proportion to its hight; the whole was neatly coverd with feathers, white
to represent skin and black to represent hair and tattow; on the head were
three protuberances which we should have calld horns but the Indians calld
them tata ete, little men. The image was calld by them Maúwe; they said it
was the only one of the kind in Otahite and readily atempted to explain its
use, but their language was totaly unintelligible and seemed to referr to
some customs to which we are perfect strangers.--After this we got into
the boat and rowd several miles before we went ashore. When we did we
saw nothing remarkable but a burying ground whose pavement was
unusualy neat; it was ornamented by a pyramid about 5 feet high coverd
intirely with the fruits of Pandanus [tectorius] and Crataeva [gynandra]. In
the middle of all near the Pyramid was a small image of stone very roughly
workd, the first instance of carving in stone I have seen among these
people, and this they seemd to value as it was coverd from the weather
with a kind of shed built purposely over it; near it were three sculls of men
laid in order, very white and clean and quite perfect. From hence we
proceeded to Papárra, the district of our freinds Oama and Oborea, where
we proposd to sleep tonight; we came there an hour before night and found
that they were both from home, they were gone to Matavie to see us. This
did not alter our resolution of sleeping here and we chose for that purpose
the house of Oborea, which tho small was very neat and had nobody in it
but her father who was very civil to us. After having setled our matters we
took a walk towards a point on which we had from far observd trees of
Etoa, Casuarina equisetifolia, from whence we judgd that thereabouts
would be some marai; nor were we disapointed for we no sooner arrivd
there than we were struck with the sight of a most enormous pile, certainly
the masterpeice of Indian architecture in this Island so all the inhabitants
allowd. Its size and workmanship almost exceeds beleif, I shall set it down
exactly. Its form was like that of Marais in general, resembling the roof of
a house, not smooth at the sides but formd into 11 steps, each of these 4
feet in hight making in all 44 feet, its lengh 267 its breadth 71. Every one
of these steps were formd of one course of white coral stones most neatly
squard and polishd, the rest were round pebbles, but these seemd to have
been workd from their uniformity of size and roundness. Some of the coral
stones were very large, one I measurd was 3½ by 2½ feet. The
foundation was of Rock stones likewise squard, one of these corner stone
[s] measurd 4ft:7in by 2ft:4in. The whole made a part of one side of a
spatious area which was walld in with stone, the size of this which seemd
to be intended for a square was 118 by 110 paces, which was intirely pavd
with flat paving stones. It is almost beyond beleif that Indians could raise
so large a structure without the assistance of Iron tools to shape their stones
or mortar to join them, which last appears almost essential as the most of
them are round; it is done tho, and almost as firmly as a European
workman would have done it, tho in some things it seems to have faild.

The steps for instance which range along its greatest lengh are not streight,
they bend downward in the middle forming a small Segment of a circle:
possibly the ground may have sunk a little under the greatest weight of
such an immense pile, which if it happend regularly would have this effect.
The labour of the work is prodigious: the quarry stones are but few but
they must have been brought by hand from some distance at least, as we
saw no signs of quarry near it tho I lookd carefully about me; the coral
must have been fishd from under water, where indeed it is most plentifull
but generaly coverd with 3 or 4 feet water at least and oftenest with much
more. The labour of forming them when got must also have been at least as
great as the getting them; they have not shewn us any way by which they
could square a stone but by means of another, which must be most tedious
and liable to many accidents by the breaking of tools. The stones are also
polished and as well and truly as stones of the kind could be by the best
workman in Europe, in that particular they excell owing to the great plenty
of a sharp coral sand which is admirably adapted to that purpose and is
found everywhere upon the seashore in this neighbourhood. About 100
yards to the west of this building was another court or pavd area in which
were several ewhattas, a kind of altars raisd on wooden pillars about 7 feet
high, on these they offer meat of all kinds to the gods; we have seen large
Hogs offerd and here were the Sculls of above 50 of them besides those of
dogs, which the preist who accompanied us assurd us were only a small
part of what had been here sacrafisd. This marai and aparatus for sacrafice
belongd we were told to Oborea and Oamo. The greatest pride of an
inhabitant of Otahite is to have a grand Marai, in this particular our freinds
far exceed any one in the Island, and in the Dolphins time the first of them
exceeded every one else in riches and respect as much. The reason of the
difference of her present apearance from that I found by an accident which
I now relate: in going too and coming home from the Marai our road lay by
the the sea side, and every where under our feet were numberless human
bones cheifly ribbs and vertebrae. So singular a sight surprizd me much; I
enquird the reason and was told that in the month calld by them Owiráhew
last, which answers to our December 1768, the people of Tiarreboo made a
descent here and killd a large number of people whose bones we now saw;
that upon this Occasion Oborea and Oamo were obligd to fly for shelter to
the mountains, that the Conquerors burnt all the houses which were very
large and took away all the hoggs etc., that the turkey and goose which we
had seen with Mathiabo were part of the spoils, as were the jaw bones
which we saw hung up in his house; they had been carried away as trophies
and are usd by the Indians here in exactly the same manner as the North
Americans do scalps.


1769 June 30.

After having slept last night without the least interuption we proceeded
forwards but during the whole day saw little or nothing worth observation.
We bought a little bread fruit which article has been equaly scarce all
round the Island, more so even than it is at Matavie. At night we came to
Atahourou, the very place at which we were on the 28th of May: here we
were among our intimate freinds, who expressd the pleasure they had in
entertaining us by giving us a good supper and good beds, in which we
slept the better for being sure of reaching Matavie tomorrow night at the
farthest. Here we learnd that the bread fruit (a little of which we saw just
sprouting upon the trees) would not be fit to use in less than 3 months.


1769 July 1.

Proceed homewards without meeting any thing new, the countrey we
pass'd by and over being the same as we had gone over on the 28th of last
month. The day turnd out rainy and bad, the only bad weather we have had
since we left the ship, in which instance we are certainly fortunate as we
had neither of us a change of Cloaths with us, so little did either of us
expect to go round the Island when we set out from Matavie.


1769 July 2.

All our freinds crouded this morn to See us and tell us that they were
rejoicd at our return, nor were they empty handed, most of them brought
something or other. The Canoes were still in the river: Captn Cooke
finding that there was no likelihood now of any of the stolen goods being
restord resolvd to let them go as soon as he could. His freind Potattow
sollicited for one which was immediately [granted?] as it was imagind the
favour was askd for some of his freinds, but no sooner did he begin to
move the boat than the real owners and a number of Indians opposd him,
telling him and his people very clamorously that it did not belong to them.
He answerd that he had bought it of the Captn and given a pig for it. The
people were by this declaration satisfied and had we not luckily overheard
it he would have taken away this and probably soon after have sollicited
for more. On being detected he became so sulky and ashamd that for the
rest of the day neither he or his wife would open their mouths or look
streight at any of us.


1769 July 3.

This morn very early Mr Monkhouse and myself set out, resolving to
follow the cour[s]e of the valley down which our river comes in order to
see how far up it was inhabited etc. etc. When we had got about 2 miles up
it we met several of our neighbours coming down with loads of breadfruit
upon their backs. We had often wonderd from whence the small supplys of
breadfruit we had came, as there was none to be seen upon the flats, but
they soon explaind the mystery, shewing us breadfruit trees planted on the
sides of the hills and telling us at the same time that when the fruit in the
flats faild this became ready for use, which had been by them planted upon
the hills to preserve the succession. The quantity was they informd us
much less than was in the low land and not sufficient by any means to
supply all the interval of scarcity; when this was exhausted they must live
upon ahee nuts, Plantains, and Vae, a wild plantain which grows very high
up in the mountains. How the Dolphins who were here much about this
time came to find so great plenty of Breadfruit upon the trees is to me a
mystery, unless perhaps the seasons of this fruit alter; as for their having
met with a much larger supply of hoggs fowls etc. than we have done I can
most readily account for that, as we have found by constant experience that
these people may be frightned into any thing. They have often describd to
us the terrour which the Dolphins guns put them into and when we ask how
many people were killd they number names upon their fingers, some ten
some twenty some thirty, and then say worrow worow the same word as is
usd for a flock of birds or a shoal of fish: the Journals also serve to confirm
this opinion. 'When say they 'towards the latter end of our time
provisions were scarce a party of men were sent towards Eparre to get
hoggs etc. an office which they had not the smallest dificulty in
performing, for the people as they went along the shore drove out their
hoggs to meet them and would not allow them to pay any thing for them.'

We proceeded about 4 miles farther and had houses pretty plentifully on
each side the river, the vally being all this way 3 or 400 yards across. We
were now shewn a house which we were told would be the last we should
see, the master offerd us Cocoa nutts and we refreshd ourselves. Beyond
this we went maybe 6 miles (it is dificult to guess distances when roads are
bad as this was, we being generaly obligd to travel along the course of the
river) we passd by several hollow places under stones where they told us
that people who were benighted slept. At lengh we arrivd at a place where
the river was bankd on each side with steep rocks, and a caskade which fell
from them made a pool so deep that the Indians said we could not go
beyond it, they never did, their business lay upon the rocks on each side on
the plains above which grew plenty of Vae. The avenues to these were
truly dreadfull, the rocks were nearly perpendicular, one near 100 feet in
hight, the face of it constantly wet and slippery with the water of
numberless springs; directly up the face even of this was a road, or rather a
succession of long peices of the bark of Hibiscus tiliaceus which servd
them as a rope to take hold of and scramble up from ledge to ledge, tho
upon those very ledges none but a goat or an Indian could have stood. One
of these ropes was near 30 feet in lengh. Our guides offerd to help us up
this pass but rather recomended one lower down a few hundred yards
which was much less dangerous, tho we did not chuse to venture, as the
sight which was to reward our hazard was nothing but a grove of Vae trees
which we had often seen before.

In the whole course of this walk the rocks were almost constantly bare to
the view, so that I had a most excellent opportunity of searching for any
apearance of minerals but saw not the smallest. The stones every where
shewd manifest signs of having been at some time or other burnd; indeed I
have not seen a specimen of stone yet in the Island that has not the visible
marks of fire upon it, small peices indeed of the hatchet stone may be
without them but I have peices of the same species burnd almost to a
pumice, the very clay upon the hills gives manifest signs of fire. Possibly
the Island owes its original to a volcano which now no longer burns; or
Theoreticaly speaking, for the sake of those authors who balance this globe
by a proper weight of continent placed near about these latitudes, that so
nesscessary continent may have been sunk by Dreadfull earthquakes and
Volcanos 2 or 300 fathoms under the sea, the tops of the highest mountains
only still remain[in]g above water in the shape of Islands: an undoubted
proof that such a thing now exists to the great emolument of their theory,
which was it not for this proof would dhave been already totaly demolishd
by the Course our ship made from Cape Horn to this Island.


1769 July 4.

Very little company today. I employd myself in planting a large quantity
of the seeds of Water melons, Oranges, Lemons, limes etc. which I had
brought from Rio de Janeiro; they were planted on both sides of the fort in
as many varieties of soil as I could chuse. I have very little Doubt of the
former especialy coming to perfection as I have given away large
quantities among the natives and planted also in the woods; they now
continualy ask me for seeds and have already shewd me melon plants of
their raising which look perfectly well. The seeds that Captn Cooke sewd
have provd so bad that no one has come up except mustard, even the
Cucumbers and melons have faild, owing probably to the method of their
being packd which was in small bottles seald down with rosin.


1769 July 5.

This morn I saw the operation of Tattowing the buttocks performd upon a
girl of about 12 years old, it provd as I have always suspected a most
painfull one. It was done with a large instrument about 2 inches long
containing about 30 teeth, every stroke of this hundreds of which were
made in a minute drew blood. The patient bore this for about ¼ of an hour
with most stoical resolution; by that time however the pain began to
operate too stron[g]ly to be peacably endurd, she began to complain and
soon burst out into loud lamentations and would fain have persuaded the
operator to cease; she was however held down by two women who
sometimes scolded, sometimes beat, and at others coaxd her. I was setting
in the adjacent house with Tomio for an hour, all which time it lasted and
was not finishd when I went away tho very near. This was one side only of
her buttocks for the other had been done some time before. The arches
upon the loins upon which they value themselves much were not yet done,
the doing of which they told causd more pain than what I had seen. About
dinner time many of our freinds came, Oamo, Otheothea, Tuarua etc.


1769 July 6.

We begin now to prepare in earnest for our departure, the sails were
today carried on board and bent, the guns also were taken on board. Our
freinds begin now to beleive that we are realy preparing for our departure,
a circumstance which they have of late much doubted. This evening we
had a second visit from Teareederry and Toimata, the people again paying
them the same respect as on the 21st of June: poor Toimata was again
baulkd in her desire of seeing the fort, Oamo insisting that she should not
come in. Soon after these had left us some of our freinds came to inform us
that Monaamia the man who stole the Quadrant was landed and meant this
night to make an atempt upon us; all were ready to assist us and several,
Tuanne Matte especialy, very desirous of sleeping in the Fort, which
probably was the reason why this arch theif did not this night exercise his
abilities.


1769 July 7.

The carpenters were this morn employd in taking down the gates and
palisades of our little fortification to make us firewood for the ship, when
one of the Indians without made shift to steal the staple and hook of the
great gate. We were immediately app[r]ised of the theft to the great affright
of our visiters of whoom the bell tent was full; their fears were however
presently quieted and I (as usual) set out on my ordinary occupation of
theif catching. The Indians most readily joind me and away we set full cry
much like a pack of fox hounds, we ran and walkd and walkd and ran for I
beleive 6 miles with as little delay as possible, when we learnt that we had
very early in the chase passd our game who was washing in a brook, saw
us a coming and hid himself in the rushes. We returnd to the place and by
some intelligence which some of our people had got found a scraper which
had been stole from the ship and was hid in those very rushes; with this we
returnd and soon after our return Tubourai brought the staple.


1769 July 8.

Our freinds with us as usual, the fort more and more dismantled. Our
freinds seem resolvd to stay till we got tho the greatest part of them are
absolutely without victuals; we have been for some days obligd to spare
them every little assistance that we can and the best of them are most
thankfull for a single basket of apples. Notwithstanding this we had 4 small
pigs brought today from Oborea and Polotheara.


1769 July 9.

Our freinds with us early in the morning as usual, some I beleive realy
sorry at the aproach of our departu[r]e others desirous to make as much as
they can of our stay. Several of the people were this evening out on liberty.
Two foreign seamen were together and one had his knife stolen; he
atempted to recover it, may be roughly, for the Indians attackd him and
wounded him greivously with a stone over his eye, the other was also
slightly wounded in the head; the people who had done this immediately
fled to the mountains.--Two of our marines left the fort some time last
night or this morn without leave. Their doing this at a time when our
departure is so near makes us suspect them of an intention of staying
among these people; nothing however has been said about them today in
hopes of their returning which they have not yet done.


1769 July 10.

We are told by the Indians this morn that our people do not intend to
return; they are they say gone up into the mountains where our people
cannot get at them and one is already married and become an inhabitant of
Otahite. After some deliberation however Tuanne matte and Patea
undertook to carry our people to the place where they were; they were
known to have no arms so two were thought sufficient for the service, a
midshipman and a marine, who set off without loss of time. We were now
quite ready for the sea so no time was to be lost in recovering the deserters.
The Indians gave us but little hopes of our people bringing them back: one
certain method remaind however in our power, the seizing of some of their
principal people and detaining them, which was immediately resolvd upon.
Oborea, Potattow, Polotheara, Tubourai, Tamio, Tuarua, Otheothea and
Tetuahitea and Nuna were in the fort and were told that they would not be
permitted to go from it till our people returnd. At first they were not at all
alarmd, they hardly beleivd us in earnest till they saw the Pinnace come
ashore and soon after go away to the westward, the[y] immediately
suspected what was the case, that she was gone to fetch Dootahah. They
were now alarmd but depending on our having usd them well on all
occasions shewd but little signs of either discontent or fear, but assurd us
that the people should be brought back as soon as possible. In the evening
Dootahah was brought on board, Lieutenant Hickes who had been sent on
the service found him at Tettahah and easily took him or rather stole him
from the people. Night came on, it was thought unsafe to let the prisoners
remain in the fort, which was totaly dismantled; Oborea, Potattow and
Tubourai were orderd to the ship; in going into the boat they expressd
much fear and shed many tears. The Captn staid on board with them, I
slept ashore and the rest of the prisoners in my tent. About 8 our Indians
came back with the two deserters but brought the disagreable news of one
of the people who had been sent after them being seizd by the Indians, who
declard that they would not release them till Dootahah had his liberty. The
news was sent aboard and a boat came off immediately for Nuna and
Tuanne matte. They were sent to the ship, a boat armd went immediately in
search of the people and in her the latter and Tupia who was our voluntary
prisoner.


1769 July 11.

The night was spent tolerably well, the women cryd a little at first but
were soon quieted by asurances that at all events they should not be hurt.
At day break a large number of people gatherd about the fort many of them
with weapons; we were intirely without defences so I made the best I could
of it by going out among them. They wer[e] very civil and shewd much
fear as they have done of me upon all occasions, probably because I never
shewd the least of them but have upon all our quarrels gone immediately
into the thickest of them. They told me that our people would soon return.
Acordingly about 8 they did safe and sound, we saw them through our
glasses go up the side and immediately dischargd our prisoners, making
each such a present as we though[t] would please them with which some
were well content. The prisoners from the ship were by this time coming
ashore. They were receivd with much joy by the multitude; I met them
from the boat but no sign of forgiveness could I see in their faces, they
lookd sulky and affronted. I walkd with Oborea along the beach: 4 hoggs
were soon offerd me, two from her and as many from Dootahah, I refusd
them however positively unless they would sell them which they refusd to
do. The rest of the morning was employd in getting the tents aboard, which
was done by dinner time and we dind on board. The small bower had been
got up and the stock found to be so much worm eaten that we are obligd to
make a new one, and as we have no hopes of the best bower being in better
repair it is probable that we shall not get to sea this day or two.


1769 July 12.

This morn Tupia came on board, he had renewd his resolves of going
with us to England, a circumstance which gives me much satisfaction. He
is certainly a most proper man, well born, cheif Tahowa or preist of this
Island, consequently skilld in the mysteries of their religion; but what
makes him more than any thing else desireable is his experience in the
navigation of these people and knowledge of the Islands in these seas; he
has told us the names of above 70, the most of which he has himself been
at. The Captn refuses to take him on his own account, in my opinion
sensibly enough, the goverment will never in all human probability take
any notice of him; I therefore have resolvd to take him. Thank heaven I
have a sufficiency and I do not know why I may not keep him as a
curiosity, as well as some of my neighbours do lions and tygers at a larger
expence than he will probably ever put me to; the amusement I shall have
in his future conversation and the benefit he will be of to this ship, as well
as what he may be if another should be sent into these seas, will I think
fully repay me. As soon as he had made his mind known he said that he
would go ashore and return in the evening, when he would make a signal
for a boat to be sent off for him; he took with him a miniature picture of
mine to shew his freinds and several little things to give them as parting
presents. After dinner we went ashore to the Marai no Dootahah of which I
was desirous to have a drawing made and had not yet done it. We no
sooner landed than several of our freinds, those who were not totaly
afronted at the imprisonment of the day before yesterday, came to meet us;
we proceeded with them to Dootahahs house where was Oborea etc. They
were glad to see us and a perfect reconciliation ensued, in consequence of
which they promisd to visit us tomorrow morning to take their leave of us,
as we told them that we should sail before noon. With them was Tupia who
most willingly returnd in the boat with us aboard the ship where he took up
his lodgins for the first time.


1769 July 13.

About 10 this morn saild From Otahite leaving our freinds Some of them
at least I realy beleive personaly sorry for our departure, notwisthstanding
the confinement of the day before yesterday had frigh[t]ned and affronted
them as much as possible, yet our nearest freinds came on board at this
Critical time except only Tubourai and Tamio. We had Oborea, Otheothea,
Tayoa, Nuna, Tuanna Matte, Potattou, Polotheara etc. on board when the
anchor was weighd; they took their leaves tenderly enough, not without
plenty of tears tho intirely without that clamourous weeping made use of
by the other Indians, several boats of whoom were about the ship shouting
out their lamentations, as vyeing with each other not who should cry most
but who should cry loudest--a custom we had often condemned in
conversation with our particular freinds as savouring more of affected than
real greif.

Tupia who after all his struggles stood firm at last in his resolution of
acompanying us parted with a few heartfelt tears, so I judge them to have
been by the Efforts I saw him make use of to hide them. He sent by
Otheothea his last present, a shirt to Potamai, Dootahah's favourite
mistress. He and I went then to the topmast head where we stood a long
time waving to the Canoes as they went off, after which he came down and
shewd no farther signs of seriousness or concern.

In the Evening Tethuroa in sight; before night it appears clearly to be a
very low Island and but small, which with Tupias declaring that there were
no fixd inhabitants upon it only the people of Otahite who went there for a
few days to fish, determind us to content ourselves with what we had seen
and stand on in search of Urietea, which he describd to be a well peopled
Island as large as Otahite.


1769 July 14.

Before Noon today two Islands are in sight which Tupia calls Huahine
and Ulhietea, both of them make high and large.


1769 July 15.

Calm all last night, this morn hazey so that no land is seen; light breezes
and calms succeeding each other all morn. Our Indian often prayd to Tane
for a wind and as often boasted to me of the success of his prayers, which I
plainly saw he never began till he saw a breeze so near the ship that it
generaly reachd her before his prayer was finishd. At sunset a pleasant
breeze. Owahine and Ulhietea very plainly seen.


1769 July 16.

This morn we were very near the Island; some Canoes very soon came
off but appeard very much frightned, one however came to us bringing a
cheif and his wife, who on Tupia's assurances of Freindship from us came
on board. They were like the Otahite people in Language, dress, tattow, in
short in Every thing. Tupia has always said that the people of this Island
and Urietea will not steal, in which they indeed differ much from our late
freinds if they only keep up to their Character.

Soon after dinner we came to an anchor in a very fine bay calld by the
natives Owalla and immediately went ashore. As soon as we landed Tupia
squatted down on the ground and ranging us on one side and the Indians on
the other began to pray, our cheif who stood opposite to him answering
him in kind of responses. This lasted about a quarter of an hour in which
time he sent at different intervals two hankercheifs and some beads he had
prepard for the purpose as presents to Eatua; these were sent among many
messages which pass'd backwards and forwards with plantains, malapoides
etc. In return for this present to the gods which it seems was very
acceptable we had a hog given for our Eatua, which in this case will
certainly be our bellys.


1769 July 17.

Went ashore this morn and walkd up the hills; found the productions here
almost exactly similar to those of Otahite; upon the hills the rocks and clay
were burnt if any thing more than they were in that Island. The people also
were almost exactly like our late [friends] but rather more stupid and lazy,
in proof of which I need only say that we should have gone much higher up
the hills than we did if we could have perswauded them to accompany us,
whose only excuse was the fear of being killd by the fatigue. Their houses
are very neat and their boathouses particularly very large, one of those I
measurd 50 long paces in lengh 10 broad and 24 ft high: the Gothick arch
of which it consisted was supported on one side by 26, on the other by 30
pillars or rather clumsey thick posts of about 2 ft high and one thick. Most
of these were carvd with heads of men, boys or other devices, as the rough
fancy and more rough workmanship of these stone hatchet furnishd gentrey
suggested and executed. The flats were filld with very fine breadfruit trees
and an infinite number of Cocoa nuts, upon which latter the inhabitants
seemd to depend much more than those of Otahite; we saw however large
spaces occupied by lagoons and salt swamps upon which neither breadfruit
nor Cocoa nuts would thrive.


1769 July 18.

This morning went to take a farther view of a building which we had
seen yesterday and admird a good deal, taking with us Tupias boy Tayeto
for himself was too much engagd with his freinds to have time to
accompany us. The boy told us that it was calld Ewharre no Eatua or the
house of the god but could not explain at all the use of it. It consisted of a
chest whose lid was nicely sewd on and thatched over very neatly with
palm nut leaves, the whole was fixd upon two poles by little arches of
carvd wood very neat; these poles seemd to be usd in carrying it from place
to place tho when we saw it it was supported upon two posts. One end of
the chest was open with a round hole within a square one, this was
yesterday stopd up with a peice of cloth which least I should offend the
people I left untouchd, but to day the cloth and probably the contents of the
chest were removd as there was nothing at all in it.

Trade today does not go on with any spirit, the people when any thing is
offerd will not take it on their own judgement, but take the opinion of 20 or
30 people about them which takes up much time; we however got 11 piggs.


1769 July 19.

This morn trade rather better: got 3 very large hogs and some piggs by
producing hatchets, which had not been before given and we hop'd to have
had no occasion for in an Island which had not before been seen by
Europaeans. In the afternoon go to Sea.

The Island of Huahine differs scarce at all from that of Otahite either in
its productions or in the customs of the people. In all our searches here we
have not found above 10 or 12 new plants, a few insects indeed and a
species of scorpions which we did not see at Otahite. This Island seems
however this year at least to be a month forwarder than the other, as the
ripeness of the Cocoa nuts now full of kernel and the new breadfruit, some
of which is fitt to Eat, fully evinces. Of the Cocoa nut kernels they make a
food which they call Poe by scraping them fine and mixing them with
yams also scrapd; these are put into a wooden trough and hot stones laid
among them, by which means a kind of Oily hasty pudding is made which
our people relishd very well especialy fryd.

The men here are large made and stout, one we measurd was 6ft 3 high
and well made; the women very Fair, more so than at Otahite tho we saw
none so hansome. Both Sexes seem'd to be less timid as well as less
curious, the firing of a gun frightned them but they did not fall down as our
Otahite freinds at first generaly did. On one of their people being taken in
the fact of stealing and seizd upon by the hair they did not run away, but
coming round inquird into the cause and seemingly at least approving of
the Justice recomended a beating for the offender which was immediately
put in practise.

When they first came on board the ship they seemd struck with a sight so
new and wonderd at every thing that was shewn to them, but did not seem
to search and inquire for matters of curiosity even so much as the Otahite
people did, tho they had before seen almost every thing we had to shew
them.


1769 July 20.

At noon today come to an anchor at Ulhietea in a bay Calld by the
natives Oapoa, the entrance of which is very near a small Islet Calld
Owhattera. Some Indians soon came on board expressing signs of fear,
they were two Canoes each of which brought a woman, I suppose as a
mark of confidence, and a pig as a present. To each of these ladies was
given a spike nail and some beads with which they seemd much pleasd.
Tupia who has always expressd much fear of the men of Bola Bola says
that they have conquerd this Island and will tomorrow come down and
fight with us, we therefore lose no time in going ashore as we are to have
today to ourselves. On landing Tupia repeated the ceremony of praying as
at Huahine after which an English Jack was set up on shore and Captn
Cooke took possession of this and the other three Islands in sight viz.
Huahine Otahah and Bola Bola for the use of his Britannick majesty. After
this we walk together to a great Marai calld Tapodeboatea whatever that
may signifie; it is different from those of Otahite being no more than walls
about 8 feet high of Coral Stones (some of an immense size) filld up with
smaller ones, the whole ornamented with many planks set upon their ends
and carvd their whole lengh. In the neighbourhood of this we found the
altar or ewhatta upon which lay the last sacrafice, a hog of about 80 pounds
weight which had been put up there whole and very nicely roasted. Here
were also 4 or 5 Ewharre no Eatua or god houses which were made to be
carried on poles. One of these I examind by putting my hand into it: within
was a parsel about 5 feet long and one thick wrappd up in matts, these I
tore with my fingers till I came to a covering of mat made of platted Cocoa
nut fibres which it was impossible to get through so I was obligd to desist,
especialy as what I had already done gave much offence to our new
freinds. From hence we went to an adjoining long house where among
several things such as rolls of cloth etc. was standing a model of a Canoe
about 3 feet long upon which were tied 8 under jaw bones of men. Tupia
told us that it was the custom of these Islanders to cut off the Jaw bones of
those who they had killd in war; these were he said the jaw bones of
Ulhietea people but how they came here or why tied thus to a canoe we
could not understand, we were therefore contented to conjecture that they
were plac'd there as a trophy won back from the men of Bola Bola their
mortal enemies. Night now came on apace but Dr Solander and myself
walkd along shore a little way and saw an Ewharre no Eatua , the under
part of which was lind with a row of Jaw bones which we were also told
were those of Ulhietea men. We saw also Cocoa nut trees the stemms of
which were hung round with nutts so that no part of them could be seen,
these we were told were put there that they might dry a little and be
prepard for making poe; we saw also a tree of Ficus prolixa in great
perfection, the trunck or rather congeries of roots of which was 42 paces in
circumference.


1769 July 21.

Dr Solander and myself walkd out this morn and saw many large
Boathouses like that describd at Huahine page 303 and 401. On these the
inhabitants were at work making and repairing the large Canoes calld by
them Pahee, at which business they workd with incredible cleverness tho
their tools certainly were as bad as possible. I will first give the dimensions
and description of one of their boats and then their method of building. Its
extreme lenght from stem to stern not reckoning the bending up of both
those parts 51 feet; breadth in the clear at the top forward 14 inches,
midships 18, aft 15; in the bilge forward 32 inches, midships 35, aft 33;
depth midships 3 ft 4; hight from the ground she stood on 3ft 6; her head
raisd without the figure 4ft 4 from the ground, the figure 11 inches; her
stern 8 ft 9, the figure 2 feet. Alongside of her was lashd another like her in
all parts but less in proportion being only 33 feet in her extreme lengh. The
form of these Canoes is better to be expressd by a drawing than by any
description. This annexd may serve to give some Idea of a section: aa is the
first seam, bb the second, cc the third. The first stage or keel under aa is
made of trees hollowd out like a trough for which purpose they chuse the
longest trees they can get, so that 2 or three make the bottom of their
largest boats (some of which are much larger than that describd here as I
make a rule to describe every thing of this kind from the common size); the
next stage under bb is formd of streght plank about 4 feet long and 15
inches broad and 2 inches thick; the next stage under cc is made like the
bottom of trunks of trees hollowd into its bilging form; the last or that
above cc is formd also out of trunks of trees so that the moulding is of one
peice with the plank. This work dificult as it would be to an Europaean
with his Iron tools they perform without Iron and with amazing dexterity;
they hollow with their stone axes as fast at least as our Carpenters could do
and dubb tho slowly with prodigious nicety; I have seen them take off a
skin of an angular plank without missing a stroke, the skin itself scarce
1/16 part of an inch in thickness. Boring the holes throug[h] which their
sewing is to pass seems to be their greatest dificulty. Their tools are made
of the bones of men, generaly the thin bone of the upper arm; these they
grind very sharp and fix to a handle of wood, making the instrument serve
the purpose of a gouge by striking it with a mallet made of a hard black
wood, and with them would do as much work as with Iron tools was it not
that the brittle Edge of the tool is very liable to be broke.

When they have prepard their planks etc. the keel is layd on blocks and
the whole Canoe put together much in the same manner as we do a ship,
the sides being supported by stantions and all the seams wedg'd together
before the last sewing is put on, so that they become tolerably tight
considering that they are without calking.

With these boats they venture themselves out of sight of land; we saw
several of them at Otahite which had come from Ulhietea and Tupia has
told us that they go voyages of twenty days, whether true or false I do not
affirm. They keep them very carefully under such boathouses as are
describd p.[], one of which we measurd today 60 yards by 11.


1769 July 22.

Weather worse than yesterday, in the course of last night it blew very
fresh, this morn rainy. Walk out but meet little worth observation. Saw a
double pahie such as that describd yesterday but much larger, she had upon
her an awning supported by pillars which held the floor of it 4 feet at least
above the deck or upper surface of the boat; also a trough for making Poe
poe or sour paste carvd out of hard black stone such as their hatchets are
made of, it was 2 ft 7 long and 1 ft 4 broad, very thick and substantial and
supported by 4 short feet, the whole neatly finishd and perfectly polishd
tho quite without ornaments. Today as well as yesterday every one of us
who walkd out saw many Jaw bones fix'd up in houses as well as out of
doors, a confirmation of their taking them instead of scalps.


1769 July 23.

Weather mended a little. Dr Solander and myself go upon the hills in
hopes of finding new plants but ill rewarded; return home at night having
seen nothing worth mentioning.


1769 July 24.

Foul wind. The Captn attempts to go out of the reef at another passage
situate between the two Islets of Opourourou and Taumou. The ship
turning to windward within the reef in doing which she narrowly escapes
going ashore, the Quartermaster in the chains calld out 2 fathom; the ship
drawing at least 14 feet made it impossible that such a shoal could be under
her Keel, so either the man was mistaken or she went along the edge of a
coral rock many of which are here as steep as a wall.

Soon after this we came to an anchor and I went ashore but saw nothing
but a small marai ornamented with 2 sticks about 5 feet long, each hung
with Jaw bones as thick as possible and one having a skull stuck on its top.


1769 July 25.

This morn get to sea and turn to windward all day. Find that the two
Islands Ulhietea and Otahah are inclosed by one reef: Tupia says that there
is a large pasage through[h] it between them and a harbour within it, also
another fronting a large bay on the Eastermost end of Otahah.


1769 July 26.

Foul wind Continues last night, the ship has faln much to leward. Before
night however we have gaind our loss and something more, as we discover
a low Island ahead which Tupia tells us is calld by the natives Tupi; he
says that it is low without a harbour and yields nothing but Cocoa nuts and
fish.


1769 July 27.

Turn to leward all night and all day again, so much that at night Tupi is
not in sight.


1769 July 28.

Wind still baffles us as much as ever. This morn hoisted out a boat and
sent ashore on the Island of Otahah in which Dr Solander and myself took
a passage. We went through a large breach in the reef situate between two
Islands calld Toahattu and Whennuaia within which we found very
spatious harbours, particularly in one bay which was at least 3 miles deep.
The inhabitants as usual so that long before night we had purchasd 3
hoggs, 21 fowls and as many yams and plantains as the boat would hold.
Indeed of these last we might have had any quantity and a more useful
refreshment they are to us in my opinion even than the pork; they have
been for this week past boild and servd instead of bread; every man in the
ship is fond of them and with us in the Cabbin they agree much better than
the Bread fruit did which sometimes gripd us. But what makes any
refreshments of this kind the more acceptable is that our bread is at present
so full of vermin that notwistanding all possible care I have sometimes had
20 at a time in my mouth, every one of which tasted as hot as mustard.

The Island itself seemd more barren than Ulhietea tho much like it in
produce, bread fruit being less plentyfull than Plantains and Cocoa nuts.
The people perfectly the same, so much so that I did not observe one new
custom or any thing Else among them worth mention; they were not very
numerous but flockd from all Quarters to the boat wherever she went
bringing with them whatever they had to sell. Here as well as in the rest of
the Islands they paid us the same Compliment they are used to pay to their
own Kings, uncovering their shoulders and lapping their Garments round
their breasts; here particularly they were so scrupulously observant of it
that a man was sent with us who calld out to every one we met telling him
what we were and what he was to do.


1769 July 29.

The wind last night has favourd us a little so that we are this morn close
under the Island of Bola Bola, whose high craggy peak seems on this side
at least totaly inaccessible to men; round it is a large quantity of low land
which seems very barren. Tupia tells us that between the shore and the
mountain is a large salt lagoon, a certain sign of barrenness in this climate;
he however tells us that there are upon the Island plenty of Hogs and fowls
as well as the vegetables we have generaly met with.

We see but few people on the shore, Tupia tells us that they are gone to
Ulhietea where we shall find them. He says also that there is no breach in
the reef on this side the Island but on the other there is one large enough
for the ship to go in and a good harbour within it.


1769 July 30.

This morn wind right on end. See a new Island calld by Tupia Maurua,
he says it is fertile and yeilds plentifully all kinds of provision, but that
there is no breach in the reef large enough for the ship to go into.


1769 July 31.

Still turning to windward with the wind right in our teeth, towards
evening however it mends and gives us hopes that we may tomorrow morn
come to an anchor in Ulhietea. Tupia today shewes us a large breach in the
reef of Otahah through which the ship migh[t] conveniently pass into a
large bay, where he says there is good anchorage. We have now a very
good opinion of Tupias pilotage, especialy since we observd him at
Huahine send a man to dive down to the heel of the ships rudder; this the
man did several times and reported to him the depth of water the ship drew,
after which he has never sufferd her to go in less than 5 fathom water
without being much alarmd.


1769 August 1.

The wind right off the land of Ulhietea mak[in]g it dificult to get in tho
we see a good inlet; after turning to windward till afternoon we however at
last get hold of anchorage in the mouth of it. Many canoes came
immediately about the ship bringing all sorts of trade so that before night
we have purchas'd several piggs and fowls and a large quantity of Plantains
and Cocoa nutts.

On attempting to warp the ship in this even the anchor was found to be
fast in a rock; at least no attempts could stir it till night when the tide
(which runs strong through the inlet) turnd, the ship then going over the
anchor tripd it herself.


1769 August 2.

Dr Solander and myself have spent this day ashore and been very
agreably entertaind by the reception we have met with from the people, tho
we were not fortunate enough to meet with one new plant. Everybody
seemd to fear and respect us but nobody to mistrust us in the smallest
degree, men women and children came crouding after us but no one shewd
us the least incivility, on the contrary wherever there was dirt or water to
pass over they strove who should carry us on their backs. When we came
to the houses of the principal people we were receivd with a form quite
new to us. The people who generaly followd us rushd into them before us
leaving however a lane sufficiently wide for us to pass; when we came in
we found them rangd on each side a long mat spread upon the ground, at
the farther end of which sat one or more very young women or children
neatly dressd, who without stirring expected us to come up to them and
make them presents, which we did with no small pleasure for prettier
children or better dressd we had no where seen. One of these Tettuas as
they were calld was about 6 years old, her ahou or gown was red and round
her head was wound a large quantity of Tamou (plaited hair) an ornament
they value more than any thing they have. She sat at the farther end of a
mat 30 feet long on which no one of the spectators presumd to set a foot
notwistanding the crowd, leaning upon the arm of a well looking well
dressd woman about 30, possibly her nurse. We walkd up to her, as soon as
we aproachd she stretchd out her hand to receive the beads we were to
give, but had she been a princess royal of England giving her hand to be
kissd no instruction could have taught her to have done it with a better
grace. So much is untaught nature superior to art that I have seen no sight
of the kind that has struck me half so much.

Gratefull possibly for the presents we had made to these girls the people
in our return tryd every method to Oblige us; particularly in one house the
master orderd one of his people to dance for our amusement which he did
thus:

He put upon his head a large cylindrical basket about 4 feet long and 8
inches in diameter, on the front of which was fastned a facing of feathers
bending forwards at the top and edged round with sharks teeth and the tail
feathers of tropick birds: with this on he dancd moving slowly and often
turning his head round, sometimes swiftly throwing the end of his
headdress or whow so near the faces of the spectators as to make them start
back, which was a joke that seldom faild of making every body laugh
especialy if it happned to one of us.

We had also an opportunity of seeing the inside of the Ewharre no eatua
so often mentiond. There were 3 of them much ornamented with jaw bones
and very full of bundles lapd up with their cloth; these the people opned
with some perswasion and in them we found complete skulls with their
lower jaw bones in their proper places. Perhaps these were the skulls of
those of the victorious party who died in battle and the jaw bones fastnd on
the outside were those of the conquerd, but for this conjecture I had no
authority from the Indians who seemd to avoid as much as possible any
questions upon the subject.


1769 August 3.

This day went along shore in the opposite direction to that we took
yesterday, intending to spend most of our time in purchasing stock, which
we have always found the people readyer to part with at their houses and
selling cheaper than at the market. In the course of our walk we met a set
of stroling dancers Calld by the Indians Heiva who detaind us 2 hours and
during all that time entertaind us highly indeed. They consisted of 3 drums,
2 women dancers and 6 men; these Tupia tells us go round the Island as we
have seen the little Heivas do at Otahite, but differ from those in that most
of the people here are principal people, of which assertion we had in the
case of one of the women an undoubted proof.

I shall first describe their dresses and then their dances. The women had
on their heads a quantity of tamou or plaited hair which was rolled and
between the interstices of it flowers of Gardenia were stuck making a head
dress truly Elegant. Their shoulders arms and breasts as low as their arms
were bare, below this they were coverd with black cloth and under each
shoulder was placd a bunch of black feathers much as our ladies nosegays
or Bouquets. On their hips rested a quantity of cloth pleated very full
which reachd almost up to their arms and fell down below into long
peticoats reaching below their feet, which they managd with as much
dexterity as our opera dancers could have done; these pleats were brown
and white alternately but the peticoats were all white.

In this dress they advancd sideways keeping excellent time to the drums
which beat brisk and loud; they soon began to shake their hips giving the
folds of cloth that lay upon them a very quick motion which was continued
during the whole dance, they sometimes standing, sometimes sitting and
sometimes resting on their knees and elbows and generaly moving their
fingers with a quickness scarce to be imagind. The chief entertainment of
the spectators seemd however to arise from the Lascivious motions they
often made use of which were highly so, more indeed than I shall atempt to
describe.

One of these girls had in her ear 3 pearls, one of them very large but so
foul that it was worth scarce any thing, the other two were as large as a
midling pea and of a good and clear water as well as shape. For these I
offerd at different times any price the owner would have but she would not
hear of parting with them; I offerd once the price of 4 hogs down and any
thing she would ask beside, but she would not hear of it. Indeed they have
always set a value upon their pearls, if tolerably good, almost equal to our
valuation supposing them as they always are spoild by the drilling.

Between the dances of the women (for they sometimes rested) the men
acted a kind of interlude in which they spoke as well as dancd. We were
not however sufficiently vers'd in their language to be able to give an
account of the Drama.


1769 August 4.

We had often heard Tubia speak of Lands belonging to him which had
been taken away by the Bola Bola men: these he tells us now are situate in
the very bay where the ship lies. On going ashore this morning the
inhabitants confirmd What he has told us and shewd us several different
whennuas which they all acknowledged belong of right to him. The largest
number of the people here are it seems the so much feard Bola Bola men,
and we are told that tomorrow Opoony the King of that Island will come to
visit us. We are much inclind to receive him civily as we have met with so
civil a reception from his subjects.

Dr Solander and myself go upon the hills accompanied by several
Indians, who carried us by excellent paths so high that we plainly saw the
other side of the Island and the passage through which the ship went out of
the reef between the Islets of Opoorooroo and Tamou. Our walk did not
turn out very profitable as we found only two plants that we had not seen
before.

In coming down again we saw the game that the Indians call Erowhaw,
which is no more than pitching a kind of light lances headed with hard
wood at a mark: of this amusement they seem to be very fond but none that
we saw now excelld in doing it, not above one in 12 striking the mark
which was the bole of a plantain tree about 20 yards distant.


1769 August 5.

Went in the boat to the Southward with the Captn etc. Saw two inlets in
the reef and good harbours within them; they were both situate close to
Islets, one having one on each side of it (indeed in general I have seen
Breaches in Reefs almost wherever there are Islands upon them. The
people all along shore were very poor, so much so that after all our days
work we did not procure either hog or fowl nor indeed did we see either.


1769 August 6.

Yesterday Opoony the King of Bola Bola sent his Compts and a present
of hogs and Fowls to the King of the ship, sending word also that he would
in person wait upon him today. We therefore all hands staid at home in
hopes of the honour of his excellencys visit. We were disapointed in our
expectations not disagreably for instead of his majesty came 3 hansome
lively girls who staid with us the morning and took off all regret for the
want of his majesties company.

In the evening we all went to see the great king and thank him for his
civilities particularly of this morning. The King of the Tatatoas or Club
men who have conquerd this and are the terror of all other Islands we
expected to see young lively hansome etc. etc. but how were we
disapointed when we were led to an old decrepid half blind man who
seemd to have scarce reason enough left to send hogs, much less galantry
enough to send ladies.


1769 August 7.

We learnd from Opoony yesterday that his cheif residence was at Otahah,
to this place he proposd to acompany us. As today Captn Cooke and Dr
Solander went upon the expedition myself staid at home. They proceeded
with Opoony and all his train, many Canoes, to a bay in Otahah calld
Obooto-booto, his majesties cheif residence; here the houses were very
large and good and the Canoes also finer than any the gentlemen had
before seen. Such a prelude made them expect much from the owners of so
fine houses, a boat load of hogs was the least they thought of, especialy as
they had plenty of Spartan money to pay for them; but alas, the Gentlemen
who had fatigued themselves with building the houses, chose to refresh
themselves with eating the hogs; so that after the whole day was spent a
small number only were procurd in proportion to what were expected.
Myself staid at home this morning and traded for some provisions and
curiosities; in the afternoon took Mr Parkinson to the Heiva that he might
scetch the dresses. The dancing was exactly the same as I had seen it
before except that another woman was added to the two I saw before. The
interludes of the men were varied, they gave us 5 or 6 which resembled
much the Drama of an English stage dance. Most of my Freinds were
constan[t]ly at the Heiva. Their names I set down and relationships as they
are cheifly one family (1) Tiarree no Horoa a King or cheif; (2)
Whannooutooa wife to 1; (3) Otoobooi sister to 2; (4) Orai Elder brother to
2; (5) Tettuanue younger brother to 2; (6) Otehammena dancing girl; (7)
Ouratooa Do; (8) Mattehea father to 1; (9) Opipi mother to 1.


1769 August 8.

Dr Solander and self went along shore to gather plants, buy hogs or any
thing else that might occurr. We took our course towards the Heiva and at
last came up to it; it has gradualy moved from very near us till now it is 2
Leagues off, Tupia tells us that it will in this manner move gradualy round
the Island. Our Freinds receivd us as usual with all manner of civility,
dancing and giving us after the amusement a very good dinner as well as
offering us a quantity of their Cloth by way of present, which we should
have accepted had we not been full stockd with it before. We now
understood a little more of the interludes than we had formerly done. I
shall describe one as well as I can. The men dancers were divided into two
parties differing in the colour of their clothes, one brown the other white.
The cheif of the brown ones gave a basket of meat to the rest his servants
that they might take care of it; the white represented theives who atempted
to steal it several times, dancing all the time. Several different expedients
they make use of without success till at last they found the watchmen
asleep; they then gently went up to them and lifting them off from the
basket, which for security sake they had placd in the middle of them, they
went off with their prize. The others woke and danced but seem'd to shew
little regret for their loss or indeed hardly to miss the basket at all.


1769 August 9.

This morn spent in trading with the Canoes for whatever they would
bring, resolving to sail as soon as they left off to bring provision, which
about noon they did and we again Launchd out into the Ocean in search of
what chance and Tupia might direct us to.


1769 August 10.

Myself sick all day.


1769 August 11.

Tupia talks of an Island which he calls Mannúa, he says that we shall see
it tomorrow morning but points out its place upon our weather bow so we
shall probably go to leward of it.


1769 August 12.

Get rid of sea sickness today. Tupias Island not in sight, he tells us that it
is et-pa (we are past it) for the same word is usd by them for the setting of
the sun and the leaving behind of an Island. He says however that
tomorrow or next day we shall see another which he calls Oheter-a.


1769 August 13.

At noon today high land in sight which proved to be Tupias Island of
Oheter-a. At night we were close in with it. He sayd that there were many
other Islands from south to south west of us most of their names beginning
with Ohete, none however were in sight.
Many Albecores have been about the ship all the evening, Tupia took one
and had not his rod broke would probably have taken many. He usd an
Indian fish hook made of mother of pearl so that it servd at the same time
both for hook and bait.


1769 August 14.

Close under the land: a boat was sent from the ship in which Dr Solander
and myself took a passage, she rowd right in for the land on which several
natives appeard armd with long lances. The boat standing along shore not
intending to land till she got round the next point made them (I beleive)
think that we were afraid of them. The main body about 60 sat down upon
the shore and sent two of their number forwards, who after walking
sometime abreast of us leap'd into the water intending to swim to us but
were soon left behind; two more then atempted the same thing and were in
like manner left behind; a single man then ran forwards and taking good
start of the boat fetchd her easily, but when he was alongside I could not
persuade the officer of the boat to take him, notwisthstanding it was so fair
an opportunity of making freinds with a people who certainly lookd upon
us as their enemies. He was therefore left behind as was another who
followd his example.

We now came round a point where all our followers left us. We had
opend a large bay at the bottom of which we saw another body of men
armd like the former; here we hopd to land and pushd towards the place.
The natives had pushd off a canoe which came out to meet us. As soon as it
aproachd us we lay upon our oars and calld to them that we were freinds
and would give them nails if they would come to us; they after a very little
hesitation came up to the boats stern and took the nails that were given
them, seemingly with great satisfaction, but in less than a minute seemd to
have formd a design of boarding our boat and taking her, in pursuance of
which 3 leapd almost in an instant into our boat and the others brought up
the canoe which had flown off a little intending probably to follow their
countrey mens example. The first who came in the boat was close to me,
he instantly snatchd my powder horn out of my pocket which I
immediately laid hold of and wrenchd out of his hand, not without some
dificulty; I then laid my hand on his breast and attempted to shove him
overboard but he was two strong for me and kept his place. The officer
orderd a musquet to be fir'd over their heads his own having mis'd fire, two
were immediately fird and they all instantly leapd into the water; one of
our people however inconsiderately leveld a 3d at one of them who was
swimming and the ball gras'd his forehead but I beleive did him no material
harm, as he recoverd his boat and stood up in her as active as ever. The
canoe now stood for the shore where were a large number of people
collected I beleive 200; our boat also pulld in but found the land guarded
all round with a shoal upon which the sea broke much, so was obligd to go
along shore in hopes of finding a more convenient landing place. We saw
the canoe go ashore where the people were assembled who came down to
her seemingly very eager to enquire into our behavior to them; soon after a
single man came along shore armd with a long lance, he came abreast of
the boat and then began to dance and shake his weapon calling out in a
very shrill voice, which we understood from Tupia was a defiance sent
from the people. We rowd along shore and he attended us sometime, we
found it however impracticable to land and as for the gen lemans tricks we
gave ourselves very little concern about them: we therefore resolvd to
return to the bay and try if it would be practicable to land where the Canoe
did, hoping that if we should not the people would at least come and make
peace either on the shoal or in their Canoes of which we saw only two in
the Island, which was one more than Tupia allowd them who said they had
but one.

As we rowd gently along shore our defying champion was joind by
another likewise armd with a lance and dressd with a large cap of the tail
feathers of tropick birds and his body coverd, as indeed many of them
were, with stripes of different coulourd cloths, yellow red and brown; he
(who we now calld Harlequin) danc'd as the other had done only with
much more nimbleness and dexterity. These two were soon after Joind by
an older looking man likewise armd who came gravely down to the beach
and hailing us askd from whence we came, Tupia answerd him from
Otahite. The three then went peaceably along shore till the boat came to a
shoal upon which a few people were collected; they talkd together and
soon after began to p-orah or pray very loud to which Tupia made his
responses but continued to tell us that they were not our freinds. We after
this enterd into a parley with them, telling them that if they would lay by
their arms which were lances and clubbs we would come ashore and truck
with them for whatever they would bring; they agreed but upon condition
that we should lay down our musquets, an article which we did not think fit
to comply with, so our negotiation dropt for the present at least. After a
little time however they took courage and came nearer to the boat, near
enough to begin to trade which they did very fairly for a smal quantity of
cloth and some of their weapons, but as they gave us no hopes of
provisions or indeed any thing else unless we would venture through a
narrow channel to the shore we put off the boat and left them.

In this expedition we labourd under many disadvantages: we left the ship
in a hurry taking with us no kind of arms but our musquets, which without
bayonets would have made but a poor resistance against these peoples
weapons all meant to fight hand to hand; but what was worst of all was the
dificulty of landing which we could not do without wetting ourselves and
arms unless we had venturd through the passage I have spoke of, which
was so small that tho the weather was perfectly fine the sea often broke
right across it, so that had we gone in and the least surf rose we could never
have got out again but must have remaind the night in shoal water, liab[l]e
to any stratagems that our enemies might devise, ill furnishd as we were to
oppose their boarding us by swimming to which we were always liable.

The Island to all apearance that we saw was more barren than any thing
we have seen in these seas, the cheif produce seeming to be Et-a (the wood
of which make their weapons); indeed every where along shore where we
saw plantations they were coverd by trees of this kind planted between
them and the sea. It is without a reef and the ground in the bay we were in
so foul and corally that tho a ship might come almost close to the shore she
could not possibly anchor. The water was clearer than I ever saw it, I saw
distinctly the ground at 25 fathoms depth.

The people seemd strong lusty and well made but were rather browner
than those we have left behind; they were not tattowd on their backsides,
but instead of that had black marks about as broad as my hand under their
armpits the sides of which were deeply indented, they had also circles of
smaller ones round their arms and legs. Their dress was indeed most
singular as well as the cloth with which they were dressd which I shall first
describe. It was made of the same materials as the inhabitants of the other
Islands make use of and generaly died of a very bright and deep yellow.
Upon this was on some sorts spread a composition which coverd it like oil
colour or varnish, it was either red or of a dark lead colour; upon this again
was painted stripes in many different patterns with infinite regularity much
in the same way as some lute string silks in England are wove, all the
streight lines upon them drawn with such accuracy that we were almost in
doubt whether or not they were stampd on with some kind of press. The
red cloth was painted in this manner with black, the lead coulord with
white. Of this cloth, generaly the lead coulourd, they had on a short jacket
that reachd about their Knees made of one peice with a hole through which
they put their heads, the sides of which hole was contrary to any thing I
have seen before stichd with long stitches. This was confind to their bodies
by a peice of Yellow cloth which pass'd behind their necks and came
across their breasts in two broad stripes crossing each other, it was then
collected round their waists in the form of a belt, under which was another
of the red cloth so that the whole made a very gay and warlike apearance.
Some had on their heads caps as before describd made of the tails of
tropick birds, but they did not become them so well as a peice of white or
lead colourd cloth which the most of them had wound on like a small
turban.

Their arms consisted of long lances made of the etoa or hard wood well
polishd and sharpnd at one end; of these there were some near 20 feet long
and scarce so thick as three fingers; they had also clubs or pikes of the
same wood about 7 feet long, well polishd and sharpned at one end into a
broad point. How expert they may be in the use of these weapons we
cannot tell but the weapons themselves seem more intended for shew than
use, as the lance was not pointed with the stings of Sting rays, and the
clubs or pikes which must do more execution by their weight than their
sharpness were not more than half so heavy as the smallest I have seen in
the other Islands. Defensive weapons I saw none, they however guarded
themselves against such weapons as their own by matts folded and laid
upon their breasts and bellys under their other cloths.

Of the few things we saw among these people every one was ornamented
infinitely superior to any thing we had before seen: their cloth was better
coulourd as well as nicely painted, their clubs were better cut out and
polishd, the Canoe which we saw tho a very small and very narrow one
was nevertheless carvd and ornamented very highly. One thing particularly
in her seemd to be calculated rather for the ornaments of a thing that was
never intended to go into the water than a boat, which was two lines of
small white feathers that were placd on the outside of the canoe which
were when we saw them totaly wet with the water.

After leaving these unhospitable people we Stood to the Southward as
usual and had in the evening a great dew which wetted every thing.See
Manners and Customs of S Sea Islands, below


1769 August 15.

Crossd the tropick this morn, wind North and weather very pleasant; at
night wind rather variable.


1769 August 16.

Soon after we rose this morn we were told that land was in sight; it provd
to be a cloud but at first sight was so like land that it deceivd every man in
the ship, even Tupia gave it a name. The ship bore down towards it but in
about 3 hours all hands were convincd that it was but a cloud.


1769 August 17.

A heavy swell from the SW all day so we are not yet under the Lee of the
continent: in the Even no wind. Our Taros (roots of the Yam kind calld in
the W. Indies Cocos) faild us today, many of them were rotten; they would
probably have kept longer had we had either time or opportunity of drying
them well, but I beleive that at the best they are very much inferior to
either Yamms or potatoes for keeping.


1769 August 18.

SE swell continues today with little wind at N.


1769 August 19.

Weather and swell much as yesterday; some of our people tell me that
they have seen Albatrosses both yesterday and the day before.


1769 August 20.

A Large Albatross about the ship most of the day. Little wind, the swell
less than yesterday but still troublesome, at night a heavy Dew.


1769 August 21.

A fine breeze at NW. Some Pintado birds (Proc. capensis) about the ship.
This day our Plantains faild us, they were all eat, not one ever was rotten.
Indeed since we left Ulhietea the Hogs have almost intirely subsisted upon
them, of which we have no small number who I fear will feel the loss of
them most sensibly as not one I beleive has yet eat the smallest proportion
of English food.


1769 August 22.

Fresh breeze of wind but little sea. Several Albatrosses and Pintado birds
about the ship today.


1769 August 23.

Light breeze. Our hogs and fowls begin to die apace, of the latter a great
many, want of proper food and cold which now begins to pinch even us is I
suppose the cause. Afternoon calm, many Albatrosses and Pintado birds
about the ship.


1769 August 24.

The morning was calm. About 9 it began to flow fresh with rain which
came on without the least warning, at the same time a water spout was seen
to leward; it appeard to me so inconsiderable that had I not been shewd it I
should not have particularly notic'd the apearance; it resembled a line of
thick mist, as thick as a midling tree, which reachd not in a strait line
almost to the waters edge and in a few minutes totaly disapeard; its
distance I suppose made it appear so trifling, as the Seamen judg'd it not
less than 2 or 3 miles from us. Many Birds about the ship, Pintado,
Common and Southern Albatross.


1769 August 25.

Less wind today but the swell occasiond by yesterdays wind still
troublesome. Birds today about the ship Pintado, Common and Southern
Albatross and a shearwater in size and shape like the common, but grey or
whitish on the head and back. It was this day a twelvemonth since we left
England, in consequence of which a peice of cheshire cheese was taken
from a locker where it had been reservd for this occasion and a cask of
Porter tappd which provd excellently good, so that we livd like English
men and drank the hea[l]ths of our freinds in England.


1769 August 26.

Few birds today cheifly Albatrosses, few pintados. In the evening several
grampuses about the ship.


1769 August 27.

Pleasant breeze: birds today as plentifull as ever, Albatrosses of both
kinds, Pintados and grey shearwaters.


1769 August 28.

Birds as yesterday with the addition of a kind of shearwater, quite black,
the same as was seen and shot on the 21st of March last in our passage to
the westward (p. atrata). Tupia not well today, he complains of a pain in his
stomach; his distemper probably proceeds from cold of which we have for
some days past had more than from our latitude we shoud have expected.
One of the seamen Rayden by name was this morn found so drunk that he
had scarce any signs of life and in about an hour he expird. Where he could
have got his liquor is a mystery which however nobody seems to enquire
into, probably not fairly. I have more than once had occasion to
congratulate myself on my prudence in not taking wine on board at
Madera, as I beleive I may safely say that there is not a cask on board the
ship that has not been tap'd to the great dissatisfaction of the owners, who
in general have had the comfort to find the gentlemen honest enough not to
have filld up with salt water; in some cases however this was not a
Consideration of much comfort as many of the casks were 2/3 empty and
some quite.


1769 August 29.

Very moderate and pleasant, scarce any motion; few or no birds about
the ship. In the course of last night a phenomenon was seen in the heavens
which Mr Green says is either a comet or a Nebulus he does not know
which, the Seamen have observd it these 3 nights.


1769 August 30.

Our Comet is this morn acknowledged and proves a very large one but
very faint. Tupia as soon as he saw it declard that the people of Bola bola
would upon the sight of it kill the people of Ulhietea who would as many
as could fly into the mountains. More sea today than yesterday heaving in
from WSW. Several birds, Pintados, Albatross's of both kinds, the little
silver backd bird which we saw off Faukland Isles and Cape Horn, Pr.
velox and grey shearwater. Peter saw a green bird about the size of a dove,
the colour makes us hope that it is a land bird, it took however not the least
notice of the ship. Some sea weed was also seen to pass by the ship but as
it was a very small peice our hopes are not very sanguine on that head. The
thermometer today 52 which pinches us much who are so lately come from
a countrey where it was seldom less than 80. A swell from SW.


1769 August 31.

Blows fresh this morn with a good deal of sea; about 7 in the morn a
heap of sea weed passd the ship. An immense quantity of birds are about
her today: Albatrosses of both kinds which are easily distinguishd one from
the other by their beaks, which in one is white in the other black; also large
black shearwaters and a smaller sort with grey backs, Pintados; but above
all many millions I may safely say of the small bird mentiond yesterday
about as large as a dove, greyish on the back, some with a dark colourd
mark going in a crooked direction on that and its wings. I try'd today to
catch some of these numerous attendants with a hook but after the whole
morning spent in the atempt caught only one Pintado which provd to be
Procellaria capensis of Linnaeus.


MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF S. SEA ISLANDS. 1769

[From 14 August 1769]

We have now seen 17 Islands in these Seas and been ashore upon 5 of
the most principal ones. Of these the Language manners and customs have
agreed almost exactly, I should therefore be tempted to conclude that those
of the Islands we have not seen differ not materialy at least from them. The
account I shall give of them is taken cheifly from Otahite where I was well
acquainted with their most interior policy, as I found them to be a people
so free from deceit that I trusted myself among them almost as freely as I
could do in my own countrey, sleeping continualy in their houses in the
woods with not so much as a single companion. Whither or not I am right
in judging their manners and customs to be general throughout these seas
any one who gives himself the trouble of reading this Journal through will
be as good a Judge as myself.

All the Islands I have seen are very populous all along the sea coast,
where are generaly large flats coverd with a vast many breadfruit and
Cocoa nut trees. Here are houses almost every 50 yards with their little
plantations of Plantains, the tree that makes their cloth etc. but the inland
parts are totaly uninhabited except in the vallies where are rivers and even
there are but a small propo[r]tion of people to what live upon the flats.
They are of the larger size of Europaeans, all excellently made, and some
handsome both men and women, the only bad feature they have is their
noses which are in general flat, but to balance this their teeth are almost
without exception even and white to perfection, and the eyes of the women
especialy are full of expression and fire. In Colour they differ very much:
those of inferior rank who are obligd in the excersise of their professions,
fishing especialy, to be much exposd to the sun and air are of a dark
brown; the superiors again who spend most of their time in their houses
under shelter are seldom browner (the women especialy) than that kind of
Brunette which many in Europe preferr to the finest red and white.
Complexion indeed they seldom have tho some I have seen shew a Blush
very manifestly; this is perhaps owing to the thickness of their skins, but
that fault is in my opinion well compensated by their infinite smoothness
much superior to any thing I have met with in Europe.

The men as I have before said are rather large, I have measurd one 6 feet
3½; the superior women are also as large as Europaeans but the inferior
sort generaly small, some very small owing possibly to their early amours
which they are much more addicted to than their superiors. Their hair is
almost universaly black and rather coarse: this the women wear always
cropt short round their ears, the men on the other hand wear it in many
various ways, sometimes cropping it short, sometimes letting [it] grow
very long and tying it at the top of their heads or letting it hang loose on
their shoulders etc. Their beards they also wear in many different fashions
always however plucking out a large part of them and keeping that that is
left very clean and neat. Both sexes eradicate every hair from under their
armpits and they look upon it as a great mark of uncleanliness in us that we
did not do the same.

During our stay in these Islands I saw some not more than 5 or 6 who
were a total exception to all I have said before. They were whiter even than
us but of a dead Colour like that of the nose of a white horse; their eyes
hair eyebrows and beards were also white; they were universaly short
sighted and lookd always unwholesome, their skins scurfy and scaly and
eyes often full of Rheum. As they had no two of them any connextions
with one another I conclude that the difference of colour etc. was totaly
accidental and did not at all run in families.

So much for their persons. I shall now mention their method of Painting
their bodies or Tattow as it is calld in their language. This they do by
inlaying the colour of Black under their skins in such a manner as to be
indelible; every one is markd thus in different parts of his body according
may be to his humour or different circumstances of his life. Some have ill
designd figures of men, birds or dogs, but they more generaly have this
figure Z eitheir simply, as the women are generaly marked with it, on every
Joint of their fingers and toes and often round the outside of their feet, or in
different figures of it as square, circles, crescents etc. which both sexes
have on their arms and leggs; in short they have an infinite diversity of
figures in which they place this mark and some of them we were told had
significations but this we never learnt to our satisfaction. Their faces are in
general left without any marks, I did not see more than one instance to the
contrary. Some few old men had the greatest part of their bodies coverd
with large patches of black which ended in deep indentations like coarse
imitations of flame, these we were told were not natives of Otahite but
came there from a low Island called Noouoora.

Tho they are so various in the application of the figures I have mentiond
that both the quantity and situation of them seems to depend intirely upon
the humour of each individual, yet all the Islanders I have seen (except
those of Ohiteroa) agree in having all their buttocks coverd with a deep
black; over this most have arches drawn one over another as high as their
short ribbs, which are often ¼ of an inch broad and neatly workd on their
edges with indentations etc. These arches are their great pride: both men
and women shew them with great pleasure whether as a beauty or a proof
of their perseverance and resolution in bearing pain I can not tell, as the
pain of doing this is almost intolerable especialy the arches upon the loins
which are so much more susceptible of pain than the fleshy buttocks.

Their method of doing it I will now describe. The colour they use is lamp
black wich they prepare from the smoak of a kind of oily nutts usd by them
instead of candles; this is kept in cocoa nut shells and mixt with water
occasionaly for use. Their instruments for pricking this under the skin are
made of Bone or shell, flat, the lower part of this is cut into sharp teeth
from 3 to 20 according to the purposes it is to be usd for and the upper
fastned to a handle. These teeth are dippd into the black liquor and then
drove by quick sharp blows struck upon the handle with a stick for that
purpose into the skin so deep that every stroke is followd by a small
quantity of Blood, or serum at least, and the part so markd remains sore for
many days before it heals.

I saw this operation performd on the 5th of July on the buttocks of a girl
about 14 years of age; for some time she bore it with great resolution but
afterwards began to complain and in a little time grew so outrageous that
all the threats and force her freinds could use could hardly oblige her [to]
indure it. I had occasion to remain in an adjoining house an hour at least
after this operation began and yet went away before it was finished, tho
this was the blacking of only one side of her buttocks the other having been
done some weeks before.

It is done between the ages of 14 and 18 and so essential it is that I have
never seen one single person of years of maturity without it. What can be a
sufficient inducement to suffer so much pain is difficult to say; not one
Indian (tho I have askd hundreds) would ever give me the least reason for
it; possibly superstition may have something to do with it, nothing else in
my opinion could be a sufficient cause for so apparently absurd a custom.
As for the smaller marks on the fingers, arms etc. they may be intended
only for beauty; Our European ladies have found the Convenience of
patches, and something of that kind is more usefull here, where the best
complexions are much inferior to theirs, and yet whiteness is esteemd the
first Essential in beauty.

They are certainly as cleanly a people as any under the sun except in their
lousyness, every one of them wash their whole bodies in the running water
as soon as they rise in the morn, at noon, and before they sleep at night;
and if they have not such water near their houses as often happens, they
will go a good way to it; as for their lice had they the means only they
would certainly be as free from them as any inhabitants of so warm a
climate could be. Those to whoom combs were given provd this, for those
who I was best acquainted with kept themselves very clear while we staid
by the use of them; as for their eating lice it is a custom which none but
children and those of the inferior people can be chargd with. Their cloths
also as well as their persons are kept almost without spot or stain; the
superiour people spend much of their time in repairing, dying, etc. the
cloth, which seems to be a genteel amusement for the ladies here as it is in
Europe.

Their Clothes are either of a kind of cloth made of the Bark of a tree, or
matts of several different sorts. Of all these and their manner of making
them I shall speak in another place, here I shall only mention their method
of covering and adorning their Persons, which is of course most various as
they never form dresses, or sew any two things together. It must be a peice
of cloth which is generaly 2 yards wide and 11 long, is sufficient Clothing
for any one, and this they put on in a thousand different ways, often very
genteel. Their dress of form however is, in the women, a kind of Peticoat
(Parou) wrappd round their hipps, and reaching about the middle of their
leggs; 1, 2 or 3 peices of thick cloth about 2½ yards long and one wide
(Te buta) through a hole in the middle of which they put their heads, and
suffer the sides of it to hang before and behind them, the open edges
serving to give their arms liberty of moving; round the ends of this, about
as high as their wastes, are tied 2 or 3 large peices of thin Cloth, and
sometimes another or two thrown over their shoulders loosely, for the rich
seem to shew their greatest pride in wearing a large quantity of cloth. The
dress of the men differs but little from this; their bodys are rather more
bare, and instead of the petticoat they have a peice of Cloth passed between
their leggs and round their waists (Maro) which keeps up the strictest rules
of decency, and at the same time gives them rather more liberty to use their
limbs than the womens dress will allow. Thus much of the richer people,
the poorer sort have only a small allowance of cloth given them from the
tribes or families to which they belong, and must use that to the best
advantage.

It is reckond no shame for any part of the body to be exposd to view
except those which all mankind hide; it was no uncommon thing for the
richest of the men to come to see us with a large quantity of cloth rolld
round their loins, and all the rest of their bodies naked, tho the cloth
wrappd round them was sufficient to have clothd a dozn people. The
women at sun set always bard their bodys down to the navel, which seemd
to be a kind of easy undress to them as to our ladies to pull off any finery
that has been usd during the course of the day, and change it for a loose
gown and capachin.

Both sexes shade their faces from the sun with little bonnets of cocoa nut
leaves which they make occasionaly in a very few minutes, some have
these made of fine matting but that is less common. Of matting they have
several sorts, some very fine, which is usd in exactly the same manner as
Cloth for their dresses, cheifly in rainy weather, as their cloth will not bear
the least wett.

Ornaments they have very few, they are very fond of earings but wear
them only in one ear. When we came they had them of their own, made of
Shell, stone, berries, red pease, and some small pearls which they wore 3
tied together; but our beads very quickly supplyd their place; they also are
very fond of flowers, especialy of the Cape Jasmine of which they have
great plenty planted near their houses; these they stick into the holes of
their ears, and into their hair, if they have enough of them which is but
seldom. The men wear feathers often the tails of tropick birds stuck upright
in their hair, they have also a kind of wiggs made upon one string of the
hair of men, dogs, or Cocoa nut strings, which they tie under their hair
upon the back of their heads; I have seen them also wear whimsical
garlands made of a variety of flowers stuck into a peice of the rind of
plaintain, or of scarlet pease stuck upon a peice of wood with gum, but
these are not common. Their great pride of Dress seems to be centerd
almost in what they call Tamou, which is human hair platted, scarce
thicker than common thread, of this I may easily affirm that I have peices
above a mile in lenght worked upon an end without a single Knot, and I
have seen 5 or 6 of such peices wound round the head of one woman, the
effect of which if done with taste was most becoming. Thus much of their
common dresses, their dancing dresses I have describd in the Island of
Ulhietea and that of the Heiva I shall when I come to their mourning
ceremonies. They have also several more suited to particular ceremonies
which I had not an opportunity of seeing, tho I was very desirous, as the
singular taste of those promise much novelty at least if not something
worth imitation in whatever they take pains with.

I had almost forgot the Oil with which they anoint their heads, monoe it
is calld in their language, a custom more disagreable to Europeans than any
other among them. This is made of Cocoa nut oil in which some sweet
woods or flowers are infusd; the oil is most commonly very rancid and
consequently the wearers of it smell most disagreably, at first we found it
so but very little use reconcild me at least very compleatly to it. These
people are free from all smells of mortality and surely rancid as their oil is
it must be preferrd to the odoriferous perfume of toes and armpits so
frequent in Europe.

The houses or rather dwellings of these people are admirably calculated
for the continual warmth of their climate. They do not build them in
villages or towns but seperate each from the other according to the size of
the estate the owner of the house possesses; they are always in the woods
and no more ground is cleard away for each house than is Just sufficient to
hinder the Dropping of the branches from rotting the thatch with which
they are coverd, so that you step from the house immediately under shade
and that the most beautifull imaginable. No countrey can boast such
delightfull walks as this, the whole plains where the people live are coverd
with groves of Breadfruit and cocoa nut trees without underwood; these are
intersected in all directions by the paths which go from one house to the
other, so the whole countrey is a shade than which nothing can be more
gratefull in a climate where the sun has so powerfull an influence. They are
built without walls so that the air coold by the shade of the trees has free
access in whatever direction it happens to blow. I shall describe one of the
middle size which will give an Idea of all the rest as they differ scarce at all
in fashion.

Its lengh was 24 feet, breadth 11, extreem high[t] 8½, hight of the
eaves 3½; it consisted of nothing more than a thatchd roof of the same
form as in England supported by 3 rows of posts or pillars, one on each
side and one in the middle; the floor was coverd some inches deep with
soft hay upon which here and there were laid matts for the convenience of
setting down; this is almost the only furniture as few houses have more
than one stool which is the property of the master of the family and
constantly usd by him, and most are intirely without. These houses serve
them cheifly to sleep in and make their cloth etc., they generaly Eat in the
open air under the shade of the next tree if the weather is not rainy. The
matts which serve them to set upon in the day time are also their beds at
night; the Cloth which they wear in the day serves for covering, and a little
wooden stool, block of wood or a bundle of cloth for a pillow. Their order
is generaly this, near the middle lay the master of the house and his wife
and with them the rest of the married people, next to them the unmarried
women, next to them at some small distance the unmarried men; the
Servants, Toutous as they are calld, generaly lay in the open air or if it
rains come just within shelter. Thus all privacy is banishd even from those
actions which the decency of Europaeans keep most secret: this no doubt is
the reason why both sexes express the most indecent ideas in conversation
without the least emotion; in this their language is very copious and they
delight in such conversation beyond any other. Chastity indeed is but little
valued especialy among the midling people; if a wife is found guilty of a
breach of it her only punishment is a beating from her husband.
Notwithstanding this some of the Eares or cheifs are I beleive perfectly
virtuous. They indeed tho they have no decency in conversation have
privacy; most or all of them have small houses which when they move are
tied upon their Canoes; these have walls made of Cocoa nut leaves etc. in
them they constantly sleep, man and wife, generaly lifting them off from
their canoes and placing them on the ground in any situation they think
proper.

Besides these there are another kind of houses much larger. One in our
neighbourhood measurd lengh 162 feet, breadth 28½, high[t] of one of
the middle row of pillars 18. These we conjecturd to be common to all the
inhabitants of a district and raisd and kept up by their joint labour, of use
maybe for any meetings or consultations, for the reception of any visitants
of consequence, etc.; such we have also seen usd as dwelling houses by the
very principal people, some of them much larger than this which I have
here describd.

In the article of food these happy people may almost be said to be exempt
from the curse of our forefather; scarcely can it be said that they earn their
bread with the sweat of their brow when their cheifest sustenance Bread
fruit is procurd with no more trouble than that of climbing a tree and
pulling it down. Not that the trees grow here spontaneously but if a man
should in the course of his life time plant 10 such trees, which if well done
might take the labour of an hour or thereabouts, he would as compleatly
fulfill his duty to his own as well as future generations as we natives of less
temperate climates can do by toiling in the cold of winter to sew and in the
heat of summer to reap the annual produce of our soil, which when once
gatherd into the barn must be again resowd and re-reapd as often as the
Colds of winter or the heats of Summer return to make such labour
disagreable.

O fortunati nimium sua si bona norint

may most truly be applied to these people; benevolent nature has not only
supplyd them with nescessaries but with abundance of superfluities. The
Sea about them in the neighbourhood of which they always live supplys
them with vast variety of fish better than what is generaly met with
between the tropicks, but these they get not without some trouble; every
one desires to have them and there is not enough for all, tho while we
remaind in these seas we saw above species more perhaps than our own
Island can boast of. I speak now only of what is more properly calld Fish;
but almost every thing which comes out of the sea is eat and esteemd by
these people, Shellfish, lobsters, Crabbs, even Sea insects and what the
seamen call blubbers of many kinds conduce to their support. Some of the
last indeed that are of a tough nature are prepard by suffering them to stink;
custom will make almost any meat palatable and the women especialy are
very fond of this, tho after they had eat it I confess I was not extreemly
fond of their company.

Besides the Bread fruit the earth almost spontaneously produces Cocoa
nuts, Bananas of 13 sorts the best I have ever eat, Plantains but indiffer[e]
nt, a fruit not unlike an apple which when ripe is very pleasant, Sweet
potatoes, Yamms, Cocos, another kind of Arum known in the East Indies
by the name of Arum [] , a fruit known there by the name of [Eug mallacc]
and reckond most delicious, Sugar cane which the inhabitants eat raw, a
root of the Salop kind Calld by the inhabitants Pea, the root also of a plant
calld Ethee and a fruit in a Pod like a large Hull of a Kidney bean, which
when roasted eats much like Chestnuts and is call[d] Ahee; besides a fruit
of a tree which they call wharra in appearance like a pine apple, the fruit of
a tree calld by them Nono, the roots and perhaps leaves of a fern and the
roots of a plant calld Theve which 4 are eat only by the poorer sort of
people in times of scarcity.

For tame animals they have Hogs, fowls and doggs, which latter we
learn'd to eat from them and few were there of the nicest of us but allowd
that a S-Sea dog was next to an English lamb; this indeed must be said in
their favour that they live intirely upon vegetables, probably our dogs in
England would not eat half as well. Their pork is certainly most excellent
tho sometimes too fat, their fowls are not a bit better rather worse maybe
than ours at home, often very tough.

Tho they seem to esteem flesh very highly yet in all the Islands I have
seen the quantity they have of it is very unequal to the number of their
people, it is therefore seldom usd among them. Even their most principal
people have it not every day or even week, tho some of them had piggs that
we saw quarterd upon different Estates as we send Cocks to walk's in
England; when any of these kill a hog it seems to be divided almost equaly
among all his dependands himself taking little more than the rest.
Vegetables are their cheif food and of these they eat a large quantity.
Cookery seems to have been little studied here: they have only two
methods of applying fire, broiling, or baking as we calld it which is done
thus. A hole is dug in depth and size according to what is to be prepard
seldom exceeding a foot in depth, in this a heap is made of wood and
stones alternately laid; fire is then put to it which by the time it has
consumd the wood has heated the stones sufficiently just enough to
discolour any thing which touches them. The heap is then divided; half is
left in the hole the bottom of which is pavd with them, on them any kind of
provisions are laid always neatly wrappd up in leaves, the whole is then
coverd with leaves on which are laid the remaining hot stones then leaves
again 3 or 4 inches thick and over them any ashes rubbish or dirt that lays
at hand. In this situation it remains about 2 hours in which time I have seen
a midling hog very well done, Indeed I am of opinion that victuals dressd
this way are more juicy if not more Equably done than by any of our
European methods, large fish more especialy. Bread fruit cookd in this
manner becomes soft and something like a boild potatoe, tho not quite so
farinaceous as a good one yet more so than the midling sort. Of this 2 or 3
dishes are made by beating it with a stone pestil till it make a paste, mixing
water or Cocoa nut liquor with it and adding ripe plantains, bananas, sour
paste etc.

As I have mentiond Sour paste I will proceed to de[s]cribe what it is.
Bread fruit by what I can find remains in season only 9 or 10 of their 13
months so that a reserve of food must be made for those months when they
are without it. To do this the fruit is gatherd when just upon the point of
ripening and laid in heaps where it undergoes a fermentation and becomes
disagreably sweet; the core is then taken out which is easily done as a
small pull at the stalk draws it out intire, and the rest of the fruit thrown
into a hole dug for that purpose generaly in their houses; the sides and
bottom of which are neatly lind with grass; the whole is coverd with leaves
and heavy stones laid upon them. Here it undergoes a second fermentation
and becomes sourish in which condition it will keep as they told me many
months. Custom has I suppose made this agreable to their palates tho we
dislikd it extreemly, we seldom saw them make a meal without some [of] it
in some shape or other.

As the whole making of this Mahai as they call it depends upon
fermentation I suppose it does not always succeed. It is done at least
always by the old women who make a kind of superstitious mystery of it.
No one except the people employd by them is allowd to come even into
that part of the house where it is; I myself spoild a large heap of it only by
inadvertenly touching some leaves that lay upon it as I walkd by the
outside of the house where it was. The old directress of it told me that from
that circumstance it most certainly would fail and immediately pulld it
down before my face, who did less regret the mischeif I had done as it gave
me an opportunity of se[e]ing the preparation which perhaps I should not
otherwise have been allowd to do.

To this plain diet prepard with so much simplicity salt water is the
universal sauce; those who live at the greatest distance from the sea are
never without it keeping it in large bamboes set up against the sides of their
houses. When they eat a cocanut shell full of it always stands near them,
into which they dip every morsel especialy of fish and often leave the
whole soaking in it, drinking at intervals large supps of it out of their
hands, so that a man may use ½ a pint of it at a meal. They have also a
sauce made of the Kernels of cocoa nutts fermented till they dissolve into a
buttery paste and beat up with salt water; the taste of this is very strong and
at first was to me most abominably nauseous, a very little use however
reconcild me intirely to it so much that I should almost preferr it to our
own sauces with fish. It is not common among them, possibly it is thought
ill management among them to use cocoa nuts so lavis[h]ly, or we were on
the Islands at the time when they were scarce ripe enough for this purpose.

Small fish they often eat raw and sometimes large ones. I myself by
being much with them learnt to do the same insomuch that I have made
meals often of raw fish and bread fruit, by which I learnt that with my
stomach at least it agreed as well as dressd and if any thing was still easier
of digestion, howsoever contrary this may appear to the common opinion
of the people at home.

Drink they have none but water and cocoa nut Juice, nor do they seem to
have any method of Intoxication among them. Some there were who drank
pretty freely of our liquors and in a few instances became very drunk but
seemd far from pleasd with their intoxication, the individuals afterwards
shunning a repitition of it instead of greedily desiring it as most Indians are
said to do.

Their tables or at least apparatus for Eating are set out with great
neatness tho the small quantity of their furniture will not admit of much
Elegance. I will describe the manner in which one of their principal people
is servd; they commonly eat alone unless some stranger makes a second in
their mess.

He setts commonly under the shade of the next tree or on the shady side
of the house; a large quantity of leaves either of Bread fruit or Banana are
neatly spread before him which serves instead of a table cloth, a basket is
then set by him which contains his provisions and two cocoa nut shells,
one full of fresh water the other of salt. He begins by washing his hands
and mouth thoroughly with the fresh water which he repeats almost
continualy throughout the whole meal. He then takes part of his provision
from the basket. Supose (as it often did) it consisted of 2 or 3 bread fruits,
1 or 2 small fish about as big as a perch in England, 14 or 15 ripe bananas
or half as many apples: he takes half a breadfruit, peels of the rind and
takes out the core with his nails; he then cramms his mouth as full with it
as it can possibly hold, and while he chews that unlapps the fish from the
leaves in which they remain tied up since they were dressd and breaks one
of them into the salt water; the rest as well as the remains of the bread fruit
lay before him upon the leaves. He generaly gives a fish or part of one to
some one of his dependants, many of whoom set round him, and then takes
up a very small peice of that that he has broke into the salt water in the
ends of all the fingers of one hand and sucks it into his mouth to get with it
as much salt water as possible, every now and then taking a small sup of it
either out of the palm of his hand or the cocoa nut shell. In the mean time
one of the standers by has prepard a young cocoa nut by peeling of the
outer rind with his teeth (an operation which at first appears very
surprizing to Europeans but depends so much upon a sl[e]ight that before
we left the Islands many of us were ourselves able to do it, even myself
who can scarce crack a nut) which when he chuses to drink he takes from
him and boring a hole through the shell with his finger or breaking the nut
with a stone drinks or sucks out the water. When he has eat his bread fruit
and fish he begins with his plantains, one of which makes no more than a
mouthful if they are as big as black puddings; if he has apples a shell is
nescessary to peel them, one is pickd of the ground where they are always
plenty and tossd to him, with this he scrapes or cutts off the skin rather
awkwardly as he wastes almost half the apple in doing it. If he has any
tough kind of meat instead of fish he must have a knife, for which purpose
a peice of Bamboo is tossd him of which he in a moment makes one by
splitting it transversly with his nail, with which he can cut tough meat or
tendons at least as readily as we can with a common knife. All this time
one of his people has been employd with a stone pestle and a block of
wood beating breadfruit which by much beating and sprinkling with water
he Reduces to the consistence of soft paste; he then takes a vessel made
like a butchers tray and in it he lays his paste mixing it with either bananas
sour paste or making it up alone according to the taste of his master; to this
he adds water pouring it on by degrees and squeezing it often through his
hand till it comes to the consistence of thick custard; a large cocoa nut shell
full of this he then sets before his master who supps it down as we would
do a custard if we had not a spoon to eat it with; and his dinner is then
finishd by washing his hands and mouth, cleaning the cocoa nut shells and
putting any thing that may be left into the basket again.

It may be thought that I have given rather too large a quantity of
provision to my eater when I say he has eat 3 bread fruits each bigger than
two fists, 2 or 3 fish and 14 or 15 plantains or Bananas, each if they are
large 6 or 7 inches long and 4 or 5 round, and conclude his dinner with
about a quart of a food as substantial as the thickest unbaked custard; but
this I do affirm that it is but few of the many of them I was acquainted with
that eat less and many a great deal more. But I shall not insist that any man
who may read this should beleive it as an article of faith; I shall be content
if politeness makes him think as Joe Millers freind said, 'Well Sir as you
say so I beleive it but by g-d had I seen it myself I should have doubted it
excedingly'.

I have said that they seldom eat together the better sort hardly ever, even
two brothers or sisters have each their respective baskets one of which
contains victuals the other cocoa nut shells etc. for furniture of their
seperate tables. These were brought every day to our tents to those of our
freinds who having come from a distance chose to spend the whole day or
sometimes 2 or 3 in our company; these two relations would go out and
setting down upon the ground within a few yards of each other turn their
faces different ways and make their meals without saying a word to each
other.

The women carefully abstain from eating with the men or even any of the
victuals that have been prepard for them. All their victuals are prepard
seperately by boys and kept in a shed by themselves where they are lookd
after by the same boys who attend them at their meals; notwithstanding this
when we visited them at their houses the women with whoom we had any
particular acquaintance or freindship would constantly ask us to partake of
their meals, which we often did, eating out of the same basket and drinking
out of the same cup. The old women however would by no means allow
the same liberty but would esteem their victuals polluted if we touchd
them; in some instances I have seen them throw them away when we had
inadvertently defil'd them by handling the vessels which containd them.

What can be the motive for so unsocial a custom I cannot in any shape
guess, especialy as they are a people in every other instance fond of society
and very much so of their women. I have often askd the reason of them but
they have as often evaded the question or given me no other answer but
that they did it because it was right, and expressd much disgust when I told
them that in England men and women eat together and the same victuals;
they however constantly affirm that it does not proceed from any
superstitious motive, Eatua they say has nothing to do with it. But
whatever the motive may be it certainly affects their outward manners
more than their principles: in the tents for instance we never saw an
instance of the women partaking of our victuals at our table, but we have
several [times] seen them go 5 or 6 together into the servants apartment
and there eat very heartily of whatever they could find, nor were they at all
disturbd if we came in while they were doing [it] tho we had before usd all
the intreatys we were masters of to invite them to partake with us. When a
woman was alone she would often eat even in our company, but always
took care to extort a strong promise that we should not let her countrey
people know what she had done.

After their meals and in the heat of the day they often sleep, middle ag'd
people especialy, the better sort of whoom seem to spend most of their
time in eating or sleeping. The young boys and girls are uncommonly
lively and active and the old people generaly more so than the middle ag'd
ones, which perhaps is owing to the excessive venery which the heat of the
climate and their dissolute manners tempt them to. Diversions they have
but few: shooting with the bow is the cheif one I have seen at Otahite
which is confind almost intirely to the cheifs; the[y] shoot for distance only
with arrows unfledgd, kneeling upon one knee and dropping the bow from
their hands at the instant of the arrows parting from it. I measurd a shot that
Tubourai Tamite made, 274 yards, yet he complaind that as the bow and
arrows were bad he could not shoot so far as he ought to have done. At
Ulhietea bows were less common, but the people amusd themselves by
throwing a kind of Javelin 8 or 9 feet long at a mark which they did with a
good deal of force and dexterity, often striking the body of a plantain tree
their mark in the very center, but I could never observe that either these or
the Otahite people stakd any thing but seemd to contend merely for the
honour of victory.

Musick is very little known to them which is the more wonderfull as they
are very fond of it. They have only two instruments the flute and the drum.
The former is made of a hollow bamboo about a foot long in which is 3
holes; into one of these they blow with one nostril stopping the other with
the thumb of the left hand, the other two they stop and unstop with the fore
finger of the left and middle finger of the right hand; by this means they
produce 4 notes and no more of which they have made one tune that serves
them for all occasions, to which they sing a number of songs pehay as they
call them generaly consisting of two lines affecting a coarse metre and
generaly in Rhime. May be they would appear more musical if we well
understood the accent of their language but are as downright prose as can
be wrote. I shall give two or 3 specimens of songs made upon our arrival:

Te de pahai de parow-a
Ha maru no mina.
E pahah Tayo malama tai ya
No Tabane tonatou whannomiya
E Turai eattu terara patee whennua toai
Ino o maio Pretane to whennuaia no Tute.

At any time of the day when they are lazy they amuse themselves by
singing these couplets but especialy after dark. Their candles are then
lighted which are made of the kernel of a nut abounding much in oil; many
of these are stuck upon a skewer of wood one below the other and give a
very tolerable light which they often keep burning an hour after dark and if
they have many strangers in the house it is sometimes kept up all night--a
kind of guard maybe upon the chastity of the ladies who upon such
occasions are very shy of receiving any mark of regard from their lovers.

Their Drumms they manage rather better: they are made of a hollow
block of wood coverd with sharks skin, with these they make out 5 or 6
tunes and accompany the flute not disagreably; they know also how to tune
two drums of Different notes into concord which they do nicely enough.
They also tune their flutes if two play upon flutes which are not in unison,
the short one is leng[t]hned by adding a small roll of leaf which is tied
round the end of it and movd up and down till their ears (which are
certainly very nice) are satisfied. The drumms are usd cheifly in their
heivas which are at Otahiti no more than a set of musicians, 2 drums for
instance two flutes and two singers, who go about from house to house and
play; they are alway receivd and rewarded by the master of the family who
gives them a peice of cloth or whatever else he can best spare and while
they stay, 3 or 4 hours maybe, receives all his neighbours who croud his
house full. This diversion the people are extravagantly fond of most likely
because like concerts asemblys etc. in Europe they serve to bring the Sexes
easily together at a time when the very thoughts of meeting has opend the
heart and made way for pleasing Ideas. The grand Dramatick heiva which
we saw at Ulhietea is I beleive occasionaly performd in all the Islands but
that I have so fully Describd in the Journal of that Island Augst ye 3d 7th
and 8th that I need say no more about it.

Besides this they dance especialy the young girls whenever they can
collect 8 or 10 together, singing most indecent words using most indecent
actions and setting their mouths askew in a most extrordinary manner, in
the practise of which they are brought up from their earlyest childhood; in
doing this they keep time to a surprizing nicety, I might almost say as true
as any dancers I have seen in Europe tho their time is certainly much more
simple. This excercise is however left off as soon as they arrive at Years of
maturity for as soon as ever they have formd a connection with a man they
are expected to leave of Dancing Timorodee as it is calld.

One amusement more I must mention tho I confess I hardly dare touch
upon it as it is founded upon a custom so devilish, inhuman, and contrary
to the first principles of human nature that tho the natives have repeatedly
told it to me, far from concealing it rather looking upon it as a branch of
freedom upon which they valued themselves, I can hardly bring myself to
beleive it much less expect that any body Else shall. It is this that more
than half of the better sort of the inhabitants of the Island have like Comus
in Milton enterd into a resolution of enjoying free liberty in love without a
possibility of being troubled or disturbd by its consequences; these mix
together with the utmost freedom seldom cohabiting together more than
one or two days by which means they have fewer children than they would
otherwise have, but those who are so unfortunate as to be thus begot are
smotherd at the moment of their birth. Some of these people have been
pointed out to me by name and on being askd have not denyd the fact, who
have contracted intimacies and livd together for years and even now
continue to do so, in the course of which 2, 3 or more children have been
born and destroyd.

They are calld Arreoy and have meetings among themselves where the
men amuse themselves with wrestling etc. and the women with dancing the
indecent dances before mentiond, in the course of which they give full
liberty to their desires but I beleive keep strictly up to the appearances of
decency. I never was admitted to see them, one of our gentlemen saw part
of one but I beleive very little of their real behavior tho he saw enough to
make him give credit to what we had been told.

This custom as indeed it is natural to suppose Owes as we were told its
existence cheifly to the men. A Woman howsoever fond she may be of the
name of Arreoy and the liberty attending it before she conceives, generaly
desires much to forfeit that title for the preservation of her child: in this she
has not the smallest influence; if she cannot find a man who will own it she
must of course destroy it; and if she can, with him alone it lies whether or
not it shall be preserv'd: sometimes it is, but in that case both the man and
woman forfeit their title of Arreoy and the privelege annext thereunto, and
must for the future be known by the term Whannownow, or bearer of
children: a title as disgracefull among these people as it ought to be
honourable in every good and well governd society. In this case the man
and woman generaly live together as man and wife for the remainder of
their lives.

The great facility with which these people have always procurd the
nescessaries of life may very reasonably be thought to have originaly sunk
them into a kind of indolence which has as it were benumbnd their
inventions, and prevented their producing such a variety of Arts as might
reasonably be expected from the aproaches they have made in their
manners to the politeness of the Europeans. To this may also be added a
fault which is too frequent even among the politest nations, I mean an
invincible attachment to the Customs which they have learnt from their
forefathers which these people are indeed in this degree excusable for: they
derive their original not from Creation but from the womb of an inferior
divinity who was herself with those of equal rank descended from the God
Causer of Earthquakes; they therefore look upon it as a Kind of Sacriledge
to attempt to amend Customs which they suppose to have had their original
either from their deities or their first ancestors, who they hold as little
inferior to the divin[i]ties themselves.

The thing in which they shew the most ingenuity is the making and dying
of their Cloth: in the description of these especialy the latter I shall be
rather diffuse, as I am not without hopes that my countrey men may
receive some advantage either from the things themselves or at least by
hints derivd from them.

The Material of which it is made is the interior bark or liber of 3 sorts of
trees, the Chinese paper mulberry Morus Papyrifera, the Breadfruit tree
Sitodium altile, and a tree much resembling the wild fig tree of the west
Indians Ficus prolixa. Of the first which is calld by them Äouta the finest
and whitest cloth is made which is worn cheifly by the principal people, it
is likewise the properest for dying especialy with the Colour of red; of the
second which is calld by them ooroo is made a cloth inferior to the former
in whiteness and softness, worn cheifly by people of inferior degree; of the
third which is much the most rare is made a coarse harsh Cloth of the
colour of the deepest brown paper, which is the only one they have that at
all resists water. It is much valued, the greatest quantity of it is perfumd
and usd by the most principal people as a Morning dress.

These three trees are cultivated with much care especialy the former
which covers the largest part of their cultivated land. Young plants of them
only are us'd of 1 or 2 years growth, whose great merit is to be thin,
streight, and tall, without branches; to prevent the growth of which they
pluck off with great care all the lower leaves and their Gemms, as often as
there is any appearance of a tendency to produce branches.

Their Method of manufacturing the Bark is the same in all the sorts: one
description of it will therefore be Sufficient: first then, the thin cloth they
begin to make thus. When the trees are arrivd at a sufficient size they are
drawn up and the roots and topps cut of and strippd of their leaves; the best
of the Aouta are in this state about 3 or 4 feet long and as thick as a mans
finger but the ooroo are considerably larger. The bark of these rods is then
slit up longitudinaly and in this manner drawn off the stick; when all are
stripd the bark is carried to some brook or running water into which it is
laid to soak with stones upon it and in this situation it remains some days.
When sufficiently soakd the women servants go down to the river, and
stripping themselves set down in the water and scrape the peices of bark,
holding them against a flat smooth board, with the shell calld by the
English shell merchants Tygers tongue Tellina Gargadia, dipping it
Continualy in Water untill all the outer green bark is rubbd and washd
away and nothing remains but the very fine fibres of the inner bark. This
work is generaly finishd in the afternoon; in the evening these peices are
spread out upon Plantain leaves. In doing this I suppose there is some
dificulty as the mistress of the family generaly presides, all that I could
observe was that they laid them 2 or 3 layers thick, and seemd very carefull
to make them every where of equal thickness; so that if any part of a peice
of Bark was scrapd thinner than it ought, another peice of the same thin
quality was laid over it, in order to render it of the same thickness as the
next. When laid out in this manner the size of the peice of cloth [is] 11 or
12 yards long and not more than a foot broad, for as the longitudinal fibres
are all laid lenghwise they do not expect it to stretch in that direction tho
they well know how considerably it will in the other. In this state they
suffer it to remain till morning, by which time a large proportion of the
water with which when laid out it is thouroughly soakd is either draind off
or evaporated and the fibres begin to adhere together, so that the whole
may be lifted from the ground without dropping in peices. It is then taken
away by the women servants who beat it in the following manner: they lay
it upon a long peice of wood one side of which is very Even and flat, which
side is put under the Cloth; as many women then as they can muster or as
can work at the board begin; each is furnishd with a battoon made of a very
hard wood calld by the natives Etoa (Casuarina equisetifolia) these are
about a foot long and square with a handle; on each of the 4 faces of the
square are many small furrows of as many different fineness, in the first or
coarsest not more than [15] in the finest one [56] which cover the whole
face of the side. With the coarsest then they begin, keeping time with their
strokes in the same manner as smiths or Anchor smiths, and continue until
the Cloth which extends itself very fast under these strokes shews by the
too great thinness of the Grooves which are made in it that a finer side of
the beater is requisite; in the same manner they proceed to the finest side
with which they finish, unless the Cloth is to be of that very fine sort which
they call Hoboo which is almost as thin as muslin. For the making of this
they double the peice several times and beat it out again and afterwards
bleach it in the sun and air which in these Climates cause whiteness in a
very short time, but I beleive that the finest of their Hoboo does not come
to either its whiteness or softness untill it has been worn some time, then
washd and beat over again with the very finest beaters. Of this thin cloth
they have as many different sorts almost as we have of Linnen,
distinguishing it into different finenesses and the different materials of
which it is made. Each peice is from 9 to 15 yards in lengh and about 2 and
a half broad and serves them for Cloths in the day and bedding at night.
When by use it is sufficiently worn and become dirty it is carried to the
river and washd, cheifly by letting it soak in a gentle stream fasned to the
bottom by a stone, or if very dirty wringing it and squeesing it gently;
several of the peices of Cloth so washd are then laid on each other and
being beat with the coarsest side of the beater adhere together and become
a cloth as thick as coarse broad cloth, then which nothing can be more soft
or delicious to the feel. This however is not the case with it immediately
after being beat: it is then stiff as if newly starchd and some parts not
adhering together as well as others it looks ragged, and is also of various
thicknesses wherever any faults were in the Cloth from whence it was
made; to remedy this is the business of the mistress of the family and
principal women of it, who in this, and dying, seem to amuse themselves as
our English women do in making Caps, ruffles, etc.; and in this they spend
the greatest part of their time. They are furnishd with each a k[n]ife made
of a peice of Bamboo cane, to which they make, by splitting it diagonally
with their nails, an edge which with great ease cuts any kind of cloth or
soft substance; and a certain quantity of a Paste made of the root of a Plant
which serves them also for food, and is calld by them Pea (Chaitaea
Tacca): with the former they cut off any ragged edges or ends which may
not have been sufficiently fixd down by the Beating; and with the Paste
they fasten down others which are less ragged, and also put on patches
upon any part which may be thinner than the rest, generaly finishing their
work, if intended for the best, by pasting a compleat covering of the finest
thin Cloth or Hoboo over the whole. They make the thick Cloth also
sometimes of thin, only half worn, and which having been worn by cleanly
people is not soild enough to require washing; of this it is sufficient to
paste the Edges together, which is done with the same paste. This thick
cloth, made in either of these ways, is usd either for the garment calld
Maro, which is a long peice passd between the legs and round the waste
that serves instead of breeches; or the Tebuta as it is calld, a garment usd
equally by both sexes instead of a Coat or gown, which exactly resembles
that worn by the inhabitants of Peru and Chili that is calld by the
Spanyards Poncho.

The cloth itself both thick and thin resembles most the finest cottons in
softness especialy in which article it even exceeds them. Its tenderness (for
it tears by the smallest accident) makes it very impossible that it can ever
be usd in Europe; indeed it is properly adapted to a hot climate; I usd it to
sleep in very often in the Islands and always found it far cooler than any
English cloth, and that it much prevented perspiration or else, by drying it
up immediately, the disagreable sensation of it.

Having thus describd their manner of making the Cloth I shall proceed to
their method of dying it. They have principaly two Colours in which they
excell, Red and Yellow; the first of these is most beautifull, I might almost
venture to say a more delicate colour than any we have in Europe,
aproaching however nearest to Scarlet; the second is a good bright colour
but of no particular excellence. They also upon some occasions dye brown
and black but so seldom that I had not an opportunity during my stay to see
the methods or learn the materials which they make use of; I shall therefore
say no more of these Colours than that they were so indifferent in their
qualities that they did not much raise my curiosity to enquire concerning
them.

To begin then with the red, in favour of which I shall premise that I
beleive no Voyager has past these seas but he has said something in praise
of this colour, the brightness and elegance of which is so great that it
cannot avoid being taken notice of by the slightest observer. This colour is
made by the admixture of the Juices of two vegetables neither of which in
their seperate state have the least tendency to the colour of Red, nor have
any Parts of them that I have at least been able to observe any circumstance
relating to them from whence any one should be led to conclude that the
colour of red was at all latent in them. They are Ficus tinctoria which is
calld by them Matte the same name as the colour and Cordia Sebestena
orientalis calld Etou; of these the fruits of the first and the leaves of the
second are usd in the following manner.

The fruits which are about as large as a rounceval pea or very small
Gooseberry, produce upon breaking off the stalk close to them each one
drop of a milky liquor resembling the Juice of a fig tree in Europe, for
indeed the tree itself is a kind of wild fig tree. This liquor the women
collect, breaking off the footstalk and shaking the drop which hangs to the
little fig into a small quantity of cocoa nut water: to sufficiently prepare a
gill of Cocoanut water will require 3 or 4 quarts of the little figs, tho I
never could observe that they had any rule in Proportioning the quantity
except observing the Cocoa nut water, which was to be of a Whey colour
when a sufficient quantity of the Juice of the little figs was mixd among it.
When this liquor is prepard the leaves of the Etou are brought which are
well wetted in it, they are then laid upon a Plantain leaf and the Women
begin first gently to turn and shake them about; afterwards as they grow
more and more flaccid by this operation to squeese them a little, increasing
the pressure gradualy, all which is done merely to prevent the leaves from
breaking; still as they become more flaccid and spongy they supply them
with more of the juice. In about 5 minutes the Colour begins to appear on
the Veins of the leaves of the Etou and in 10 or a little more all is finishd
and ready for straining, at which time they press and squeese the leaves as
hard as they possibly can. The method of straining is this: they have for the
purpose a large quantity of the fibres of a kind of Cyperus Grass (Cyperus
stupeus) calld by them Mooo, which the boys prepare very nimbly by
drawing the stalks of it through their teeth or between two little sticks until
all the green bark and the branny substance which lays between them is
gone. In a covering of these fibres then they invelop the leaves and
squeesing or wringing them strongly express the dye which turns out very
little more in quantity than the liquor employd; this operation they repeat
several times, soaking as often the leaves in the dye and squeesing them
dry again until they have sufficiently extracted all their virtue, when they
throw away the remaining leaves keeping however the Möoo which serves
them instead of a brush to lay the colour upon the Cloth. The receptacle
usd for the liquid dye is constantly a Plantain leaf, whether from any
property it may have agreable to the colour, or the great ease with which
they are always got and the facility of dividing one and making of it many
small cups in which the dye may be distributed to every one in company I
do not know. Their method of laying it on the Cloth is this: they take it up
in the fibres of the Möoo and rubbing that gently over the Cloth spread the
outside of it with a thin coat of dye. This of the thick cloth, the thin they
very seldom dye more than the edges of; some indeed I have seen dyed
through as if it had been soakd in the dye, but had not near so elegant a
colour as that on which a thin coat only was laid on the outside.

Though the Etou leaf is the most generaly usd and I beleive produces the
finest colour, yet there are several more which being mixd with the Juice of
the little figs produce a red colour, as Tournefortia Sericea which they call
Taheinoo; Convolvulus brasilienis, Pohue the Eurhe; Solanum latifolium,
Ebooa. From the use of these different plants or from different proportions
of materials many varieties of the colour are observable among their cloths,
some of which are very conspicuously superior to others.

When the women have been employd in dying cloth they industriously
preserve the colour upon their fingers and nails upon which it shews with
its greatest beauty. They look upon this as no small ornament and I have
been sometimes inclind to beleive that they even borrow the dye of each
other merely for the purpose of dying their fingers; whether it is esteemd as
a beauty, a mark of their housewifry in being able to dye, or their riches in
having cloth to dye I know not.

Of what use this preparation may be of to my Countreymen either in
itself or in any hints which may be drawn from an admixture of vegetable
substances so totaly different from any thing of the kind that is practis'd in
Europe, I am not enough vers'd in Chymistry to be able to guess, I must
however hope that it will be of some. The latent qualities of vegetables
have already furnishd our most valuable dyes; no one from an inspection of
the Plants could guess that any coulour was hid under the herbs of Indigo,
Woad, Dyers weed, or indeed the most of the Plants whose leaves are usd
in dying, and yet those latent qualifications have when discoverd produc'd
Colours without which our dyers could hardly go on with their Trades.

The Painter whoom I have with me tells me that the nearest imitation of
the colour that he could mak[e] would be by mixing together vermilion and
Carmine, but even that would not equal the delicacy of it tho a body
colour, and the Indian only a stain in the way that the Indians use it. I can
not say much for its standing: they commonly keep their cloth white till the
very time when it is to be us'd and then dye it as if conscious that it would
soon fade. I have however usd Cloth dy'd with it myself for a fortnight or
three weeks, in which time it has very little alterd itself and by that time the
Cloth was pretty well wore. Of it I have also some now in chests which a
month ago when I lookd into them had very little alterd their colour; the
admixture of fixing drugs would however certainly not a little conduce to
its standing.

So much for their Red: their yellow though a good colour has certainly
no particular excellence to recommend it in which it is superior to our
known Yellows: it is made of the bark of the Root of a shrub calld by them
Nono (Morinda umbellata) this they scrape into water and after it has
soakd there a sufficient time strain the water and dip the cloth into it. The
wood of the root is no doubt furnishd in some degree with the same
property as the Bark but not having any vessels in which they can boil it it
is useless to the inhabitants. The genus of Morinda seems worthy of being
examind as to its propertys in dying; Browne in his hist of Jamaica
mentions 3 species whose roots he says are usd to dye a brown colour, and
Rumphius says of his Bancudus angustifolia, which is very nearly allied to
our Nono, that it is usd by the inhabitants of the East Indian Islands as a
fixing drug for the colour of red with which he says it particularly agrees.
They also dye Yellow with the fruits of a tree calld by them Tamanu
(Calophyllum Inophyllum) but their method I never had the fortune to see;
it seems however to be cheifly esteemed by them for the smell which it
gives to the cloth, a smell that is more agreable to an Indian than a
Europaean nose.

Besides their cloth the women make several kinds of matting which
serves them to sleep upon, and the finest for cloths: with the last they take
much pains, especialy with that sort which is made of the Bark of the Tree
calld by them Poorou, Hibiscus tiliaceus, of which I have seen matting
almost as fine as coarse cloth. But the most beautifull sort, calld by them
Vanne, which is white and extreemly glossy and shining is made of the
leaves of a sort of Pandanus calld by them Wharra, of which we had not an
opportunity of seing either flowers or fruit. The rest of their Möeäs as they
call them which serve to set down or sleep upon are made of a variety of
sorts of Rushes, grass etc.: these they are extreemly nimble in making and
indeed every thing which is platted, baskets of a thousand different
patterns, some very neat etc. As for occasional Baskets or Paniers made of
a Cocoa nut leaf, or the little Bonnets which they wear to shade the eyes
from the sun of the same material, every one knows how to make them at
once; as soon as the sun was pretty high the women who had been with us
since morning sent generaly out for cocoa nut leaves of which they made
such bonnets in a few minutes, which they threw away as soon as the sun
became again low in the afternoon. These however serve merely for a
shade, coverings to their heads they have none except their hair for these
bonnets or shades only fit round their heads not upon them.

Besides these things they make netts for fishing in the same manner as
we do, Ropes of about an inch, and lines, of the Poorou; threads with
which they sew together their canoes, and also belts, of the fibres of the
Cocoa nut, platted either round or flat very neatly; all their twisting work
they do upon their thighs in a manner very dificult to describe and indeed
unnecessary, as no European can want to learn how to do an operation
which his instruments will do for him so much faster than it possibly can
be done by hand. But of all the strings that they make none are so excellent
as the fishing lines etc. which are made of the bark of a kind of frutescent
nettle calld by them Erowa (Urtica argentea) which grows in the mountains
and is consequently rather scarce; of this they make the lines which are
employd to take the briskest and most active fish as bonetos, Albecores
etc. As I never made experiments with it I can only ascertain its strengh by
saying that it was infinitely stronger than silk lines which I had on board
made by the best fishing shops in London, tho not so thick by almost half.

In every expedient for taking fish they are vastly ingenious. Their Seines,
netts for fish to mesh themselves in etc. are exactly like ours: they strike
fish with harpoons made of Cane and pointed with hard wood in a more
dextrous manner than we can do with ours that are headed with Iron, for
we who fasten lines to ours need only lodge them in the fish to secure it,
while they on the other hand throwing theirs quite from them must either
mortaly wound the fish or loose him. Their hooks indeed as they are not
made of Iron must be very different from ours in construction. They [are]
of two sorts, first that calld by them Witte witte which is usd for towing, of
which fig 1 is the profile and fig 2 the view of the bottom part. The shank
(a) is made of mother of Pearl the most glossy that can be got, the inside or
naturaly bright side of which is put undermost as in fig 2; (b) is a tuft of
white dogs or hogs hair which serves may be to imitate the tail of a fish.
These hooks require no bait. They are usd with a fishing rod of Bamboo;
the people who go out with them having found by the flights of birds
which constantly attend shoals of Bonetos where they are, Paddle their
Canoes as swift as they can across them and seldom fail to take some. This
Indian invention seems far to exceed any thing of the kind which I have
seen among Europaeans, and is certainly more successful than any artificial
flying fish or other thing which is generaly usd for the taking of Bonitos, so
far it deserves imitation at any time when the taking of Bonitos is at all
desirable.

The other sort of hooks which they have are made likewise of mother of
Pearl or some hard shell, and as they can not make them bearded as our
hooks they supply that fault by making the points turn much inwards as in
the annexd figure; they hae them of all sizes and catch with them all kinds
of fish very successfully I beleive. The manner of making them is very
simple, every fisherman makes them for himself. The shell is first cut by
the edge of another shell into square peices; these are formd with files of
Coral which work in a manner surprizing to any one who does not know
how sharp Corals are; a hole is then bord in the middle by a drill which is
no more than any stone that may have a sharp corner in it tied to a hand[l]e
of cane, which is turnd in the hand like a Chocolate mill untill the hole is
made; the file then comes into the hole and compleats the hook which is
done in such a one as the figure shews in less than a quarter of an hour.

In their carpenters, joiners and stone cutters work etc. they are almost as
little obligd to the use of tools as in making these hooks: an axe of Stone in
the shape of an adze, a chisel or gouge made of a human bone, a file or
rasp of Coral, skin of Sting rays, and coral sand to polish with, are a
sufficient set of tools for building a house and furnishing it with boats, as
well as for quarrying and squaring stones for the pavement of any thing
which may require it in the neighbourhood. Their stone axes are made of a
black stone not very hard but tolerably tough; they are of different sizes,
some that are intended for felling weigh 3 or 4 Pounds, others which are
usd only for carving not so many ounces. Whatever these tools want in
goodness is made up by the industry of the people who use them. Felling a
tree is their greatest labour, a large one requires many hands to assist and
some days before it can be finishd, but when once it is down they manage
it with far greater dexterity than is credible to an Europaean. If it is to be
made into boards they put wedges into it, and drive them with such
dexterity (as they have told me--for I never saw it) that they divide it into
slabs of 3 or 4 inches in thickness, seldom meeting with an accident if the
tree is good. These slabs they very soon dubb down with their axes to any
given thinness; in this work they certainly excell; indeed their tools are
better adaptd for it than any other performance; I have seen them dubb of
the first rough coat of a plank at least as fast as one of our carpenters could
have done it; and in hollowing, where they have liberty to raise large floors
of the wood, they certainly work quicker, owing to the weight of their
tools: those who are masters of this business, will take of a surprizing thin
coat from a whole plank, without missing a stroke; they can also work
upon a peice of wood of any shape as well as they can upon a flat one, for
in making their canoes every peice is formd first into its proper shape,
bilging or flat: for as they never bend a Plank all the bilging peices must be
shap'd by hand which is done intirely with axes. They have small axes for
carving also but all their carvd work was so bad and in so very mean a taste
that it scarce deservd that name. Yet they love much to have carvd work
and figures stuck about their canoes, the great ones especialy, which
generaly have a figure of a man at the head and another at the stern of
them. Their marai's also are ornamented with different kinds of figures, one
sort of which represent many men standing on Each others heads; they
have also the figures of animals, and Planks whose faces are carvd in
patterns of squares and circles etc. but every part of their carving is in an
equaly bad taste. All their work however acquires a certain neatness in the
finishing for they polish every thing, even the side of a canoe or a Post of a
house, with Coral sand rubbd on in the outer husk of a Cocoa nut and rays
skin, which makes them very smooth and neat.

Their Boats all at least that I have seen of them may be divided into two
general classes. The first which are calld by the natives Ivahah are the only
sort which are usd at Otahite; they serve for fishing, and for short trips to
sea but do not at all seem calculated for long ones. The others again which
are calld Pahei and are usd by the inhabitants of the Societies Isles viz.
Ulhietea, Bola Bola, Huaheine etc. are rather too clumsey for fishing, for
which reason the inhabitants of those Isles have also Ivahas but are much
better adapted for long voyages than the others. The figure below gives a
section of both the kinds of which fig. I is the Ivahah and fig. II the Pahei.

To begin then with the Ivahah these boats differ very much in lengh, I have
measurd them from 10 ft to 72, but by no means proportionaly in breadth,
for that of 10 feet was about 1 in breadth and that of 72 scarce 2, nor is
their hight increasd in a much greater proportion. They may be subdivided
into three sorts, the fighting ivahah, the common sailing or fishing ivahah,
and the traveling ivahah. The fighting Ivahah is by far the largest; the head
and stern of these boats are considerably raisd above the body of them in a
semicircular form, the latter especialy which is 17 or 18 feet in hight when
the body of the boat is scarcely 3. These boats never go to sea singly: two
are always fastned together side by side at the distance of about 2 feet by
strong poles of wood [which] go across them, and upon them is built a
stage in the fore part, about 10 or 12 feet long and a little broader than the
two boats; this is supported by pillars about 6 feet high and upon it stand
the people who fight with slings, spears etc.; below are the rowers who are
much less engagd in the battle on account of their confind situation but
who receive the wounded from the stage and furnish fresh men to ascend in
their room. This much from description for I never saw any of their battles.
The Sailing and fishing Ivahahs vary in size from about 40 feet in lengh to
the smallest I have mentiond, but those which are under 25 feet in lengh
seldom or never carry sail; their Sterns only are raisd and those not above 4
or 5 feet; their heads are quite flat and have a flat board projecting forwards
beyond them about 4 feet. Those which I have calld traveling Ivahas differ
from these in nothing but their being constantly joind 2 and 2 together in
the same manner as the fighting ones, and having a small neat house 5 or 6
feet broad and 7 or 8 long fastned upon the fore part of them, in which the
principal people, who use them very much, set when they are carried from
place to place. The sailing Ivahas have also sometimes this house upon
them when they are joind two and two together, which is but seldom
however; indeed the difference between these two consists almost intirely
in the rigging, and I have divided them into two more because they are
generaly seen employd in very different occupations than from any real
difference in their built. All Ivahas however agree in that they are built
wall sided and with flat bottoms, in which they differ from the Pahie fig. II:
whose sides are built rounding out, or bilging as it is calld, and her bottom
sharp which answers in some measure instead of a Keel.

These Pahies differ very much in size. I have seen them from 60 to 30
feet in lenght but like the Ivahas they are very narrow in proportion to their
lengh: one that I measurd was 51 feet in lengh, in breadth at the top (a)
only 1½ ft and in the bilge (b) 3 feet, which is about the general
proportion; their round sides however make them capable of carrying much
greater burthens and being much more safe sea boats, in consequence of
which they are usd merely for fighting and making long voyages; for the
purposes of fishing and traveling along shore the natives of the Islands
where these are cheifly usd have Ivahas. The fighting Pahies which are the
largest are fitted in the same manner as the fighting Ivahas, only as they
carry far greater burthens the stages are proportionaly larger. The Sailing
ones are most generaly fastned two and two together: for this purpose the
middling sizd ones are said to be the best and least liable to accidents in
stormy weather; in these if we may credit the reports of the inhabitants they
make very long voyages, often remaining out from home several months,
visiting in that time many different Islands of which they repeated to us the
names of near a hundred. They cannot however remain at sea above a
fortnight or 20 days tho they live as sparingly as possible, for want of
proper provisions and places to put them in safe, as well as water of which
however they carry a tolerable stock in hollow Bamboes.

All these imbarkations which indeed are all that I saw us'd in any of the
Islands are disproportionaly narrow in respect to their lengh, Which causes
them to be so very Easily overset that not even the Indians dare venture in
them till they are fitted with a contrivance to prevent this inconvenience;
which is done either by fastening two together side by side as has been
before describd, in which case one supports the other and they become the
most steady Veh[i]cle that can be imagind, or if one of them is to go out
single a log of wood fas[t]ned to two poles which are tied across the boat
serves to balance it tolerably, tho not so securely but that I have seen the
Indians overset them very often. This is upon the same principles as that
usd in the flying Proa of the Ladrone Isles describd in Ld Ansons voyage,
where it is calld an outrigger; indeed the vessels themselves enough
resemble the flying Proa to make it appear at least possible that either that
is a very artfull improvement of these or these a very aukward imitation of
that.

These boats are paddled along with large paddles which have a long
handle and a flat blade resembling more than any thing I recollect a Bakers
peel; of these generaly every one in the boat has one except those who set
under the houses and with these they push themselves on pretty fast
through the water. They are so leaky however that one person at least is
employd almost constantly in throwing out the water. The only thing in
which they excell is landing in a surf, for by reason of their great lengh and
high sterns they would land dry in a surf when our boats could scarcely
land at all, and in the same manner put off from the shore as I have often
experienc'd.

When fitted for sailing they have either one or two Masts fitted to a
frame which is above the canoe; they are made of a single stick; in one that
I measurd of 32 feet in lengh the mast was 25 ft high which seems to me to
be about the common proportion. To this is fastned a sail of about one third
longer but narrow, of a triangular shape, pointed at the top and the outside
curvd; it is borderd all round with a frame of wood and has no contrivance
either for reefing or furling, so that in case of bad weather it must be
intirely cut away, but I fancy in these moderate climates they are seldom
brought to this necessity; the material of which it is made is universaly
Matting. With these sails their Canoes go at a very good rate and lay very
near the wind, probably on account of their sail being borderd with wood
which makes them stand better than any bowlines could possible do. On
the top of this sail they carry an ornament which in taste resembles much
our Pennants, it is made of feathers and reaches down to the very water so
that when blown out by the wind it makes no inconsiderable shew. They
are indeed fond of ornaments in all parts of their boats; they commonly in
the good ones have a figure at the stern; in the Paheis which rise rounding
both at the head and stern they have a figure at both, and the smaller ivahas
have commonly a small carvd pillar standing upon their stern.

Considering these people as intirely destitute of Iron they build these
Canoes very well. Of the Ivahas the foundation is always the trunks of one
or more trees, hollowd out; the ends of these are Slopd off, and sewd
together with the fibres of the Husk of the cocoanut; the sides of them are
then raisd with plank, sewd together in the same manner. The Paheis as
they are much better embarkations so they are built in a more ingenious
manner. Like the others they are laid upon a long keel which however is
not above 4 or 5 inches deep; upon this they raise with two ranges of Plank
each of which is about 18 inches high and about 4 feet in lengh. Such a
number of peices must necessarily be framd and fitted together before they
are sewd and this they do very dexterously, supporting the Keel by ropes
made fast to the top of the house under which they work and then each
plank by a stantion: so that the canoe is compleatly put together before any
one part of her is fastned to that which is next to it, and in this manner
supported till the sewing is compleated. This however soon rotts in the salt
water: it must be renewd once a year at least, in doing which the canoe is
intirely taken to peices and every plank examind, by which means they are
always in good repair. The best of them are however very leaky for as they
use no calking the water must run in at every hole through which the
sewing is past; this however is no great inconvenience to them who live in
a climate where the water is always warm, and go barefoot.

For the convenience of keeping these Paheis dry we saw in the Islands
where they are usd a peculiar sort of houses which were built on purpose
for their reception, and put to no use but that; they are built of Poles stuck
upright in the ground and tied together at the top so that they make a kind
of Gothick arch; the sides of these are compleatly coverd with Thatch
down to the ground but the ends are left open. One of these I measurd, 50
paces in lengh, 10 in breadth and 24 feet high, and this was of the midling
size.

The people excell much in predicting the weather, a circumstance of
great use to them in their short voyages from Island to Island. They have
many various ways of doing this but one only that I know of which I never
heard of being practisd by Europaeans, that is foretelling the quarter of the
heavens from whence the wind shall blow by observing the Milky Way,
which is generaly bent in an arch either one way or the other: this arch they
conceive as already acted upon by the wind, which is the cause of its
curving, and say that if the same curve continues a whole night the wind
predicted by it seldom fails to come some time in the next day; and in this
as well as their other predictions we found them indeed not infallible but
far more clever than Europaeans.

In their longer Voyages they steer in the day by the Sun and in the night
by the Stars. Of these they know a very large part by their Names and the
clever ones among them will tell in what part of the heavens they are to be
seen in any month when they are above their horizon; they know also the
time of their annual appearing and disapearing to a great nicety, far greater
than would be easily beleivd by an Europaean astronomer.

For their Method of dividing time I was not able to get a compleat Idea
of it, I shall however set down what little I know. In speaking of Time
either past or to come they never use any term but Moons, of which they
count 13 and then begin again: this of itself sufficiently shews that they
have an Idea of the Solar year but how they manage to make their 13
months agree with it I never could find out: that they do however I beleive
because in mentioning the names of months they very frequently told us
the fruits that would be in season in each of them, the sort of weather that
was usual in them etc. They have also a name for the 13 months
collectively but they never use it in speaking of time, they use it only in
explaining the mysteries of their religion: in their metaphorical way they
say that the Year Tettowmatatayo was the daughter of their cheif Divinity
Taroataihetoomoo and that she in process of time brought forth the months,
who in their turn produc'd the days, of which they count 29 in every month
including one on which the moon is invisible. Every one of these has its
respective name and is again subdivided into 12 parts containing about 2
hours each, 6 for the day and 6 for the night, each of which has likewise its
respective name; in the day time they guess the divisions of these parts
very well, but in the night tho they have the same number of divisions as in
the day seem very little able to tell at any time which of them it then is,
except the cleverer among them who know the stars.

In counting they proceed from 1 to 10, having a different name for each
number; from thence they say one more, 2 more etc. till the number 20,
which after being calld in the general count 10 more acquires a new name,
as we say a score; by these scores they count till they have got 10 of them,
which again acquires a new name, 200; these again are counted till they get
10 of them, 2000; which is the largest denomination I have ever heard
them make use of and I suppose is as large as they can ever have occasion
for, as they can count 10 of these 20,000 without any new term.
In measures of space they are very poor, indeed one fathom and ten
fathoms are the only terms I have heard among them; by these they convey
the size of any thing as a house, a boat, depth of the sea etc.; but when they
speak of distances from one place to another they have no way but time of
making themselves understood, but by the number of days it takes them in
their canoes to go the distance.

Their Language appeard to me to be very soft and tuneable, it abounds
much with vowels and was very easily pronounc'd by us when ours was to
them absolutely impracticable. I shall instance particularly my own name
which I took much pains to teach them and they to learn: after three days
fruitless trials I was forc'd to select from their many attempts the word
Tabáne, the only one I had been able to get from them that had the least
similitude to it. Again Spanish or Italian words they pronouncd with ease
provided they ended with a vowel, for few or none of theirs end with a
consonant.

I cannot say that I am enough acquainted with it to pronounce whether or
not it is copious. In one respect however it is beyond measure inferior to all
European languages, which is its almost total want of inflexion both of
Nouns and verbs, few or none of the former having more than one Case or
the latter one tense. Notwithstanding this want however we found it very
easy to make ourselves understood in matters of common necessaries,
howsoever paradoxical that may appear to an European.

The[y] have certain Suffixa and make very frequent use of them, which
puzzled us at first very much tho they are but few in number. An instance
or two may be necessary to make myself understood as they do not exist in
any modern European language. One asks another Harre hea? where are
you going? the other answers Ivahinera, to my Wives; on Which the first
questioning him still farther Ivahinera? to your wives do you say? is
answered Ivahinereia, Yes I am going to my wives. Here the suffixa era
and eia save several words to both parties.

From the vocabularies given in Le Mair's voyage (See Histoire des
navigations aux Terres australes Tom 1. p.410) it appears clearly that the
Languages given there as those of the Isles of Solomon and the Isle of
Cocos are radicaly the identical same languages as those we met with, the
greatest number of words differing in little but the greater number of
consonants. The languages of New Guinea and Moyse Isle have also many
words Radicaly the same, particularly their Numbers, tho they are so
obscurd by a multitude of consonants that it is scarce possible that they
should be found out by any but one in some measure acquainted with one
of the Languages; for instance

New Guinea Hissou fish, is found to be the same as the Otahite Eia by
the medium of Ica of the Isles of Solomon; Talingan ears, in Otahite
Terrea; Limang a hand, Lima or Rima; Paring cheeks Paparea; Isle of
Moyse Sou Sou Breasts, Eu; Mattanga Eyes, Mata. They calld us says the
author Tata, which in Otahite signifies men in general; besides several
more.

That the people who inhabit this numerous range of Isles should have
originaly come from one and the same place and brought with the[m] the
same numbers and Language, which latter especialy have remaind to this
time not materialy alterd, is in my opinion not at all past beleif, but that the
Numbers of the Island of Madagascar should be the same as all these is
almost if not quite incredible. I shall give them from a book calld a
Collection of voyages by the Duch East India Company Lond. 1703. p.
116, where supposing the author Who speaks of ten numbers and has only
nine to have lost the fifth their similarity is beyond dispute.

Madagascar/Otahite/Cocos Isle/New Guinea
Issa/Tahie/Taci/Tika
Rove/Rua/Loua/Roa
Tello/Torou/Tolou/Tola
Effat/Hea/Fa/Fatta
Enning/Whene/Houno/Wamma
Fruto/Heta/Fitou/Fita
Wedo/Whearu/Walou/Walla
Sidai/Heva/Ywou/Siwa
Scula/Ahourou/Ongefoula/Sangafoula

It must be rememberd however that the author of this voyage during the
course of it touchd at Java and several more of the East Indian Isles as well
as Madagascar, so that supposing by any misarangement of his papers that
he has given the numerals of some of those Isles for those of Madagascar
our wonder will be much diminishd; for after having tracd them from
Otahite to New Guinea it should seem not very wonderfull to carry them a
little farther to the East Indian Isles, which from their situation seem not
unlikely to be the place from whence our Islanders originaly have come;
but I shall wave saying any more on this subject till I have had an
opportunity of myself seeing the customs etc. of the Javans, which this
Voyage will in all probab[i]lity give me an opportunity of doing.

All the Isles I was upon agreed perfectly as far as I could understand
them; the people of Ulietea only chang'd the t of the Otahiteans to a k,
calling Tata which signifies a man or woman Kaka, a circumstance which
made their Language much less soft. The people of Ohiteroa as far as I
could understand their words which were only shouted out to us seemd to
do the same thing, and add many more consonants and harshness's which
made their Language still more untuneable. I shall give a few of their
words from whence an Idea may be got of their language.

Eupo the Head Booa a hog
Ahewh the Nose Moa fowl
Roourou the Hair Eurèe a dog
Outou the mouth Eùre-Eùre Iron
Nihëo the teeth Ooroo Bread fruit
Arrero the Tongue Hearee Cocoa nuts
Meu-eumi the Beard Mia Bananes
Tiarraboa the throat Vaèe wild Plantanes
Tuamo the shoulders Poe Beads
Tuah the Back Poe Matawewwe Pearl
Öima the Breast ahow a garment
Eu the Nipples Avee a fruit like apples
Oboo the Belly ahee another like Chestnuts
Rema the arm Ewharre a house
Aporema the hand Whennua a high Island
Manneow the fingers Motu a low one
Mieu the Nails Toto Blood
Towhe the Buttocks Aeve bone
Hoowhah the thighs Äeo flesh
Avai the legs Mäe fat
Tapoa the feet Huru-huru Hair
Eraou a tree Miti good
Ama a Branch Eno Bad
Tiäle a flower A Yes
Huero fruit ima no
Etummoo the stem Paree ugly
Aaa the root Pororee Hungry
Eiherre herbaceous plants Pia Full
Oooopa a pidgeon Tuhea Lean
Avigne a parroquet Timahah Heavy
A-a another species Mama Light
Mannu a Bird Poto short
Mora a duck Roa tall
Mattow a fish hook Nenenne sweet
Toura a rope Mala-mala bitter
Mow a shark Whanno to go Far
Mahimahi a Dolphin Harre to go
Mattera a fishing rod Arrea to stay
Eupea a Net Enoho to remain or tarry
Mahanna the Sun Rohe-rohe to be tird
Malama the Moon Maa to Eat
Whettu a star Inoo to Drink
Whettu-euphe a Comet Ete to understand
Erai the sky Warriddo to steal
Eatta a cloud Waridde to be angry
Teparahie to beat

Among people whose dyet is so simple and plain Distempers cannot be
suppos'd to be so frequent as among us Europeans, we observd but few and
those cheifly cutaneous as erysipelas and scaly eruptions upon the skin.
This last was almost if not quite advanc'd to Leprosy; the people who were
in that state were secluded from society, living by themselves each in a
small house built in some unfrequented place where they were daily
supplyd with provisions; whither these had any hopes of releif or were
doom'd in this manner to languish out a life of solitude we did not learn.
Some but very few had ulcers upon different parts of their bodies, most of
which lookd very virulent; the people who were afflicted with them did not
however seem much to regard them, leaving them intirely without any
application even to keep off the flies. Acute distempers no doubt they have
but while we stayd upon the Island they were very uncommon, possibly in
the rainy season they are more frequent. Among the numerous
acquaintance I had upon the Island only one was taken ill during our stay;
her I visited and found her as is their custom left by everybody but her
three children who sat by her; her complaint was cholick which did not
appear to me at all violent; I askd her what medicines she took, she told me
none and that she depended intirely upon the preist who had been trying to
free her from her distemper by his prayers and ceremonies, which she said
he would repeat till she was well, shewing me at the same time Branches of
the (Thespesia Populnea) which he had left with her. After this I left her
and, whether by the ceremonies of the preist or the goodness of her
constitution I know not, in three days time she came down to our tents
compleatly recoverd.

I never hapned to be present when their preists performd their
ceremonies for the cure of sick people, but one of our gentlemen who was
informed me that it consisted in nothing but the preist repeating certain
fixd sentences during which time he platted the leaves of the Cocoa nut
tree into different figures, neat enough, some of which he fas[t]ned to the
fingers and toes of the sick man, who [was during] the time uncoverd as in
respect to the prayers, the whole ceremony almost exactly resembling their
method of praying at the Marai's which I shall by and by describe. That
they have however besides these operations of Preistcraft a knowledge of
Medecine not to be despis'd we were abundantly convinc'd of by the
following fact. The Spanish ship which visited this Island about 17 months
before we came brought with it the Venereal disease and that in a most
virulent degree; these people have often describd to me in most pathetick
terms the shocking symptoms with which the poor wretches were afflicted
who were first seizd by this filthy distemper, which in their Language they
call by a name of Nearly the same but a more extensive signification than
rotteness in English; their hair and nails dropd off and their very flesh
rotted from their bones so that they dyed miserable objects shunnd by their
nearest relations, fearfull least they themselves might be tainted with the
dreadfull Contagion. Yet shocking as these symptoms were they had even
at the time when we came there found a method of cure and that I should
suppose not of a despicable nature, as we saw no one during the whole of
our stay in whoom the distemper arrivd to any hight and some who went
from us for their cure returnd in a short time perfectly recover'd. When first
we discoverd this distemper among these people we were much alarmd,
fearing that we ourselves had notwithstanding our many precautions
brought it among them; but upon strict inquiry we found that one of our
people had been infected within 5 days after our arrival and when we a
little better understood the Language the natives explaind the matter fully
to us.

That they have skillfull Chirurgeons among them we easily gatherd from
the dreadfull scars of wounds which we frequently saw that had been cur'd,
some of which were far greater than any I have seen any where else, and
these were made by stones which these people know how to throw with
slings with great dexterity and force. One man I particularly recolect whose
face was almost intirely destroyd, his nose one cheek and one eye being
beat in and all the bones there flatted down so that the hollow would
receive a mans fist, yet this dreadfull wound was heald clean without any
ulcer remaining. Tupia who has had several wound[s] has had one made by
a spear of his countrey headed with the bone of a stingrays tail which has
peircd quite through his body, entering at his back and coming out just
under his breast, yet this has been so well curd that the remain[in]g scar is
as smooth and as small as any I have seen from the cures of our best
European surgeons.

Vulnerary herbs they have many, nor do they seem at all nice in the
choice of them so they have plenty of such herbaceous plants as yeild mild
juices devoid of all acridity, such as chickweed groundsell etc. in England.
With these they make fomentations which they frequently apply to the
wound, taking care to cleanse it as often as possible, the patient all the time
observing great abstinence; by this method if they have told us true their
wounds are curd in a very short time. As for their medicines we learn'd but
little concerning them; they told us indeed freely that such and such plants
were good for such and such distempers, but it requird a much better
knowledge of the language than we were able to obtain during our short
stay to understand the method of application even of those they attempted
to explain to us.

Their Manner of Disposing of their dead as well as the ceremonies
relating to their mourning for them are so remarkable that they deserve a
very particular description. As soon as any one is dead the House is
immediately filld with their relations who bewail their Loss with Loud
lamentations, especialy those who are the farthest removd in blood from or
who profess the least greif for the deceasd; the nearer relations and those
who are realy affected spend their time in more silent sorrow, while the
rest join in Chorus's of Greif at certain intervals between which they laugh,
talk and gossip as if totaly unconcernd; this lasts till day light on the Morn
after their meeting, when the body being shrowded in their cloth is laid
upon a kind of Bier on which it can conveniently be carried upon mens
shoulders. The priests office now begins; he prays over the body, repeating
his sentences, and orders it to be carried down to the sea side; here his
prayers are renewd, the Corps is brought down near the waters edge and he
sprinkles water towards but not upon it, it is then removd 40 or 50 yards
from the sea and soon after brought back and this ceremony repeated
which is done several times. In the mean time a house has been built and a
small space of ground round it raild in; in the center of this house are posts
set up for the supporting of the bier which as soon as the ceremonies are
finishd is brought here and set upon them, where the Corps is to remain
and putrifie in state to the no small disgust of every one whose business
requires them to pass near it.

These houses of corruption, Tu papow as they are calld here, are of a size
proportionate to the rank of the Person containd in them; if he is poor they
merely cover the bier and these generaly have no railing round them, the
largest I ever saw was 11 yards in lengh. They are ornamented according to
the abilities and inclinations of the surviving relations, who never fail to
lay a profusion of Good Cloth about the body and often almost cover the
outside of the house; the two ends which are open are also hung with kind
of garlands of the Fruits of the Palm nut (Pandanus) Cocoa nut leaves
knotted by the Preists in kind of Mystick knots, and a plant calld by them
Ethee no ta Marai (terminalia) which is particularly consecrated to
funerals. Near the House is also laid fish, fruits and cocoa nut or Common
water or such provisions as can well be spard, not that they suppose the
dead any way capable of eating this provision, but think that if any of their
gods should descend upon that place and being hungry find that these
preparations had been neglected he would infalibly satisfy his appetite with
the flesh of the dead corps.

No sooner is the corps fixd up within the House or ewhatta as they call it
than the ceremony of mourning begins again. The women (for the men
seem to think lamentations below their dignity) assemble Led on by the
nearest relation, who walking up to the door of the House swimming
almost in tears strikes a sharks tooth several times into the crown of her
head, on which a large effusion of blood flows, which is carefully caught in
their linnen and thrown under the Bier. Her example is imitated by the rest
of the women and this ceremony is repeated at the interval of 2 or 3 days as
long as the women chuse or can keep it up, the nearest relation thinking it
her duty to Continue it longer than any one else. Besides the blood which
they beleive to be an acceptable present to the deceasd, whose soule they
beleive to exist and hover about the place where the body lays observing
the actions of the survivors, they throw in Cloths wet with tears, of which
all that are shed are carefully preservd for that purpose, and the younger
people cut off their hair either all or in part and throw that also under the
Bier.

When these ceremonies have been performd for two or three days the
men, who till now seemd to be intirely insensible of their loss, begin their
part which the Nearest relations take in turns. They dress themselves in a
dress so extrordinary that I question whether words can give a tolerable
Idea of it, I therefore refer intirely to the annexd figure. In this dress they
patrole the woods early in the morn and late at night, preceeded by 2 or 3
boys who have nothing upon them but a small peice of Cloth round their
wrists and are smutted all over with Charcoal; these sable emissaries run
about their principal in all directions as if in pursuit of people on whoom
he may vent the rage inspird by his sorrow, which he does most
unmercifully if he catches any body, cutting them with his stick the edge of
which is set with sharks teeth, but this rarely or never happens for no
sooner does this figure appear than every one who see either him or his
emissaries fly inspird with a sort of religious awe, fly with the utmost
speed, hiding wherever they think themselves the most safe but by all
means quitting their Houses if they lie even near the path of this dreadfull
apparition.

These ceremonies continue for 5 moons decreasing however in frequency
very much towards the latter part of that time. The body is then taken down
from the ewhatta, the bones washd and scrapd very clean, and burried
according to the rank of the person either within or without some one of
their Marais or places of publick worship; and if it is one of their Earees or
cheifs his Scull is preservd and being wrappd up in fine Cloth is plac'd in a
kind of case made for that purpose which stands in the marai. The
mourning then ceases unless some of the women who find themselves
more than commonly afflicted by the Loss repeat the ceremony of
Poopooing or bleeding themselves in the head, which they do at any time
or in any place where they happen to be when the whim takes them.
The ceremonies however are far from Ceasing at this time. Frequent
prayers are to be said by the preist and frequent offerings made for the
benefit of the deceasd, or more properly for that of the Preists who are well
paid for their prayers by the surviving relations. During this ceremony
Emblematical devices are made use of: a young plantain tree signifies the
Deceased and a bunch of feathers the Deity invokd; opposite to this the
preist places himself often attended by relations of the deceasd and always
furnish'd with a small offering of some kind of Eatables intended for the
God; he begins by adressing the God by a set form of sentences and during
the time he repeats them employs himself in weaving Cocoa nut leaves into
different forms, all which he disposes upon the Grave where the bones
have been deposited; the Deity is then adressed by a shrill scritch usd only
on that occasion and the offering presented to his representative, the little
tuft of feathers, which after this is removd and every thing else left in statu
quo, to the no small Emolument of the Rats who quickly devour the
offering.

Religion has been in ages, is still in all Countreys Cloak'd in mysteries
unexplicable to human understanding. In the South Sea Islands it has still
another disadvantage to present to any one who has a desire to investigate
it--the Language in which it is conveyd, at least many words of it, are
different from those usd in common conversation, so that tho Tupia often
shewd the greatest desire to instruct us in it he found it almost impossible;
in short it is only needfull to remember how dificult it would be to
reconcile the apparent inconsistencies of our own religion to the faith of an
infidel, and to recolect how many excellent discourses are daily read to
instruct even us in the faith which we profess, as articles of excuse in my
favour when I declare that I know less of the religion of these people than
of any other part of their policy. What I do know however I shall here write
down wishing that inconsistencies may not appear to the eye of the candid
reader as absurdities.

This Universe and its marvelous parts must strike the most stupid with a
desire of knowing from whence themselves and it were producd. Their
Preists however have not Ideas sufficiently enlarg'd to adopt that of
Creation: that this world should have been originaly created from nothing
far surpasses their comprehension. They observd however that every
animal and every plant producd new ones by procreation and adopted the
Idea; hence it is necessary to suppose two original beings one of whom
they call Ettoomoo and the other which they say was a rock Tepapa; these
at some very remote period of time, and by the common means allowd to
us males and females their children, begat all that is seen or known of by
us; some things however they imagine have increasd among themselves, as
the Stars, the different species of plants, and even the different divisions of
Time; the Years say they producd the Months who intermingling with each
other produc'd the days.

The First man say they was the Issue of a Connection between two of
their inferior deities or Eatuas who at that time inhabited the Earth. He was
when first born round like a ball but his mother with great care drew out
each Limb and formd him as we now are, after which he was Calld Eothe
which signifies finishd. When he arrivd at maturity the Stings of nature
made him very desirous of Excersising those faculties with which the
males of all animals are indued; his mother was the only female he could
find and consequently the Object of his attempts; ignorant however what
part of her he was in search of he made several unsuccessfull efforts, at
Last however chance leading him right he begat a daughter whoom also he
compressd and begat another, nor could for several generations have one
son; at last however he had one who by the asistance of his many Sisters
peopled this world and is the ancestor of us all.

Their Gods are numerous; they are divided into two Classes, the Greater
and the Lesser Gods and of each Class are some of Both Sexes. The cheif
of all is Tarroati'ettoomoo the procreator of all things whoom they
emphaticaly stile the Causer of Earthquakes; his Son Tane was however
much more generaly calld upon as supposd to be the more active deity. The
Men worshipd the male Gods and the Women the Females, the Men
however supply the office of Preist for both sexes.

They beleive in a heaven and a hell, the first they call Tairua l'orai the
other Tiahoboo. Heaven they describe as a place of Great happines and hell
is only a place enjoying less of the luxuries of life; to this they say that the
souls of the interior people go after death and those of the cheifs and rich
men to the other. This is one of the strongest instances to shew that their
religion is totaly independent of Morality: no actions regarding their
neighbours are supposd to come at all under the Cognizance of the Deity, a
humble regard only is to be shewn him and his assistance askd on all
occasions with much Ceremony and some sacrafice, from whence are
derivd the Perquisites of the Preists.

The Tahowa or Preist is here a hereditary Character. They are numerous
and all ranks of People have preists among them, the cheif is generaly
however the younger brother of some very Good Family and is respected
in a degree next to their kings. All ranks of preists are commonly more
learned than the laity; their learning consists cheifly in knowing well the
names and ranks of the different Eatuas or divinities, the origin of the
universe and all its parts etc.; these things have been handed down to them
in set sentences of which those who are clever can repeat an almost infinite
number, in doing which few words occur the same as those usd in common
conversation, which greatly increasd the dificulty we found in Gaining a
knowledge of their Theology.

Besides religion the Practise of Physick and the knowledge of Navigation
and Astronomy is in the Possession of the Preists. The name indeed of
preist, Tahowa, signifies a Man of Knowledge, so that even here the Preists
Monopolize the greatest part of the learning of the Countrey in much the
same manner as they formerly did in Europe; the practise of which gains
them profit as well as respect each in his particular order, for each order
has preists of its own nor will the preists of the Manahounies do any thing
for a Toutou who is below them in rank.

Marriage is [in] these Islands no more than an agreement between the
man and the woman totaly independent of the preist, it is in general I
beleive pretty well kept unless they agree to seperate, which is done with
as little trouble as they came together. Few people however enter this state
but rather chuse freedom in their Amours, tho bought at the inhuman
expence of murthering their children, whose fate is in that case intirely
dependant on the father; who if he does not chuse to acknowledge both
them and the woman and engage to contribute his part towards their
support, orders them to be strangled which is instantly put in execution.
If our preists have excelld theirs in persuading us that the Sexes can not
come lawfully together without having bought their benediction, they have
done it by intermingling it so far with religion that the fear of punishment
from above secures their power over us; but these untaught parsons have
securd to themselves the profit of two operations without being driven to
the necessity of so severe a penalty on the refusal, viz. Tattowing or
painting their bodies and Circumsizing. Neither of these can be done by
any but preists, and as the highest degree of shame follows the wanting
either the people are as much necessitated to make use of them as if bound
by the highest ties of Religion, of which both customs are totaly
independent. For the first they give no reason but that their ancestors did
the same, for the other Cleanliness in hot climates always will be a
sufficient reason. For both these operations they are paid by every one
according to his abilities in the same manner as weddings Christnings etc.
etc. are paid for in Europe.

Their places of publick worship, which they call Marai, are square
enclosures of very different sizes, from 10 to 100 yards in diameter; at one
end of these is a heap or built up pile of stones near which the bones of the
principal people are interrd, those of their dependants laying all round on
the outside of the wall. Near or in these enclosures are often placd planks
carvd into different figures and very frequently images of many men
standing on each others heads; these however are in no degree the objects
of adoration, every prayer and sacrafise being here offerd to the Invisible
deities.

Near or even within the Marai are one or more large altars raisd upon
high posts 10 or 12 feet above the ground which are calld Whatterow: on
these are laid the offerings, Hogs, dogs, fowls, fruits or what ever else the
piety or superfluity of the owner thinks proper to dedicate to the gods.
Both these places are reverencd in the highest degree, no man aproaches
them without taking his Cloths from off his shoulders and no woman is on
any account permitted to enter them. The women however have Marais of
their own where they worship and sacrifice to their Godesses.

Of these Marais each family of consequence has one which serves him
and his dependants; as each family values itself upon its antiquity so are
these esteemd. In the Society Isles especialy Ulhietea were some of great
antiquity particularly that of Tapodeboatea; the building of these is rough
and coarse but the stones of which they are composd immensely large. At
Otahite again where either from frequent wars or other accidents many of
the most ancient families are extinct they have tried to make them as
elegant and expensive as possible, of which sort is that of Oamo describd
in the Journal of going round the Island.

Besides their Gods each Island has a Bird to which the Title of Eatua or
God is given, for instance Ulietea has the Heron and Bola Bola a kind of
Kingfisher; these birds are held in high respect and by no means killd or
molested. They are thought to be givers of Good or Bad fortune but no
kind of Worship is offerd to them.

Tho I dare not assert that these people, to whoom the art of writing and
consequently of Recording Laws etc. is totaly unknown, live under a
regular form of Goverment, Yet the Subordination which takes place
among them very much resembles the early state of the feudal laws by
which our Ancestors were so long Governd, a System evidently formd to
secure the Licentious Liberty of a few while the Greater part of the Society
are unalterably immersd in the most abject Slavery.

Their Orders are Earee ra hie which answers to King; Earee, Baron;
Manahouni, Vassel; and Toutou, Villain. The Earee ra hie is always the
head of the Best family in the countrey; to him great respect is paid by all
ranks but in Power he seemd to us inferior to several of the Principal
Earees, nor indeed did he once appear in the transacting of any part of our
business. Next to him in Rank are the Earees, each of whoom hold one or
more of the Districts into which the Island is divided (in Otahite there may
be about 100 such districts); which are by the Earees parceld out to the
Manahounies, who cultivate each his part and for the use of it owe their
Cheif service when calld upon and provisions, especialy when he travels,
which he often does accompanied by many of his freinds and their families
often amounting to near 100 principals beside their attendants. Inferiour to
the Manahounes are the toutous who are upon almost the same footing as
the Slaves in the East indian Islands, only that they never appeard to us
transferrable from one to the other; these do all kinds of Laborious work,
till the land, fetch wood and water, dress the victuals, under the direction
however of the Mistris of the family, catch fish etc. Besides these are the
two classes of Erate and Towha which seem to answer to Yeoman and
Gentleman as they came between Earee and Manahouni; but as I was not
acquainted with the existence of these classes during our stay on the Island
I know little of their real situation.

Each of the Earees kept a kind of Court and hade a large attendance
cheifly of the Younger brothers of their own family and of other Earees;
among these were different officers of the Court, as Heewa no t'Earee
Whanno no t'Earee, who were sometimes sent to us upon business. Of all
these Courts Dootahah's was the most splendid, indeed we were almost
inclind to believe that he acted as Locum tenens for Otou the Earee rahie,
his nephew, as he livd upon an estate belonging to him and we never could
hear that he had any other publick place of residence.

The Earees or rather the districts which they Possess are obligd in time of
a general attack to furnish each their Quota of soldiers for the service of the
Publick. Those of the Principal districts which Tupia recolected when
added together amounted to 6680 men to which army it is probable that the
small Quotas of the rest would not make any great addition.

Besides these publick wars, which are to be headed by the Earee ra hie,
any private difference between two Earees is decided by their own people
without at all disturbing the tranquility of the Publick. Their weapons are
Slings which they use with great dexterity, pikes headed with the stings of
sting Rays, and Clubbs of 6 or 7 feet long made of a very heavy and hard
wood. With these they fight by their own account very obstinately, which
appears the more probable as the Conquerors give no Quarter to Man
Woman or Child who is unfortunate enough to fall into their hands during
or for some hours after the Battle, that is till their Passion is subsided.
Otahite at the time of Our being there was divided into two Kingdoms,
Oporeonoo the larger and Tiarrebo the smaller. Each had its seperate king
etc. etc. who were at Peace; the king of Oporeonoo however Calld himself
king of both in just the Same manner as most European Monarchs usurp
the Title of king over kingdoms over which they have not the least
influence.

It is not to be expected that in a Goverment of this kind Justice can be
strictly administerd, we saw indeed no signs of Punishments during our
stay. Tupia however always insisted upon it that Theft was punishd with
death and smaller crimes in proportion: in cases of Adultery the offenders
were in the power of the offended party who if he takes them in the fact
frequently kills them both. All punishments however were the business of
the injurd party, who if superior to him who committs the crime easily
executes them by means of his more numerous attendants; equals seldom
chuse to molest each other unless countenancd by their superior who
assists them to defend their unjust acquisitions. The cheifs however to
whoom in reality all kinds of Property belong punish their dependants for
crimes committed against each other, and the dependants of others if
caught doing wrong within their districts.


1769 September 1.

Blows very fresh with a heavy sea; the ship was very troublesome all last
night and is not less so today. Many birds are about but not so many as
yesterday, there are however all the sorts.


1769 September 2.

Wind still fresher, ship lays too. Bird[s] of all the sorts before mentiond
in great numbers round her. In the evening the weather moderates and the
sea falls fast. At night the comet was seen brighter than when last observd
but the tail was something shorter, which when last seen measurd 42
degrees in lengh. Great sea from WSW. At 4 lat. 40¡.


1769 September 3.

Sea quite down, a pleasant breeze. Few birds today about the ship,
cheifly Pintado birds and black beakd Albatrosses.


1769 September 4.

Almost calm, few birds as yesterday. In the Evening a light breeze
springs up and the sun sets among many dark black clouds edg'd with fiery
red, which is lookd upon by some seamen as a sure sign of a gale of wind.


1769 September 5.

In the morn a pleasant breeze which increasd gradualy till about 4 when
it blew fresh; about 6 hard rain came on which made both sea and wind fall
in a very short time. Many birds were seen today, all of the 2nd and two
that had not been seen before, probably varieties of the common albatross;
one at a distance appeard snow white but nearer was easily seen to be
thickly powderd over with small grey spotts, the other milk white except
the tipps of the wings which were black as in Gannetts. Saw a peice of rock
weed.


1769 September 6.

Moderate all day: few individuals of Birds but all the sorts of yesterday.


1769 September 7.

Blows fresh: many birds, all the sorts of yesterday and one added to the
number, a shearwater of the common size (of a sea gull) black above and
white underneath except his chin and neck which were black. A seal seen.


1769 September 8.

Little wind in the morn, at noon calm with rain; few birds seen all of the
common sorts. Great swell from SW.


1769 September 9.

Fair wind, light breeze and very pleasant weather: a small peice of sea
weed was seen; few birds only the Pintado and small shearwater.


1769 September 10.

This morn a fog bank was seen upon our quarter which much resembled
land, we bore after it but were soon convincd of our mistake. More birds
than yesterday: Pintado birds, both the albatrosses, the small grey backd
bird like a dove (Mother Careys dove), the grey backd shearwater of the
31st, and a small kind of Mother Careys chicken black above and white
underneath.


1769 September 11.

Fine weather and few birds.


1769 September 12.

Moderate. Saw another of the small bird of the 20th which are the only
two that have yet been observd. Swell from SSW.


1769 September 13.

Almost calm all last night; weather today very uncertain, breezes
succeeding calms. Few birds are about the ship, two were however seen
swimming in the water that were perfectly white and appeard larger than
Albatrosses.


1769 September 14.

Weather much as yesterday; swell from SSW.


1769 September 15.

Fresh breeze of wind but fair abundance of birds are again about the ship,
both the Albatrosses, Pintados, grey backd shearwater, black backd d¡ of
the 7th, Dove. In the even it blew hard, myself far from well, complaint
much like sea sickness.


1769 September 16.

Weather rather more moderate but still blows fresh. My self rather better
but still very sick at the stomach which continualy supplys a thin acid
liquor which I discharge by vomit. Birds as yesterday.


1769 September 17.

Moderate, few birds; myself quite well.


1769 September 18.

Moderate this morn, several pintados and albatrosses; in the evening
quite calm.


1769 September 19.

Quite calm today go out in the boat and shoot Procellaria velox (the dove
of the 31st), vagabunda (the grey backd shearwater of the same day),
Passerina (the small mother Careys chicken of the 10th). Took with the
dipping net Medusa vitrea, Phillodoce velella to one specimen of which
stuck Lepas anatifera, Doris complanata, Helix violacea, Cancer..... Very
few birds were to be seen, there were however some Albatrosses and a
kind of Shearwater quite black which I was not fortunate enough to shoot.
A large hollow swell from the South.


1769 September 20.

Uncertain weather, Calms and light breezes often succeeding each other;
few birds about the ship.


1769 September 21.

Pleasant breeze: some birds about us, Albatrosses and black and grey
shearwaters.


1769 September 22.

Moderate. Few birds cheifly Albatrosses and Pintados; towards night a
large flock of Black shearwaters are seen that do not change their place but
keep hovering as if some prey was under them; two whales were also seen.
Southerly swell still continued.


1769 September 23.

Moderate today. Several birds are about the ship cheifly Pintados and
Albatrosses; in the evening another flock of Black shearwaters passd the
ship and soon after two whales were seen.

Dr Solander has been unwell for some days so today I opend Dr Hulme's
Essence of Lemon Juice, Mr Monkhouse having prescribd it for him,
which provd perfectly good, little if at all inferior in taste to fresh lemon
juice. We also today made a pye of the North American apples which Dr
Fothergill gave me, which provd very good, if not quite equal to the apple
pyes which our freinds in England are now eating, good enough to please
us who have been so long deprivd of the fruits of our native Countrey. In
the main however we are very well off for refreshments and provisions of
most species: our ships beef and Pork are excellent as are the peas; the
flour and oatmeal which have at some times faild us are at present and
have in general been very good. Our water is as sweet and has rather more
spirit than it had when drank out of the river at Otahite. Our bread indeed is
but indifferent, occasiond by the quantity of Vermin that are in it, I have
often seen hundreds nay thousands shaken out of a single bisket. We in the
Cabbin have however an easy remedy for this by baking it in an oven, not
too hot, which makes them all walk off, but this cannot be allowd to the
private people who must find the taste of these animals very disagreable, as
they every one taste as strong as mustard or rather spirits of hartshorn.
They are of 5 kinds, 3 Tenebrios, 1 Ptinus and the Phalangium cancroides;
this last is however scarce in the common bread but was vastly plentyfull
in white Deal bisket as long as we had any left.

Wheat was allowd to the ships company which has been boild for their
breakfasts 2 or 3 times a week in the same manner as firmity is made; this
has I beleive been a very usefull refreshment to them as well as an agreable
food, which myself and most of the officers in the ship have constantly
breakfasted upon in the cold weather; the grain was originaly of a good
quality and has kept without the least damage. This however cannot be said
of the Malt of which we have plainly had two kinds, one very good but that
has been some time ago us'd; that that is at present in use is good for
nothing at all, it has been originaly of a bad light grain and so little care has
been taken in the making of it that the tails are left in with innumerable
other kinds of Dirt; add to all this that it has been damp'd on board the ship
so that with all the care that can be usd it will scarce give a tincture to
water. Portable Soup is very good, it has now and then requird an airing
which has hinderd it from moulding. Sour Crout is as good as ever and I
have not the least doubt of its remaining so.

So much for the Ships Company. We ourselves are hardly as well of as
them; our live stock consists of 17 Sheep, 4 or 5 fowls, as many S. Sea
hogs, 4 or 5 Muscovy ducks, an English boar and sow with a litter of piggs;
in the use of these we are rather sparing as the time of our Getting a supply
is rather precarious. Salt Stock we have nothing worth mentioning except a
kind of Salt Beef which was put up by one Mellish a butcher at New Crane
Stairs, which is by much the best salt meat I have ever tasted, and Our
Salted Cabbage, see p.210 which is now as good as it was then.

Our Malt liquors have answerd extreemly well: we have now both small
beer and Porter upon tap as good as I ever drank them, especialy the latter
which was bought of Sam. & Jno. Curtiss at Wapping New Stairs. The
Small beer had some art usd to make it keep, it was bought of Bruff &
Taylor in Hog Lane near St Giles's. Our wine I cannot say much for tho I
beleive it to be good in its nature, we have not a glass fine these many
months I beleive cheifly owing to the Carelessness or ignorance of the
Steward.


1769 September 24.

Weather very moderate: some birds seen, in the morning a flock. A peice
of sea weed and a peice of wood or something that lookd like it and was
coverd with Barnacles were seen from the ship.


1769 September 25.

Fine weather and fair wind: several birds seen of most of the usual sorts.


1769 September 26.

Blows fresh today: fewer birds in sight than usual in such weather.
Several large leaves of sea weed have been seen to go by the Ship today
but no heaps of it.


1769 September 27.

Blows fresh still. A good deal of sea weed has been seen this morn some
in heaps as much together as would fill a large wheelbarrow; after dinner a
Seal is seen asleep upon the water which gives new life to our hopes. In the
evening a shoal of Porpoises black upon the back, white under the belly
and upon the nose, with either no back fin or one placd very far behind.
Few birds today, but some of almost all the kinds we have usualy seen.


1769 September 28.

Blows fresh all day: some but not many birds seen, several heaps of sea
weed pass by the ship.


1769 September 29.

Pleasant weather: birds more plentiful than usual in such weather; about
noon saw one like a snipe but less and with a short bill which I judge to be
a land bird. Mr Gore saw a bird which he calls a Port Egmont hen which he
describes to be brown on the back, like a gull in size and shape, but flyes
like a crow flapping its wings. Some large heaps of sea weed have been
seen; some of the gentlemen upon deck think that the colour of the water is
chang'd consequently we are in soundings.


1769 September 30.

Pleasant weather: several small peices of weed go by the ship; one was
taken with the hoave or dipping net, it seemd not to have been long at sea
as it was not much broken or rubbd.


1769 October 1.

Very little wind and yet vast quantities of small birds are about the ship
which has been to us a very uncommon sight in such fine weather; a Seal
seen from the ship. Several peices of sea weed are taken and among them a
peice of wood quite overgrown with sertularias; it must have been a long
time at Sea yet more hopes are drawn from this than the sea weed, as we
now have in our possession a part of the produce of our Land of Promise.
Among the weed are many sea insects which are put into spirits weed
wood and all, so we shall at least have this to shew. Several whales have
been seen today.


1769 October 2.

Calm: I go in the boat and take up Dagysa rostrata, Serena, polyedra,
Beroe incrassata, coarctata, medusa vitrea, Phyllodoce velella, with several
other things which are all put in spirits. See a seal but cannot come near
him to shoot. Shoot Diomedea exulans, Procellaria velox, pallipes,
Latirostris, longipes and Nectris fuliginosa.


1769 October 3.

Calm almost this morn. About 5 a sudden squall came on with such
violence that the officer of the watch was obligd to settle the topsails, it did
not however last above 5 minutes; this we look upon as a sure sign of land
as such squalls are rarely (if ever) met with at any considerable distance
from it. I go in the boat and kill Procellaria capensis, longipes and
latirostris. In the course of the day several peices of sea weed are taken up
of species very new and one peice of wood coverd with Striated Barnacles
Lepas Anserina?

Now do I wish that our freinds in England could by the assistance of
some magical spying glass take a peep at our situation: Dr Solander setts at
the Cabbin table describing, myself at my Bureau Journalizing, between us
hangs a large bunch of sea weed, upon the table lays the wood and
barnacles; they would see that notwisthstanding our different occupations
our lips move very often, and without being conjurors might guess that we
were talking about what we should see upon the land which there is now
no doubt we shall see very soon.


1769 October 4.

Several small peices of sea weed are seen today but no heaps; weather
pleasant, breeze rather of the gentlest. Towards evening we were entertaind
by a large shoal of Porpoises like those of the 30th of last month; they
came up to the ship in prodigious circl[in]g action leaping out of the water
sometimes 2 or 3 feet high as nimbly as Bonetos; immediately after them
came a number of a larger sort quite black who movd very heavy in the
water; both these troops kept their course by the ship without taking much
notice of her probably in pursuit of some prey.


1769 October 5.

Our old enemy Cape fly away entertaind us for three hours this morn all
which time there were many opinions in the ship, some said it was land and
others Clouds which at last however plainly appeard. 2 Seals passd the ship
asleep and 3 of the birds which Mr Gore calls Port Egmont hens, Larus
Catarrhactes, and says are a sure sign of our being near land. They are
something larger than a crow, in flight much like one, flapping their wings
often with a slow motion; their bodies and wings of a dark chocolate or
soot colour, under each wing a small broadish bar of dirty white which
makes them so remarkable that it is hardly possible to mistake them. They
are seen as he says all along the Coast of America and in Faulklands Isles;
I myself remember to have seen them at Terra del Fuego but by some
accident did not note them down. Just before sun set we were much
entertaind by a shoal of Porpoises like those seen yesterday; they kept in
sight of the ship for near an hour, all that while as if in hot pursuit of some
prey, leaping out of the water almost over each other; they might be very
justly compard to a pack of hounds in full cry only their numbers which
were some thousands made them a much more considerable object;
sometimes they formd a line near ¼ of a mile in lengh, sometimes
contracted them selves into a much smaller compass, keeping the water
wherever they went in a foam so that when they were so far from the ship
that their bodys could not be distinguishd any man would have taken them
for breakers.


1769 October 6.

This morn a Port Egmont hen and a seal were seen pretty early. At ½
past one a small boy who was at the mast head Calld out Land. I was
luckyly upon deck and well I was entertaind, within a few minutes the cry
circulated and up came all hands, this land could not then be seen even
from the tops yet few were there who did not plainly see it from the deck
till it appeard that they had lookd at least 5 points wrong.
Weather most moderate. We came up with it very slowly; at sun set
myself was at the masthead, land appeard much like an Island or Islands
but seemd to be large. Just before a small shark was seen who had a very
piked nose something like our dog fish in England.


1769 October 7.

This morn the Land plainly seen from the deck appears to be very large;
about 11 a large smoak was seen and soon after several more, sure sign of
inhabitants. After dinner dropd calm: myself in little boat shot Nectris
munda and Procellaria velox, took with the dipping net Dagysa gemma and
a good deal of Fucus, sertularia etc., the examination of which is postpond
till we shall have more time than we are likely to have at present.
In the Evening a pleasant breeze. At sunset all hands at the mast head;
Land still distant 7 or 8 leagues, appears larger than ever, in many parts 3,
4 and 5 ranges of hills are seen one over the other and a chain of
Mountains over all, some of which appear enormously high. Much
difference of opinion and many conjectures about Islands, rivers, inlets etc.,
but all hands seem to agree that this is certainly the Continent we are in
search of.


1769 October 8.

This morn the land very near us makes in many white cliffs like chalk;
the hills are in general clothd with trees, in the valleys some appear to be
very large; the whole of the appearance not so fruitfull as we could wish.
Stood in for a large bay in hopes of finding a harbour; before we are well
within the heads saw several Canoes standing across the bay, who after a
little time returnd to the place they came from not appearing to take the
least notice of us. Some houses were also seen which appeard low but neat,
near one a good many people were collected who sat down on the beach
seemingly observing us, possibly the same as we saw in the canoes as they
landed somewhere near that place. On a small peninsula at the NE head we
could plainly see a regular paling, pretty high, inclosing the top of a hill,
for what purpose many conjectures were made: most are of opinion or say
at least that it must or shall be either [a] park of Deer or a feild of oxen and
sheep. By 4 oclock came to an anchor near 2 miles from the shore. The bay
appears to be quite open without the least shelter: the two sides of it make
in high white Cliffs, the middle is low land with hills gradualy rising
behind one another to the chain of high mountains inland. Here we saw
many great smoaks, some near the beach others between the hills, some
very far within land, which we lookd upon as great indications of a
populous countrey.

In the evening went ashore with the marines etc. March from the boats in
hopes of finding water etc. Saw a few of the natives who ran away
immediately on seeing us; while we were absent 4 of them attackd our
small boat in which were only 4 boys, they got off from the shore in a
river, the people followd them and threatned with long lances; the pinnace
soon came to their assistance, fird upon them and killd the cheif. The other
three draggd the body about 100 yards and left it. At the report of the
musquets we drew together and went to the place where the body was left;
he was shot through the heart. He was a middle sizd man tattowd in the
face on one cheek only in spiral lines very regularly formd; he was coverd
with a fine cloth of a manufacture totaly new to us, it was tied on exactly as
represented in Mr Dalrymples book p.63; his hair was also tied in a knot on
the top of his head but no feather stuck in it; his complexion brown but not
very dark.

Soon after we came on board we heard the people ashore very distinctly
talking very loud no doubt, as they were not less than two miles distant
from us, consulting probably what is to be done tomorrow.


1769 October 9.

We could see with our glasses but few people on the beach; they walkd
with a quick pace towards the river where we landed yesterday, most of
these without arms, 3 or 4 with long Pikes in their hands. The captn orderd
three boats to be mannd with seamen and marines intending to land and try
to establish a communication with them. A high surf ran on the shore. The
Indians about 50 remaind on the farther side of the river; we lookd upon
that as a sign of fear, so landing with the little boat only the Captn Dr
Solander, Tupia and myself went to the river side to speak to them. As
soon almost as we appeard they rose up and every man producd either a
long pike or a small weapon of well polishd stone about a foot long and
thick enough to weigh 4 or 5 pounds, with these they threatned us and
signd to us to depart. A musquet was then fird wide of them the ball of
which struck the water, they saw the effect and immediately ceasd their
threats. We though[t] that it was prudent to retreat till the marines were
landed and drawn up to intimidate them and support us in case of
nesscessity. They landed and marchd with a Jack carried before them to a
little bank about 50 yards from the river, which might be about 40 broad;
here they were drawn up in order and we again advancd to the river side
with Tupia, who now found that the language of the people was so like his
own that he could tolerably well understand them and they him. He
immediately began to tell them that we wanted provisions and water for
which we would give them Iron in exchange: they agreed to the proposal
but would by no means lay by their arms which he desird them do: this he
lookd upon as a sign of treachery and continualy told us to be upon our
guard for they were not our freinds. Many words passd the cheif purport of
which was that each side desird the other to come over to them; at last
however an Indian stripd himself and swam over without arms, he was
followd by two more and soon after by most of the rest who brought with
them their arms. We gave them Iron and beads, they seemd to set little
value upon either but especialy upon the iron the use of which they
certainly were totaly ignorant of. They caught at whatever was offerd them
but would part with nothing but a few feathers: their arms indeed they
offerd to exchange for ours which they made several atempts to snatch
from us; we were upon our guard so much that their attempts faild and they
were made to understand that we must kill them if they snatchd any thing
from us. After some time Mr Green in turning himself about exposd his
hanger, one of them immediately snatchd it, set up a cry of exultation and
waving it round his head retreated gently. It now appeard nescessary for
our safeties that so daring an act should be instantly punishd, this I
pronouncd aloud as my opinion, the Captn and the rest Joind me on which
I fird my musquet which was loaded with small shot, leveling it between
his shoulders who was not 15 yards from me. On the shot striking him he
ceasd his cry but instead of quitting his prize continued to wave it over his
head retreating as gently as before; the surgeon who was nearer him, seeing
this fird a ball at him at which he dropd. Two more who were near him
returnd instantly, one seizd his weapon of Green talk, the other attempted
to recover the hanger which the surgeon had scarce time to prevent. The
main body of them were now upon a rock a little way in the river. They
took the water returning towards us, on which the other three, for we were
only 5 in number, fird on them. They then retird and swam again across the
river. On their landing we saw that 3 were wounded, one seemingly a good
deal hurt: we may hope however that neither of them were killd as one of
the musquets only was loaded with ball, which I think I saw strike the
water without taking effect, and Tupias gun which was the last that was
fird I clearly saw strike two men low down upon their legs, who probably
would be so lame as to walk with difficulty when they landed.

The Indians retird gently carrying with them their wounded and we
reembarkd in our boats intending to row round the bay, see if there might
be any shelter for the ship on the other side, and attempt to land there
where the countrey appeard to be much more fruitfull than where we now
were. The bottom of the bay provd to be a low sandy beach on which the
sea broke most prodigiously so that we could not come near it; within was
flat, a long way inland over this water might be seen from the mast head
probably a lagoon but in the boat we could see no entrance into it. We had
almost arrivd at the farthest part of the bay when a fresh breze came in
from the seaward and we saw a Canoe sailing in standing right towards
[us], soon after another padling. The Captn now resolvd to take one of
these which in all probability might be done without the least resistance as
we had three boats full of men and the canoes seemd to be fishermen, who
probably were without arms. The boats were drawn up in such a manner
that they could not well escape us: the padling canoe first saw us and made
immediately for the nearest land, the other saild on till she was in the midst
of us before she saw us, as soon as she did she struck her sail and began to
paddle so briskly that she outran our boat; on a musquet being fird over her
she however immediately ceasd padling and the people in her, 7 in all,
made all possible haste to strip as we thought to leap into the water, but no
sooner did our boat come up with her than they began with stones, paddles
etc. to make so brisk a resistance that we were obligd to fire into her by
which 4 were killd. The other three who were boys leapd overboard, one of
them swam with great agility and when taken made every effort in his
power to prevent being taken into the boat, the other two were more easily
prevaild upon. As soon as they were in they squatted down expecting no
doubt instant death, but on finding themselves well usd and that Cloaths
were given them they recoverd their spirits in a very short time and before
we got to the ship appeard almost totaly insensible of the loss of their
fellows. As soon as they came onboard we offerd them bread to eat of
which they almost devourd a large quantity, in the mean time they had
Cloaths given them; this good usage had such an effect that they seemd to
have intirely forgot every thing that had happned, put on chearfull and
lively countenances and askd and answerd questions with a great deal of
curiosity. Our dinner came, they expressd a curiosity to taste whatever they
saw us eat, and did; salt pork seemd to please them better than any thing
else, of this they eat a good deal. At sunset they eat again an enormous
quantity of Bread and drank above a quart of water each; we then made
them beds upon the lockers and they laid down to sleep with all seeming
content imaginable. After dark loud voices were heard ashore as last night.
Thus ended the most disagreable day My life has yet seen, black be the
mark for it and heaven send that such may never return to embitter future
reflection. I forgot to mention in its proper place that we pickd up a large
pumice stone floating in the bay in returning to the ship today, a sure sign
that there either is or has been a Volcano in this neighbourhood.


1769 October 10.

In the middle of last night one of our boys seemd to shew more reflection
than he had before done sighing often and loud; Tupia who was always
upon the watch to comfort them got up and soon made them easy. They
then sung a song of their own, it was not without some taste, like a Psalm
tune and containd many notes and semitones; they sung it in parts which
gives us no indifferent Idea of their taste as well as skill in musick. The
oldest of them is about 18, the middlemos[t] 15, the youngest 10; the
midlemost especialy has a most open countenance and agreable manner;
their names are Taáhourange, Koikerange, and Maragooete, the two first
brothers. In the morning they were all very chearfull and eat an enormous
quantity, after that they were dressd and ornamented with bracelets,
ancklets and necklaces after their own fashion. The boats were then hoisted
out and we all got into them: the boys express'd much joy at this till they
saw that we were going to land at our old Landing place near the river,
they beggd very much that they might not be set ashore at that place where
they said were Enemies of theirs who would kill and eat them. The Captn
resolvd to go ashore at that place and if the boys did not chuse to go from
us, in the evening to send a boat with them to the part of the bay to which
they pointed and calld their home. Accordingly we went ashore and crossd
the river. The boys at first would not leave us. No method was usd to
persuade them; it was even resolvd to return and carry them home when on
a sudden they seemd to resolve to go and with tears in their eyes took
leave. We then went along a swamp intending to shoot some ducks of
which there was great plenty; the countrey was quite flat; the Sergeant and
4 marines attended us walking upon a bank abreast of us which overlookd
the countrey. We proceeded about a mile when they Calld out that a large
body of Indians was marching towards us, we drew together and resolvd to
retreat; before we had put this in execution the 3 boys rose out of a bush in
which they were hid and put themselves again under our protection. We
went upon the beach as the clearest place and walkd briskly towards the
boats. The Indians were in two parties, one marchd along the bank before
spoke of, the other came round by the morass where we could not see
them; on seing us draw together they ceasd to run as they had done and
walkd but gently on, a circumstance most fortunate for us, for when we
came to our boats the pinnace was a mile at least from her station, (sent
their by the officer ashore to pick up a bird he had shot); the small boat
only remaind, which was carried over the river, and without the
midshipman who was left to attend her: the consequence of this was that
we were obligd to make 3 trips before we were all over to the rest of the
party. As soon as we were well drawn up on the other side the Indians
came down, not in a body as we expected, but 2 and 3 at a time, all armd
and soon increasd to a considerable number; we now despaird of making
peace with men who were not to be frightned with our small arms. As the
ship lay so far from the shore that [she] could not throw a shot there, we
resolvd to reembark as our stay would most likley be the cause of killing
still more people: we were begining to go towards the boats when on a
sudden one of the boys calld out that the people there were their freinds
and desird us to stay and talk with them, we did and much conversation
past but neither would the boys swim over to them nor they to the boys.
The bodys both of the man who was killd yesterday, and he who was killd
the day before, were left upon the beach. The first lay very near us, to it the
boys went and coverd it with part of the cloths we had given them; soon
after a single man unarmd swam over to us (the uncle of Maracouete, the
younger boy), he brought in his hand a green bough, probably emblem of
peace; we made him many presents after having receivd his bough which
he presented to Tupia our interpr[e]ter. We askd him to go onboard of the
ship but he refusd so we left him, but all the 3 boys chose rather to return
with us than stay with him.

As soon as we had retird and left him to himself he went and gatherd a
green bough; with this in his hand he aproachd the body with great
ceremony, walking sideways, he then threw the bough towards it and
returnd to his companions who immediately sat down round him and
remaind above an hour, hearing probably what he said without taking the
least notice of us, who soon returnd to the ship. From thence we could see
with our glasses 3 men cross the river in a kind of Catamaran and take
away the body which was carried off upon a pole by 4 men.

After dinner the Captn desird Tupia to ask the boys if they had now any
objection to going ashore at the same place, as taking away the body was
probably a ratification of our peace. They said they had not and went most
nimbly into the boat in which two midshipmen were sent; they went ashore
willingly but soon returnd to the rocks, wading into the water and begging
hard to be taken in again; the orders were positive to leave them so they
were left. We observd from the ship a man in a catamaran go over the river
and fetch them to a place where 40 or 50 were assembled: they sat till near
sunset without stirring. They rose then and the 3 boys appeard who had till
now been conceald by being surrounded with people, they left the party
came down upon the beach and 3 times wavd their hands towards the ship,
then nimbly ran and joind the party who walkd leisurely away towards the
place where the boys live. We therefore hope that no harm will happen to
them especialy as they had still the cloaths which we gave them on. After
sunset loud voices were heard as usual in the bottom of the bay.


1769 October 11.

This morn We took our leave of Poverty bay with not above 40 species
of Plants in our boxes, which is not to be wonderd at as we were so little
ashore and always upon the same spot; the only time we wanderd about a
mile from the boats was upon a swamp where not more than 3 species of
Plants were found.

Weather this day was most moderate: several Canoes put off from shore
and came towards us within less than a quarter of a mile but could not be
persuaded to come nearer, tho Tupia exerted himself very much shouting
out and promising that they should not be hurt. At last one was seen
coming from Poverty bay or near it, she had only 4 people in her, one who
I well rememberd to have seen at our first interview on the rock: these
never stopd to look at any thing but came at once alongside of the ship and
with very little persuasion cam[e] on board; their example was quickly
followd by the rest 7 Canoes in all and 50 men. They had many presents
given to them notwithstanding which they very quickly sold almost every
thing that they had with them, even their Cloaths from their backs and the
paddles out of their boats; arms they had none except 2 men, one of whom
sold his patoo patoo as he calld it, a short weapon of green talk of this
shape intended doubtless for fighting hand to hand and certainly well
contrivd for splitting sculls as it weigh[s] not less than 4 or 5 pounds and
has sharp edges excellently polishd.

We were very anxious to know what was become of our poor boys,
therefore as soon as the people began to lose their first impressions of fear
that we saw at first disturbd them a good deal we askd after them. The man
who first came on board immediately answerd that they were at home and
unhurt and that the reason of his coming on board the ship with so little
fear was the account they had given him of the usage they had met with
among us.

The people were in general of a midling size tho there was one who
measurd more than 6 feet, their colour dark brown. Their lips were staind
with something put under the skin (as in the Otahite tattow) and their faces
markd with deeply engravd furrows Colourd also black and formd in
regular spirals; of these the oldest people had much the greatest quantity
and deepest channeld, in some not less than 1/16 part of an inch. Their hair
always black was tied on the tops of their heads in a little knot, in which
was stuck feathers of various birds in different tastes according to the
humour of the wearer, generaly stuck into the knot, sometimes one on each
side the temples pointing forwards which made a most disagreable
apearance; in their Ears they generaly wore a large bunch of the down of
some bird milk white. The faces of some were painted with a red colour in
oil some all over, others in parts only, in their hair was much oil that had
very little smell, more lice than ever I saw before! and in most of them a
small comb neatly enough made, sometimes of wood sometimes of bone,
which they seemd to prize much. Some few had on their faces or arms
regular scars as if made with a sharp instrument: such I have seen on the
faces of negroes. The inferior sort were clothd in something that very much
resembled hemp; the loose strings of this were fastned together at the top
and hung down about 2 feet long like a petticoat; of these garments they
wore 2, one round their shoulders the other about their wastes. The richer
had garments probably of a finer sort of the same stuff, most beatifully
made in exactly the same manner as the S. American Indians at this day, as
fine or finer than one of them which I have by me that I bough[t] at Rio de
Janeiro for 36 shillings and was esteemd uncommonly cheap at that price.
Their boats were not large but well made, something in the form of our
whale boats but longer; their bottom was the trunk of a tree hollowd and
very thin, this was raisd by a board on each side sewd on, with a strip of
wood sewd over the seam to make it tight; on the head of every one was
carvd the head of a man with an enormous tongue reaching out of his
mouth. These grotesque figures were some at least very well executed,
some had eyes inlaid of something that shone very much; the whole servd
to give us an Idea of their taste as well as ingenuity in execution, much
superior to any thing we have yet seen.

Their behaviour while on board shewd every sign of freindship, they
invited us very cordialy to come back to our old bay or to a small cove
which they shewd us nearer to it. I could not help wishing that we had done
so, but the captn chose rather to stand on in search of a better harbour than
any we have yet seen. God send that we may not there have the same
tragedy to act over again as we so lately perpetrated: the countrey is
certainly divided into many small principalities so we cannot hope that an
account of our weapons and management of them can be conveyd as far as
we in all probability must go and this I am well convincd of, that till these
warlike people have severly felt our superiority in the art of war they will
never behave to us in a freindly manner.

About an hour before sunset the canoes left us, and with us three of their
people who were very desirous to have gone with them but were not
permitted to return to the Canoes. What their reason for so doing is we can
only guess, possibly they may think that their being on board will induce
us to remain here till tomorrow when they will return and renew the
traffick by which they find themselves so great gainers. The people were
tolerably chearfull, entertaind us with dancing and singing after their
custom, eat their suppers and went to bed very quietly.


1769 October 12.

During last night the ship saild some leagues which as soon as the 3 men
saw they began to lament and weep very much, Tupia with dificulty could
comfort them. About 7, 2 Canoes apeard; they left no sign unmade which
might induce them to come to the ship. One at last venturd, out of her came
an old man who seemd to be a cheif from the finenes of his garment and
weapon, patoo patoo, which was made of Bone (he said of a whale); he
staid but a short time on board but when he went took with him our 3
guests much to our as well as their satisfaction.

In sailing along shore we could clearly see several spots of land
cultivated, some fresh turnd up and laying in furrows like ploughd land,
others with plants growing upon them some younger and some older; we
also saw in two places high rails upon the Ridges of hills, but could only
guess that they belong to some superstition as they were in lines not
inclosing any thing. Before noon another Canoe appeard carrying 4 people;
she came within about ¼ of a mile of us and there (I beleive) performd
several ceremonies, the man in the bow of her sometimes seeming to ask
and offer peace, at others seeming to threaten with a weapon he held in his
hand, sometimes dancing sometimes singing. Tupia talkd much to him but
could not persuade him to come to the ship. About this time very distant
land was seen to the Southward forming a very large bay.

About dinner time the ship was hauling round an Island calld by the
inhabitants Teahoa, by us Portland, the ship on a sudden came into very
broken ground which alarmd us all a good deal; the officers all behavd
with great steadyness and in a very short time we were clear of all dangers;
we never had less than 7 fathom but the soundings hardly ever were twice
the same jumping from 11 to 7, which made us very glad once more to get
deep water under us. The Island lay within a mile of us making in white
cliffs, a long spit of low land running from it towards the main. On the
sides of these cliffs sat a vast quantity of people looking at us, these
probably observd some confusion in the manoevre of the ship for 5 Canoes
almost immediately put off from the shore full of armd people; they came
so near us shouting and threatning that at last we were in some pain least
they [should seize] our small boat which had been lowerd down to sound
and now towd along side. A musquet was therefore fird over them: the
Effect of this was rather to encourage them than otherwise so a great gun
was orderd to be prepard and fird wide of them loaded with grape, on this
they all rose in their boats and shouted but instead of continuing the chase
drew all together and after a short consultation went quietly away.
About half an hour after this we hawld in with the land again and two
more canoes came off, one armd the other a small fishing boat with only 4
men in her; they came tolerably near and answerd all the questions Tupia
askd them very civily; we could not persuade them to come on board but
they came near enough to receive several presents which we hove over
board to them, with these they seem'd very much pleasd and went away. At
night the ship came to an anchor; many fires were kept up on shore
possibly to shew us that our freinds there were too much upon their guard
to be surprizd.


1769 October 13.

Brisk breeze of wind: 9 Canoes came after the ship this morn, whether
with war or peace we cannot tell for we soon left them behind. We found
that the land within Teahoura or Portland Isle makes another Island or
peninsula, both sides of this the natives have calld Teracaco so that is in all
likelyhood the name of it. Before noon we were almost surrounded with
land; that nearest us made in green hills without the white Clifts which we
have generaly seen, the appearance more fertil tho we can not distinguish
any cultivation as we did yesterday; on the tops of the hills were several
palings like those seen yesterday. Towards evening stood in for a place that
had the appearance of an opening which provd no harbour so stood off
again with a pleasant breeze. A very large canoe soon put off carrying 18
or 20 men armd who tho they could not get within a mile of us shouted and
threatned most prodigiously; after this the white cliffs and more barren
land began again to appear. At night pleasant light breeze, stood along
shore.


1769 October 14.

This morn high mountains inland were in sight on the tops of which the
snow was not yet melted, the countrey near the shore low and
unfavourable; in one place was a patch of something yellow that bore
much resemblance to a corn feild, probably some kind of flaggs decayd as
is common in swampy places, at a distance some detachd groves of trees
upon the flat that appeard very high and tapering. Several canoes had put
off from shore in the morning and came towards us, about 10 O'Clock 5
were together seemingly holding a consultation after which they pulld
towards the ship in a body as if resolvd to attack her, 4 more were coming
after them from the shore. This manoevre was not to be disregarded: the
canoes were large, we judgd that they could not contain less than 150
people, every one armd with a sharp pike of hard wood and their little hand
instrument calld patoopatoo; were they to attempt any thing daring there
could not fail to be a dreadfull slaughter among such a croud of naked men
were we nesscesitated to fire among them; it was therefore though[t]
proper to fire a gun over their heads as the effect of that would probably
prevent any designs they might have formd from being put into execution.
They were by this time within 100 yards of the ship singing their war song
and threatning with their pikes; the gun was levelld a little before their first
boat and had the desird effect, for no sooner had they seen the grape which
scatterd very far upon the water than they paddled away in great haste. We
all calld out that we were freinds if they would only lay down their arms.
They did so and returnd to the ship; one boat came close under the quarter
and taking off his Jacket offerd it to sale, but before any body had time to
bid for it she dropd astern as did the rest, refusing to come to the ship again
because they were afraid that we should kill them, so easily were these
warriors convincd of our superiority.

Before noon we plainly saw that there was a small river ashore but no
signs of shelter near it. About this time 6 more armd canoes came off from
the land, they got together about ½ a mile from the ship and threatned
most furiously with their lances paddles etc. After they had done this for
some time they came nearer and Tupia talkd with them from the stern; they
came into better temper and answerd his questions relating to the names of
the countreys kings etc. very civily; he desird them to sing and dance and
they did so. He often told them that if they would come to the ship without
their arms we should be freinds with them; at last one boat venturd and
soon after 3 or 4 more, they put all their arms into one boat which stayd at
a distance while the others came to the ship and receivd presents, after
which they went away. One of these men had hanging round his neck a
peice of Green stone seemingly semitransparent, some of our people
imagind it to be a Jewel, myself thought it no more than the green stone of
which most of their tools and ornaments are made.

In the evening the countrey flat: upon it were 3 or 4 prodigiously pretty
groves of tall trees; near one of them was a square inclosure made with
close and very high rails, what was within it we could not guess. Some
thunder and lightning this even, weather otherwise vastly moderate. Many
shoals of small fish about the ship.


1769 October 15.

Snow was still to be seen upon the mountains inland. In the morn we
were abreast of the Southermost Cape of a large bay, the northermost of
which is Portland Isle; the bay itself was calld Hawks bay. From this point
several canoes came of with netts and other fishing implements in them;
they came along side with a little invitation and offerd to trade, we gave
them Otahite cloth for their fish which they were excessively fond of, often
snatching it from one another. With us they dealt tolerably fairly tho they
sometimes cheated us by bargaining for one thing and sending up another
when they had got their prise; after they had sold all their fish they began
to put the stones with which they sink their netts into baskets and sell them
but this was soon stoppd as we were not in want of such commodities.
About this time an armd boat came alongside and offerd to trade for their
Jackets. One of them had on one made of furr, this the Captn wanted to buy
and bargaind for it offering a peice of Red baize; the bargain was struck
and the baize sent down but no sooner had the man got hold of it than he
began with amazing coolness to pack up both it and his furr jacket in a
basket, intirely deaf to the Captns Demands, and the canoe immediately
dropd astern. A small consultation now ensued among the boats after
which they all returnd alon[g]side and the fishermen again offerd fish to
sale which was accepted and trade renewd. The little Tayeto, Tupias boy,
was employd with several more to stand over the side and reach up what
was bought: while he was doing this one of the men in a canoe seizd him
and draggd him down, 2 then held him in the fore part of the Canoe and
three more in her paddled off as did all the other boats. The marines were
in arms upon deck, they were orderd to fire into the Canoe which they did;
at lengh one man dropd, the others on seeing this loosd the boy who
immediately leapd into the water and swam towards the ship; the large boat
on this returnd towards him but on some musquets and a great gun being
fird at them left off the chase. Our boat was lowerd down and took up the
boy frigh[t]ned enough but not at all hurt. What number were killd in the
boats we cannot tell, probably not many as the people who fird at the boat
in which the boy was were obligd to fire wide of her least they should
strike him, and the other boats had only a few shots fird at them; when they
attempted to return some of the gentlemen who lookd through glasses said
however that they saw three carried up the beach when the boats landed
who were either dead or much wounded. From this daring attempt the point
was calld Cape Kidnappers.

As soon as Tayeto was a little recoverd from his fright he brought a fish
in to Tupia and told him that he intended it as an offering to his Eatua or
god in gratitude for his escape. Tupia approvd it and orderd him to throw it
into the sea which he did.

In the evening pleasant breeze. The land to the southward of Cape
Kidnappers made in bare white cliffs barren enough to appearance.


1769 October 16.

Mountains coverd with snow were in sight again this morn so that there
is probably a chain of them runs within the countrey. Land makes in
smooth hills like downs with little or no wood in sight; after breakfast
white cliffs again look as barren as ever. Vast shoals of fish were about the
ship, pursued by as large flocks of brownish birds a little bigger than a
pigeon Nectris munda. Their method of fishing was amusing enough, a
whole flock of birds would follow the fish who swam fast along: they
continualy plungd themselves under water and soon after rose again in
another place, so that the whole flock vanishd sometimes, at others a large
part of it and rose again often where you did not expect them, and in less
than a minutes time they were down again and so alternately as long as we
saw them. Before dinner we were abreast of another cape which made in a
bluff rock, the upper part of a reddish coulourd stone or clay the lower
white; beyond this the Countrey appeard pleasant with little smooth hills
like downs. The Captn thought it not nescessary to proceed any farther on
this side of the coast so the ships head was again turnd to the northward
and the cape from thence call Cape Turnagain. At night we were off
Hawks bay and saw two monstrous fires inland on the hills: we are now
inclind to think that these and most if not all the great smoaks and fires that
we have seen are made for the convenience of clearing land for tillage, but
for whatever purposes intended they are a certain indication that where
they are the countrey is inhabited.


1769 October 17.

Foul wind, ship turning to windward off Hawks bay. A seal was seen
floating on the water asleep. At night calm.


1769 October 18.

Fair wind: a whale was seen this morn. In the evening a small boat with 5
people in her came off from Teracaco, the peninsula within Portland Isle;
they with much difficulty overtook the ship; 2 of them who seemd to be the
cheif people came on board with very little invitation and orderd the other
three their servants to stay in the boat. They soon expressd satisfaction at
their treatment and came down into the cabbin where they very soon
informd us that they would sleep with us and not think of going ashore that
night. We remonstrated much against this telling them that tomorrow morn
the ship might be at a great distance from where she now was; they were
however resolvd and we were obligd to let them sleep in the ship, into
which they consented to have their canoe hoisted which was accordingly
done. The countenance of one of these men was the most open I have ever
seen, I was prejudicd much in their favour and surely such confidence
could not be found in the breasts of designing people. They expressd great
curiosity and surprize, attending to any thing that was shewn to them and
thankfully accepted the presents which were made them but would not eat
with us; their servants however were not at all scrupolous on that head for
they eat most enormously almost every thing they could get.


1769 October 19.

Pleasant breeze all last night so that in the morn we were off Table cape.
Our guests expressd some surprize at finding themselves so far from home
but had their boat hoisted out and went ashore abreast of the ship. We saild
very briskly, soon passd Poverty bay; the countrey beyond it seemd to be
fertile with few or no cliffs. About noon we passd by a remarkable white
Cliff of a triangular shape not unlike the Gable End of a farm house; this
same cliff we had seen from the sea when first we made the land and from
its triangular shape had compard it to a latteen sail, it was now calld Gable
End Foreland. Just here 3 Canoes came off, one man from them venturd on
board but soon went back and the boats dropd astern. In the evening many
shoals of very small brown shrimps passd by the ship that coulurd the
water as if dirt had been thrown into it.


1769 October 20.

During last night it once blew very fresh: in the morn the weather was
pleasant tho we felt ourselves rather cold, the Therm 50¡. Several canoes
followd us and seemd very peaceably inclind, inviting us to go into a bay
they pointed to where they said that there was plenty of fresh water; we
followd them in and by 11 came to an anchor. We then invited two who
seemd by their dress etc. to be cheifs to come on board, they immediately
accepted our invitation; in the mean time those who remaind in the canoes
traded with our people for whatever they had in their boats most fairly. The
Cheifs who were two old men, the one Dressd in a Jacket ornamented after
their manner with dogs skin, the other in one coverd almost intirely with
small tufts of red feathers, receivd our presents and staid with us till we had
dind. When we went into the boat to go ashore they accompanied us. The
evening was rainy with heavy squalls of wind, we rowd almost round the
bay but found so much surf every where that we were forcd to return; at
last we told this resolution to our cheifs who calld to the people ashore
telling them to bring off a canoe for them which was immediately done,
and they went ashore in her promising to return the next morn and bring of
fish and sweet potatoes etc. We returnd on board but in the course of the
evening it became fair and we went ashore. We were receivd with great
freindship by the natives in general who seemd carefull of giving us
umbrage by collecting in too great bodies: each family or the inhabitants of
2 or 3 houses which generaly stood together were collected in a body, 15 or
20 men women and children, these sat on the ground never walking
towards us but inviting us to them by beckoning with one hand movd
towards the breast. We made them small presents, walkd round the bay,
and found a place for watering where the people are to land tomorrow and
fill some at least of our empty cask.


1769 October 21.

This morn at day break the waterers went ashore and soon after Dr
Solander and myself; there was a good deal of Surf upon the beach but we
landed without much difficulty. The natives sat by our people but did not
intermix with them; they traded however for cloth cheifly, giving whatever
they had tho they seemd pleasd with observing our people as well as with
the gain they got by trading with them. Yet they did not neglect their
ordinary occupations: in the morn several boats went out fishing, at dinner
time every one went to their respective homes and after a certain time
returnd. Such fair appearances made Dr Solander and myself almost trust
them. We rangd all about the bay and were well repaid by finding many
plants and shooting some most beautifull birds; in doing this we visited
several houses and saw a little of their customs, for they were not at all shy
of shewing us any thing we desird to see, nor did they on our account
interrupt their meals the only employment we saw them engagd in.

Their food at this time of the year consisted of Fish with which instead of
bread they eat the roots of a kind of Fern Pteris crenulata, very like that
which grows upon our commons in England. These were a little roasted on
the fire and then beat with a stick which took off the bark and dry outside,
what remaind had a sweetish clammyness in it not disagreable to the taste;
it might be esteemd a tolerable food was it not for the quantity of strings
and fibres in it which in quantity 3 or 4 times exceeded the soft part; these
were swallowd by some but the greater number of people spit them out for
which purpose they had a basket standing under them to receive their
chewd morsels, in shape and colour not unlike Chaws of Tobacco.

Tho at this time of the year this most homely fare was their principal diet
yet in the proper seasons they certainly have plenty of excellent vegetables,
tho we have seen no sign of tame animals among them except doggs, very
small and ugly. Their plantations were now hardly finishd but so well was
the ground tilld that I have seldom seen even in the gardens of curious
people land better broke down. In them were planted sweet potatoes, cocos
and some one of the cucumber kind, as we judgd from the seed leaves
which just appeard above ground; the first of these were planted in small
hills, some rangd in rows other in quincunx all laid by a line most
regularly, the Cocos were planted in flat land and not yet appeard above
ground, the Cucumbers were set in small hollows or dishes much as we do
in England. These plantations were from 1 or 2 to 8 or 10 acres each, in the
bay might be 150 or 200 acres in cultivation tho we did not see 100 people
in all. Each distinct patch was fencd in generaly with reeds placd close one
by another so that scarce a mouse could creep through.

When we went to their houses Men women and children receivd us, no
one shewd the least signs of fear. The women were plain and made
themselves more so by painting their faces with red ocre and oil which
generaly was fresh and wet upon their cheeks and foreheads, easily
transferrable to the noses of any one who should attempt to kiss them; not
that they seemd to have any objection to such familiarities as the noses of
several of our people evidently shewd, but they were as great coquetts as
any Europaeans could be and the young ones as skittish as unbroke fillies.
One part of their dress I cannot omit to mention: besides their cloth which
was very decently rolld round them each wore round the lower part of her
waist a string made of the leaves of a highly perfumd grass, to this was
fastned a small bunch of the leaves of some fragrant plant which servd as
the innermost veil of their modesty. Tho the men did not so frequently use
paint upon their faces yet they often did: one especialy I observd whose
whole body and garments were rubbd over with dry Ocre, of this he
constantly kept a peice in his hand and generaly rubbd it on some part or
other of him.

One peice of cleanliness in these people I cannot omit as I beleive it is
almost unexamp[l]ed among Indians. Every house or small knot of 3 or 4
has a regular nescessary house where every one repairs and consequently
the neighbourhood is kept clean which was by no means the case at
Otahite. They have also a regular dunghil upon which all their offalls of
food etc. are heapd up and which probably they use for manure.

In the evening all the boats being employd in carrying on board water we
were likely to be left ashore till after dark; the loss of so much time in
sorting and putting in order our specimens was what we did not like so we
applied to our freinds the Indians for a passage in one of their Canoes.
They readily launchd one for us, but we in number 8 not being usd to so
ticklish a convenience overset her in the surf and were very well sousd; 4
then were obligd to remain and Dr Solander, Tupia, Tayeto and myself
embarkd again and came without accident to the ship well pleasd with the
behaviour of our Indian freinds who would the second time undertake to
carry off such Clumsy fellows.


1769 October 22.

The surf being so great on the shore that water was got with great
difficulty made the Captn resolve to leave the bay this morn, which he did
tho the wind was foul so the whole day was spent in turning to windward.


1769 October 23.

This morn found ourselves gone backwards, Tegadu bay which we left
yesterday was now to windward of us. Several canoes came alon[g]side
and told us that there was a small bay to leward of us where we might
anchor in safety and land in the boats without a surf where there was fresh
water; we followd their directions and they soon brought us into a bay calld
Tolaga where at 1 we anchord. Many Canoes came from the shore and all
traded for fish, curiosities etc. very honestly. After dinner we went ashore
and found as they had told us a small cove where the boat might land
without the least surf, and water near it, so the Captn resolvd to wood and
water here.


1769 October 24.

This morn Dr Solander and myself went ashore botan[i]zing and found
many new plants. The people behavd perfectly well, not mixing with or at
all interrupting our people in what they were about but on the contrary
selling them whatever they had for Otahite cloth and Glass bottles, of
which they were uncommonly fond.

In our walks we met with many houses in the vallies that seemd to be
quite deserted, the people livd on the ridges of hills in very slight built
houses or rather shedds. For what reason they have left the vallies we can
only guess, maybe for air, but if so they purchase that convenience at a
dear rate as all their fishing tackle and lobster potts of which they have
many must be brought up with no small labour.

We saw also as extrordinary natural curiosity. In pursuing a valley
bounded on each side by steep hills we on a sudden saw a most noble arch
or Cavern through the face of a rock leading directly to the sea, so that
through it we had not only a view of the bay and hills on the other side but
an opportunity of imagining a ship or any other grand object opposite to it.
It was certainly the most magnificent surprize I have ever met with, so
much is pure nature superior to art in these cases: I have seen such places
made by art where from an appearance totaly inland you was led through
an arch 6 feet wide and 7 high to a prospect of the sea, but here was an arch
25 yards in lengh, 9 in breadth and at least 15 in hight. In the evening we
returnd to the watering place in order to go on board with our treasure of
plants, birds etc. but were prevented by an old man who detaind us some
time in shewing the excercise of this countrey, arms, lance and patopato as
they are calld. The lance is made of hard wood from 10 to 14 feet long very
sharp at the ends, the patopatoo is made of stone or bone about a foot long
shapd [] . A stick was given him for an enemy, to this he advancd with
most furious aspect brandishing his lance which he held with vast firmness;
after some time he ran at the stick and supposing it a man run through the
body he immediately fell upon the upper end of it, laying on most
unmercifull blows with his patopatoo any one of which would probably
have split most sculls; from hence I should be led to conclude that they
give no quarter.


1769 October 25.

Went ashore this morn and renewd our searches for plants etc. with great
success. In the mean time Tupia who staid with the waterers had much
conversation with one of their preists; they seemd to agree very well in
their notions of religion only Tupia was much more learned than the other
and all his discourse was heard with much attention. He askd them in the
course of his conversation with them many questions, among the rest
whether or no they realy eat men which he was very loth to beleive; they
answered in the affirmative saying that they eat the bodys only of those of
their enemies who were killd in war.


1769 October 26.

All this day it raind without intermission so hard that notwithstanding our
wishing neither Dr Solander or myself could go ashore. In the course of the
day very few canoes came on board and not more than 8 or 10 Indians
came down to the waterers.


1769 October 27.

Several Canoes came on board at day break and traded as usual. Dr
Solander went with the Captn to examine the bottom of the bay, myself
went ashore at the watering place to collect Plants. He saw many people
who behavd very civily to the boats crew shewing them every thing they
wanted to See; among other nicknacks he bought of a boys top shap'd like
what boys play with in England which they made signs was to be whippd
in the same manner; he found also several new plants. Myself found some
plants and went to the top of the hill above the watering place to see a
fence of poles which we had Observd from the ship: it was on a hill almost
inaccessible by wood and steepness, we however climbd it and found
several deserted houses near the rails which only consisted of Poles of 14
or 16 feet high set in two rows, each pole 10 feet from the next; the 2 rows
were about 6 feet distant joind on the topps by a few sticks laid across
sloping like the roof of a house; this rail work with a ditch which was
paralel to it went about 100 yards down the hill in a kind of curve, but for
what purpose it had been intended I could not at all guess. The people of
the watering place at our desire sung their war song in which both men and
women joind, they distorted their faces most hideously roling their eyes
and putting out their tongues but kept very good time often heaving most
loud and deep sighs.


1769 October 28.

This morn we went ashore in an Island on the left hand as you come into
the bay calld by the natives Tubolai. Here we saw the largest canoe we had
met with: her lengh was 68½ feet, her breadth 5, hight 3:6: she was built
with a sharp bottom made in 3 peices of trunks of trees hollowd, the
middlemost of which was much longer than either of the other two; Her
gunnel planks were in one peice 62 ft 2 in lengh carvd prettily enough in
bass releif, the head was also richly carvd in their fashion. We saw also a
house larger than any we had seen tho not more than 30 feet long, it seemd
as if it had never been finishd being full of chipps. The woodwork of it was
squard so even and smooth that we could not doubt of their having among
them very sharp tools; all the side posts were carvd in a masterly stile of
their whimsical taste which seems confind to the making of spirals and
distorted human faces. All these had clearly been removd from some other
place so probably such work bears a value among them.

While Mr Sporing was drawing on the Island he saw a most strange bird
fly over his head; he describd it about as large as a kite and brown like one,
his tail however was of so enormous a [length] that he at first took it for a
flock of small birds flying after him. He who is a grave thinking man and is
not at all given to telling wonderfull stories says he judg'd it to be at least
yards in lengh.


1769 October 29.

Our water having been compleat the day before yesterday and nothing
done yesterday but getting on board a small quantity of wood and a large
supply of excellent Celary, with which this countrey abounds, we this morn
saild tho the wind was foul. We turnd to windward all day and at night
according to custom found ourselves to leward of the place we had left in
the morning.


1769 October 30.

Fine breeze: some canoes followd the ship in the morn but could not
come up with her. Before noon we passd by a Cape which the Captn judgd
to be the eastermost point of the countrey and therefore calld it East Cape,
at least till another is found which better deserves that name.


1769 October 31.

Breeze continued fair: Countrey very pleasant to appearance. Several
canoes came off and threatned us at a distance which gave us much
uneasiness, as we hop'd that an account of us and what we could and had
done had spread farther than this; we had now our work to begin over
again and heartily joind in wishing that it might be attended with less
bloodshed than our late unfortunate Rencounters. After a little time one of
the canoes came almost close to the ship and soon after we saw an
immense large canoe coming from the shore crowded full of People, all
armd with long lances. They came near and receivd signals from the boat
that was near us: we Judgd there could not be less than 60 people in her, 16
padlers of a side, besides some who did not paddle and a long row of
people in the middle from stem to stern crowded as close as possible. On a
signal from the small canoe the[y] pulld briskily up towards the ship as if
to attack. It was judgd right to let them see what we could do, least should
they come to extremities we might be obligd to fire at them in which case
numbers must be killd out of such a croud: a gun loaded with grape was
therefore fird ahead of them: they stop'd padling but did not retreat: a round
shot was then fird over them: they saw it fall and immediately took to their
paddles rowing ashore with more haste than I ever saw men, without so
much as stopping to breathe till they got out of sight. The countrey from
whence they came and indeed all round about appeard to be well wooded
and pleasant; several small clusters of houses were seen interspersd with
trees appearing very pleasant, some had a fence of pails round them others
were to appearance quite open. Towards evening 3 or 4 Canoes came off
unarmd but would scarce venture within musquet shot of us.


1769 November 1.

Calm in the morn: at sun rise we counted 45 Canoes who were coming
towards us from different parts of the shore; 7 soon came up with us and
after some conversation with Tupia began to sell Muscles and lobsters of
which they had great plenty. In the beginning they dealt fair but soon
began to cheat, taking what we gave them without making any return; one
who had done so on being threatned began to defy us and laugh, on which
a musquet was fird over the boat which instan[t]ly brough[t] him back and
made trade very regular for some time. At lengh the cabbin and gun room
having got as much as they wanted the men were allowd to come to the
gangway and trade for themselves, and I must say that there was not the
same care taken to prevent their being cheated as had been before, by
which neglect the Indians soon began to cheat with impunity and to despise
our threats; the consequence of which was that as soon as they had sold all
they had got one of the boats pulld forward and seeing some linnen which
was hanging overboard a man in her untied it without ceremony and put it
into his bundle. He was calld to but instead of returning it let his boat drop
astern and laughd at us. A musquet was fird over him which did not at all
spoil his mirth, small shot was then fird at him which struck him upon the
back; heated I suppose he was, for he regarded it less than most men would
do a stripe, just shrinking his body without ceasing to bundle up the very
linnen he had stole which he was at that moment employd about. The boats
dropd astern about 100 yards and several musquet balls were fird near
them but they continued their song of Defiance till the ship had left them 3
or 400 yards; a round shot was then fird which went over them and struck
the water 3 or 4 times at a large distance beyond them. This effectualy
shewd them that they could not easily get out of our reach for they
immediately began to paddle and proceeded quite ashore without stopping
to look behind them.

Just at night fall we were under a small Island from whence came off a
large double canoe, or rather 2 canoes lash'd together at the distance of
about a foot which was coverd with boards so as to make a kind of deck;
she came pretty near the ship and the people in her talkd with Tupia with
much seeming freindship, but when it was just dark they ran their canoe
close to the ship and threw in 3 or 4 stones after which they padled ashore.


1769 November 2.

Pass this morn between an Island and the main which appeard low and
sandy with a remarkable hill inland, flat and smooth as a mole hill tho very
high and large. Many canoes and people were seen along shore: some
followd us but could not overtake us. A Sailing canoe that had chasd us
ever since day break came up with us and provd the same double canoe as
pelted us last night which made us prepare for another volley of their
ammunition, dangerous to nothing on board but our windows. The event
provd as we expected for after having saild with us an hour they threw
their stones again; a musquet was fird over them and they dropd astern not
I beleive at all frightned by the musquet but content with having shewd
their courage by twice insulting us. We now begin to know these people
and are much less afraid of any daring attempt from them than we were. At
12 the countrey appeard low with small clifts near the shore but seemingly
very fertile inland. We saw plainly with our glasses villages larger than any
we had before seen situated on the topps of cliffs in places almost
inaccessible, besides which they were guarded by a deep fosse and a high
paling within it, so that probably these people are much given to war. In
the evening the countrey low as before: many towns were in sight larger
than those at noon, always situated like them on the topps of cliffs and
fenc'd in the same manner; under them upon the beach were many very
large canoes, some hundreds I may safely say, some of which either had or
appeard to have awnings but not one of them were put off. From all these
circumstances we judgd the countrey to be much better peopled hereabouts
and inhabited by richer people than we had before seen, may be it was the
residence of some of their princes. As far as we have yet gone along the
coast from Cape Turnagain to this place the people have acknowledgd only
one cheif, Teratu: if his dominion is realy so large he may have princes or
governors under him capable of Drawing together a vast many people: for
himself he is always said to live far inland.


1769 November 3.

Continent appeard this morn barren and rocky but many Islands were in
sight, cheifly inhabited with such towns upon them as we saw yesterday; 2
Canoes put off from one but could not overtake us. At breakfast a cluster of
Islands and rocks were in sight which made an uncommon appearance
from the number of perpendicular rocks or needles (as the seamen call
them) which were in sight at once: these we calld the Court of Aldermen in
respect to that worthy body and entertaind ourselves some time with giving
names to each of them from their resemblance, thick and squat or lank and
tall, to some one or other of those respectable citizens. Soon after this we
passd an Island on which were houses built on the steep sides of cliffs
inaccessible I had almost said to birds, how their inhabitants could ever
have got to them much surpassd my comprehension; at present however we
saw none so that these situations are probably no more than places to retire
to in case of Danger which are totaly evacuated in peaceable times. At 12
the Continent appeard still rocky and barren, few houses were seen, they
were not built in towns but stood seperate. About dinner time 3 Canoes
came alongside of much the most simple construction of any we have seen,
being no more than the trunks of trees hollowd out by fire without the least
carving or even the addition of a washboard on their gunnels; the people in
them were almost naked and blacker than any we had seen only 21 in all,
yet these few despicable gentry sang their song of defiance and promisd us
as heartily as the most respectable of their countrey men that they would
kill us all. They remaind some time out of stones throw but at last venturd
close to the ship; one of our people gave them a rope from the side to save
them the trouble of Padling, this they accepted and rewarded the man who
gave it by thrusting at him with a pike which however took no effect; they
then went a few yards from the ship and threw a lance into her which
struck nobody; a musquet was fird over them on which they all went off.
Late in the evening the ship came into a bay which appeard well shelterd
by Islands and gave hopes for the morn. Several Canoes with people like
the last came about the ship and talkd very civily to us. A bird was shot
from the ship in their sight as it swam on the water, this they took up and
tied to a fishing line that was towing astern for which they were rewarded
with a peice of cloth. Notwisthstanding all this they became very saucy
Just at night singing their song of Defiance and attempting to tow away the
buoy of the anchor; 2 or 3 musquets were fird over them which had not the
least effect, they threatned hard and promisd that tomorrow they would
return with more force and kill us all and dispatchd a boat who told us that
he was going to another part of the bay for assistance.


1769 November 4.

Our freinds meant to be still better than their word for they visited us
twice in the night intending I suppose to wake us if we should be asleep,
but as they found us not so they went away as they came without saying a
single word. In the morn they returnd with the earlyest day break, about
150 men in 10 or 12 Canoes all armd with pikes lances and stones. We all
got up to see the event. An hour and a half was spent in conversation
sometimes civil sometimes otherwise: our resolution was that as we had in
vain shewd them the power of musquets by firing near them and killing the
bird yesterday we would on the first provacation they gave us fire at them
with small shot, the last resource we had to shew them our superiority
without taking away their lives. They at lengh offerd to trade for their arms
and sold two weapons very fairly, but took a price for the third and refusd
to send it up but offerd it for a second; the second was sent down but a
third was requird instead of the weapon being parted with; this was a
convenient time for the execution of our project as the man who had thus
cheated us swaggerd prodigiously, having paddled the boat a few yards
from the ship. Accordingly a musquet ball was fird through the bottom of
the boat and small shot at the offender which struck him and another who
sat next him, on which the canoe was immediately paddled off and remaind
about 100 yards from the ship; but what was truly surprizing was that tho
the men who were shot bled a good deal not one of the other boats went
near them or enquird at all how much or in what manner they were hurt.

They returnd to the ship and renewd trade for their arms, a large quantity of
which they sold without attempting to play any tricks; at last however one
gentleman padled off with two different peices of cloth which had been
given for one weapon, he got about 100 yards from the ship and thought
himself safe. A musquet was fird after him which fortunately struck the
boat Just at the waters edge and consequently made 2 holes in her; the
people in her and the rest of the Canoes padled hard, as a finishing stroke
to convince them of our superiority a round shot was fird over them and
not a boat stoppd till they got ashore. Soon after this the Captn went in the
boats to seek a place for the ship to stay that she might observe the transit
of Mercury; it raind and as we were sure of staying 5 days Dr Solander and
myself stayd on board. The Indians ashore were neither freinds nor foes,
they shewd however much fear whenever our boats approachd them. After
dinner the ship removd to the place he had found where were great plenty
of birds, much Celery and good hopes of fish.


1769 November 5.

This morn some canoes came off but brought nothing to sell. One old
man whose name was Torava came on board; he seemd to be the cheif both
today and yesterday but in all the transactions of yesterday he was observd
to behave sensibly and well, laying in a small canoe always near the ship
and at all times speaking civily to those on board. With some persuasion he
venturd down into the cabbin and had presents, Cloth, Iron etc. given him;
he told us that the Indians were now very much afraid of us, we promisd
freindship if they would supply us with provision at their own price..
After breakfast we went ashore on the banks of a river. The Indians who
were on one side made all the signs of freindship imaginable, beckoning to
us to land among them; it suited our convenience for hawling the sein and
shooting Birds of which there were great numbers to land on the other side
and it was not without much persuasion that they about noon venturd over
to us.

The Sein was hawld with no success but several Birds were shot, like sea
pies but Black with red bills and feet, the trawl and drudge were also today
employd and caught nothing but a few shells. The people who stayd by the
boats saw two Indians fight on some quarrel of their own: they began with
Lances which were soon taken from them by the old men but they were
allowd to continue their battle, which they did like Englishmen with their
fists for sometime after which all of them retird behind a little hill so that
our people did not see the event of the combat.


1769 November 6.

Went ashore: Indians as yesterday very tame. Their habitations certainly
were at a distance as they had no houses but slept under the bushes. The
bay may be a place to which parties of them often resort for the sake of
shell fish which are here very plentifull; indeed where ever we went, on
hills or in valleys in woods or plains, we continualy met with vast heaps of
shells often many waggon loads together, some appearing to be very old;
where ever these were it is more than probable that Parties of Indians had
at some time or other taken up their residence, as our Indians had made
much such a pile about them. The countrey in general was very barren but
the topps of the hills were coverd with very large Fern, the roots of which
they had got together in large quantities as they said to carry away with
them. We did not see any kind of cultivation.

In the evening I walkd up the river which at the mouth looks very fine
and broad, it in 2 miles or less shoald to nothing. The countrey inland was
still more barren than that near the sea side.


1769 November 7.

Rain and most disagreable weather all day kept us on board as well as the
Indians from coming off to us.


1769 November 8.

Fine weather: many Canoes came off, in them our freind Torava. While
he was along side he saw 2 Canoes coming from the opposite side of the
bay on which he immediately went ashore with all the canoes, telling us
that he was afraid; he however soon returnd finding I suppose that the
canoes had not in them the people he expected. In the two boats came an
amazing number of fish of the macarel kind which the people sold for little
or nothing, so that all hands had today fish enough.

We went ashore and botanizd with our usual good success which could
not be doubted in a countrey so totaly new. In the evening we went to our
friends the Indians that we might see the method in which they slept: it was
as they had told us on the bare ground without more shelter than a few
shrubbs over their heads, the women and children were placd innermost or
farthest from the sea, the men lay in a kind of half-circle around them and
on the trees close by them were rangd their arms in order, so no doubt they
are afraid of an attack from some enemy not far off. They do not
acknowledge any superior king which all we have before seen have done,
so possibly these are a set of outlaws from Teratu's kingdom; their having
no cultivation or houses makes it clear at least that it is either so or this is
not their real habitation. They say however that they have houses and a fort
somewhere at a distance but do not say that even there is any cultivation.


1769 November 9.

At day break this morn a vast number of boats were on board almost
loaded with macarel of 2 sorts, one exactly the same as is caught in
England. We concluded that they had caught a large shoal and sold us the
overplus what they could not consume, as they set very little value upon
them. It was however a fortunate circumstance for us as by 8 O'clock the
ship had more fish on board than all hands could eat in 2 or 3 days, and
before night so many that every mess who could raise salt cornd as many
as will last them this month or more. After an early breakfast the
astronomer went on shore to Observe the transit of Mercury which he did
without the smallest cloud intervening to Obstruct him, a fortunate
circumstance as except yesterday and today we have not had a clear day for
some time.

About noon we were alarmd by the report of a great gun fird from the
ship, the occasion of which was this: two canoes came to the ship very
large and full of people, they shewd by their behaviour that they were quite
strangers or at least so much so as not to be at all afraid; they soon enterd
into trade and almost immediately cheated by taking the Cloth which was
given to them without returning that which was bargaind for. On this they
immediately began to sing their war song as if to defy any revenge those
on board might chuse to take, this enragd the 2nd lieutenant so much that
he leveld a musquet at the man who had still got the cloth in his hand and
shot him dead. The canoes went off to some distance but did not go quite
away. It was nescessary to send a boat ashore, so least they might atempt to
revenge his death upon the boat A round shot was fird over them which
had the desird Effect of putting them to flight immediately. The news of
this event was immediately brought on shore to our Indians who were at
first a little alarmd and retreated from us in a body; in a little time however
they returnd on their own accords and acknowledgd that the dead man
deservd his punishment--unaskd by us, who thought his fate severe
knowing as we did that small shot would have had almost or quite as good
an effect with little danger to his life, which tho forfeited to the laws of
England we could not but wish to spare if it could be done without
subjecting ourselves to the derision and consequently to the attacks of these
people; which we have now learnt to fear not least they should kill us, but
least we should be reducd to the nescessity of killing a number of them
which must be the case should they ever in reality attack us.

A little before sunset we went home with the Indians to see them eat their
supper. It consisted of fish, shell fish, lobsters and birds: these were dressd
either by broiling them upon a skewer which was stuck into the ground
leaning over the fire, or in ovens as we calld them at Otahite which were
holes in the ground filld with provision and hot stones and coverd over
with leaves and Earth. Here we saw a woman who mournd after their
fashion for a dead relation. She sat on the ground near the rest who (except
one) seemd not at all to regard her: the tears constantly trickled down her
cheeks; she repeated in a low but very mournfull voice words which we did
not at all understand, still at every sentence cutting her arms, face or breast
with a shell she held in her hand, so that she was almost coverd with blood,
a most affecting spectacle. The cutts she made however were so managd as
seldom to draw blood and when they did to peirce a very small way into
the flesh; but this si not always the case with them, for many we have seen
and some were among these very people who had shocking large scarrs on
their arms, thighs, breasts, cheaks etc. which they told us had been done in
this manner and upon this occasion; may be they proportion the depth of
their cutts to the regard they have for the deceasd.


1769 November 10.

This day was employd in an excursion to view the large river at the
bottom of the bay which lay at some distance from it. The mouth of it
provd to be a good harbour with water sufficient for our ship but scarce for
a larger, the stream in many places very wide with large flats of mangroves
which at low water are coverd. We went up about a league where it was
still wider than at the mouth and divided itself into innumerable channels
seperated by mangrove flatts, the whole several miles in breadth, the water
shoal, so we agreed to stop our disquisition here and go ashore to dine. A
tree in the neighbourhood on which were many shaggs nests and old
shaggs setting by them confirmd our resolution; an attack was
consequently made on the Shaggs and about 20 soon killd and as soon
broild and eat, every one declaring that they were excellent food as indeed
I think they were. Hunger is certainly most excellent sauce, but since our
fowls and ducks have been gone we find ourselves able to eat any kind of
Birds (for indeed we throw away none) without even that kind of
seasoning. Fresh provision to a seaman must always be most acceptable if
he can get over the small prejudices which once affected several in this
ship, most or all of whoom are now by vertue of good example compleatly
curd. Our repast ended we proceeded down the river again. At the mouth of
it was a small Indian village where we landed and were most civily receivd
by the inhabitants who treated us with hot cockles, at least a small flat shell
fish, most delicious food, Tellina . Near the village was the ruins of an old
Indian Eppah or Fort which we went to see. It was situate on the point of a
peninsula inaccessible on three sides from the steepness of the cliffs; the
fourth was guarded by a ditch the bank of which nearest the fort could not
be less than 20 feet high, there has also been pallisades both on the Inside
and outside of he ditch but of these nothing was left but thick posts almost
rotten. Was any ship to winter or stay any time here this would be a most
excellent place to set up tents as it is sufficiently spatious.


1769 November 11.

Rain and blowing weather all this day so that no canoes came off nor did
we go ashore. An oyster bank had been found at the river by the wooding
place, about ½ a mile up on the starboard hand Just above a small Island
which is coverd at high water; here the longboat was sent and soon returnd
deep loaded with I sincerly beleive as good oysters as ever came from
Colchester and about the same size. They were laid down under the booms
and employd the ships company very well who I verily think did nothing
but Eat from the time they came on board till night, by which time a large
part were expended, but that gave us no kind of uneasiness as we well
knew that not the boat only but the ship might be easily loaded in one tide
almost, as they are dry at half Ebb.


1769 November 12.

Two canoes came early this morn who appeard to be strangers who had
heard of us by the caution and fear they shewd in approaching the ship;
two of them were however persuaded to come on board and the rest traded
for what they had very fairly. A small canoe also came from the other side
of the bay and sold some large fish which had been taken the day before
yesterday, as yesterday it blew too [hard] for any Canoes to go to Sea.
After breakfast we all went ashore to see an Indian Fort or Eppah in the
neighbourhood, uncertain however what kind of reception we should meet
with as they might be Jealous of letting us into it, where probably all their
valuable effects were lodgd. We went to a bay where were two, we landed
first near a small one the most beautifuly romantick thing I ever saw. It was
built on a small rock detachd from the main and surroundd at high water,
the top of this was fencd round with rails after their manner but was not
large enough to contain above 5 or 6 houses; the whole appeard totaly
inaccessible to any animal who was not furnishd with wings, indeed it was
only aproachable by one very narrow and steep path, but what made it
most truly romantick was that much the largest part of it was hollowd out
into an arch which penetrated quite through it and was in hight not less
than 20 yards perpendicular above the water which ran through it. The
inhabitants on our aproach came down and invited us to go in but we
refusd intending to visit a much larger and more perfect one about a mile
off, we spent however some little time in making presents to their women.
In the mean time we saw the inhabitants of the other come down from it,
men women and children about 100 in number, and march towards us; as
soon as they came near enough they wav'd and calld horomai and set down
in the bushes near the beach (a sure mark of their good intentions). We
went to them and made a few presents and askd leave to go to their heppah
which they with joy invited us to do and immediately accompanied us to it.
It was calld Wharretoowa and was situate on the end of a hill where it
Jutted out into the sea which washd two sides of it, these were sufficiently
steep but not absolutely inaccessible; up one of the land sides which was
also steep went the road, the other was flat and open to the side of the hill.
The whole was inclosd by a pallisade about 10 feet high made of strong
pales bound together with withs; the weak side next the hill had also a
ditch the face of which next the pallisade we measurd to be 20½ feet in
depth. Besides this over the pallisade was built a fighting stage which the
[y] call Porava, which is a flat stage coverd with boughs of trees upon
which they stand to throw darts or stones at their assailants out of danger of
their weapons. The dimensions of it were thus: the hight from the ground
20½ feet, breadth 6ft 6, the lengh 43 feet. Upon it were laid bundles of
darts and heaps of stones ready in case of an attack. One of the Young men
at our desire went up to shew their method of fighting and another went to
the outside of the ditch to act assailant; they both sung their war song and
dancd with the same frigh[t]full gesticulations as we have often seen them,
threatning each other with their weapons; this I suppose they do in their
attacks to work themselves to a sufficient fury of courage, for what we call
calm resolution is I beleive found in few uncivilizd people. The side next
the road was also defended by a stage like this but much lower, the other
two were by their steepness and the pallisade thought sufficiently secure.
The inside was divided into I beleive 20 larger and smaller divisions, some
of which containd not more than 1 or 2 houses others 12 or 14; every one
of these were enclosd by its own pallisade tho not so high and strong as the
general one. In these were vast heaps of Dryd fish and fern roots pild up in
heaps, so much that had they had water I should have though[t] them well
prepard for a siege but that must be fetchd from a brook below, so probably
they do not use to beseige a town as we do in Europe. Without the fence
were many houses and large netts which I suppose were brought in upon
any alarm; there was also about ½ an acre of Gourds and sweet potatoes
planted, the only Cultivation we have seen in the bay.


1769 November 13.

Rainy and blowing weather today so we did not go ashore, indeed there
was little temptation for we hade got by much the greatest number or
perhaps all the plants that the season afforded.


1769 November 14.

But midling weather. As we were resolvd to stay no longer here we all
went ashore, the boats to get as much Celery and Oysters as possible, Dr
Solander and myself to get as many green plants as possible of sea stock
for finishing scetches etc., so an enormous number of all these articles came
on board. Dr Solander who was today in a cove different from that I was in
saw the natives catch many lobsters in a most simple manner: they walkd
among the rocks at low water about middle deep in water and still felt
about with their feet till they felt one, on which they divd down and
constantly brought him up. I do not know whether I have before mentiond
these lobsters but we have had them in tolerable plenty in almost every
place we have been in and they are certainly the largest and best I have
ever eat.


1769 November 15.

Little wind and that foul, sail however. Several canoes were on board and
in one of them Torava who sayd that as soon as ever we are gone he must
go to his heppah or fort, for the freinds of the man who was killd on the 9th
threatend to revenge themselves upon him as being a freind to us.


1769 November 16.

Wind foul as yesterday. Many Islands were seen but neither the main or
them appeard at all Fertile or well inhabited; only one town was seen all
day and no people, indeed we were rather too far off.


1769 November 17.

Foul wind and blowing fresh, so that we did not come near enough to the
land to make many observations.


1769 November 18.

Fine weather and Fair wind today repayd us for yesterdays Tossing. The
countrey appeard pleasant and well wooded. At 7 we were abreast of a
remarkable bare point jutting far into the sea; on it stood many people who
seemd to take but little notice of us but talkd together with much
earnestness. In about ½ an hour we saw canoes put off almost at the same
time from several different places and come towards us, on which these
people also put off a small Canoe they had with them and came likwise
towards us, she soon came up with us and had in her 20 people and soon
after another with 35. They sung the song of Defiance as usual which we
took very little notice of, in about ½ an hour they threw 3 or 4 stones on
board and then departed towards the shore; we though[t] we were quite
clear of them but they soon returnd as if inclind (which I beleive is the
common policy of these people) to provoke us to shew them whether we
had or not arms superior to theirs. Tupia who I beleive guessd that they
were coming to attack us immediately went upon the poop and talkd to
them a good deal, telling them what if they provokd us we should do and
how easily we could in a moment destroy them all. They answerd him in
their usual cant 'come ashore only and we will kill you all'. Well, said
Tupia, but while we are at sea you have no manner of Business with us, the
Sea is our property as much as yours. Such reasoning from an Indian who
had not had the smallest hint from any of us surprizd me much and the
more as these were sentiments I never had before heard him give a hint
about in his own case. All his preaching however had little effect for they
soon renewd their stone attack, on which a musquet ball was fird through
one of their boats on which they dropd astern and left us. At night the ship
was in a place which some people conjecturd to be a channel betwixt an
Island and the main, others a deep bay, where she came to an anchor.


1769 November 19.

This morn two Canoes came from the land who said they knew Torava
and calld Tupia by his name. We took some of them onboard who behavd
very well. Afterwards canoes came from the other side of the bay who
likewise mentiond Toravas name and sent a young man into the ship Who
told us that he was the old mans grandson: we never suspected him to have
had so much influence. In the evening it came on thick and misty so we
came to an anchor not a little pleasd to find our selves at least in a
peaceable countrey.


1769 November 20.

Weather still thick and hazey. We had yesterday resolvd to employ this
day in examining the bay so at day break we set out in the boats. A fresh
breeze of wind soon carried us to the bottom of the bay, where we found a
very fine river broad as the Thames at Greenwich tho not quite so deep,
there was however water enough for vessels of more than a midling size
and a bottom of mud so soft that nothing could possibly take damage by
running ashore. About a mile up this was an Indian town built upon a small
bank of Dry sand but totaly surrounded by Deep mud, so much so that I
beleive they meant it a defence. The people came out in flocks upon the
banks inviting us in, they had heard of us from our good freind Torava; we
landed and while we stayd they were most perfectly civil, as indeed they
have always been where we were known but never where we were not.
After this visit we proceeded and soon met with another town with but few
inhabitants. Above this the banks of the river were compleatly cloathd with
the finest timber my Eyes ever beheld, of a tree we had before seen but
only at a distance in Poverty bay and Hawks bay; thick woods of it were
every where upon the Banks, every tree as streight as a pine and of
immense size: still the higher we came the more numerous they were.

About 2 leagues from the mouth we stopd and went ashore. Our first
business was to measure one of these trees: the woods were swampy so we
could not range far, we found one however by no means the largest we had
seen which was feet in circumference and in hight without a branch; but
what was most remarkable was that it, as well as many more that we saw,
carried its thickness so truely up to the very top that I dare venture to
affirm that the top where the lowest branch took its rise was not a foot less
in diameter than where we measurd, which was about 8 feet from the
ground. We cut down a young one of these trees; the wood provd heavy
and solid, too much so for mast but would make the finest Plank in the
world, and might possibly by some art be made light enough for mast as
the pitch pine in America (to which our Carpenter likened this timber) is
said to be lightned by tapping.

As far as this the river had kept its depth and very little decreasd even in
breadth; the Captn was so much pleasd with it that he resolvd to call it the
Thames. It was now time for us to return, the tide turning downwards gave
us warning so away we went and got out of it into the bay before it was
dark. We rowd for the ship as fast as we could but nigh[t] overtook us
before we could get w[i]th[i]n some miles of it. It blew fresh with showers
of rain, in this situation we rowd till near 12 and then gave over and
running under the land came to a grapling and all went to sleep as well as
we could.


1769 November 21.

Before daybreak we set out again. It still blew fresh with mizling rain and
fog so that it was an hour after day before we got a sight of the ship.
However we made shift to get on board by 7 tird enough, and lucky it was
for us that we did, for before 9 it blew a fresh gale so that our boat could
not have rowd ahead so that had we been out we must have either gone
ashore or shelterd ourselves under it. Before evening however it moderated
so that we got under way with the Ebb tide but did little or nothing.


1769 November 22.

This morn we weighd with the Ebb but breeze was so light that the Captn
went into the boat and dr Solander with him. There were many Canoes
about the ship with which I traded for their clothes, arms etc. of which I
had got few so I stayd on board, they sold cheifly for paper. In the course
of this commerce one young man who was upon Deck stole a half minute
glass which was in the Binnacle and was catchd attempting to go off with
it. The first Lieutenant took it into his head to flogg him for his crime. He
was accordingly seezd but when they atempted to tie him to the shrowds
the Indians on board made much resistance: I heard it and came upon deck:
they then began to call for their arms which were handed them out of the
boats and one canoe atempted to come up the ships side. Just then Tupia
came upon deck, they ran to him immediately, he assurd them that their
freind would not be killd he would only be whippd, on which they were
well satisfied. He endurd the discipline and as soon as he was let go an old
man who perhaps was his father beat him very soundly and sent him down
into the canoes, into which they all went and dropd astern, saying that they
were afraid to come any more near us. They venturd however at last but
stayd a very short time promising however at their departure to return with
fish which they never performd.


1769 November 23.

Very light breezes: we have got but little as yet by Tideing. In the morn 2
small canoes came off and promisd to return at night with fish but did not.


1769 November 24.

Strong breeze off the land so we soon got clear of the bay. Land in the
morn appeard unfruitfull, few or no houses were seen; in the Evening large
sands which extended some way into the countrey in little hills as I have
seen in England. At night we came to an anchor in a small open bay; our
fishing lines were tried and we soon caught a large number of fish which
were calld by the seamen Sea bream, as many as I beleive the ships
company could eat in 2 days.


1769 November 25.

The countrey had a tolerably good appearance. In the morn some
stragling houses and 3 or 4 fortified towns were in sight, near which was a
large quantity of Cultivation; in the Evening 7 large canoes came off
carrying about 200 Indians. Two of them who said they had heard of us
came on board and receivd our presents: this did not however hinder some
of their companions from cheating as usual by offering to trade and
keeping what they had got without sending up what they had offerd. Our
usual punishment was inflicted, small shot, which made the offender
immediately relinqu[i]sh his prize (an old pair of Black breches) which he
threw into the water on seeing a second musquet presented. His
companions however as soon as they thought themselves out of our reach
began an usual to defy us which made us think it nescessary to shew them
what we could do, a conduct surely most right when it can be done without
hurting them: musquets were fird near them which made them draw a little
farther off, a round shot was then fird over their heads on which they all set
off for the shore most stoutly.


1769 November 26.

Two small canoes came off early in the morn and told us that they had
heard of yesterdays adventure, they came on board and traded queitly for
whatever they had: soon after two larger ones came from a distance, they
calld the others to them and then All came up together to the ship. The
strangers were numerous and appeard rich: their Canoes were well carvd
and ornamented and they had with them many weapons of patoo patoos of
stone and whales bones which they value much; they had also ribbs of
whales of which we had often seen imitations in wood carvd and
ornamented with tufts of Dogs hair. The people themselves were browner
than to the Southward as indeed they have been ever since we came to
Opoorage, and they had a much larger quantity of Amoco or black stains
upon their bodys and faces; almost universaly they had a broad spiral on
each buttock and many had their thighs almost intirely black, small lines
only being left untouchd so that they lookd like stripd breeches. In this
particular, I mean Amoco, almost every different tribe seem to vary their
customs: we have some days seen Canoes where every man has been
almost coverd with it, and at the same time others where scarce a man has
had a spot except his lipps black'd, which seems to be always Essential.
These people would not part with any of their arms etc. for any price we
could offer; at last however one producd an axe of Talk and offerd it for
Cloth, it was given and the Canoe immediately put off with it. A musquet
ball was fird over their heads on which they immediately came back and
returnd the cloth but soon after put off and went ashore.

In the afternoon other Canoes came off and from some inattention of the
officers were sufferd to cheat unpunishd and unfrightned. This put one of
the Midshipmen who had sufferd upon a droll tho rather mischeivous
revenge. He got a fishing line and when the Canoe was close to the ship
hove the lead at the man who had cheated, with so good success that he
fastned the hook into his backside, on which he pulld with all his might and
the Indian kept back, so the hook soon broke in the shank leaving its beard
in his backside, no very agreable legacy.


1769 November 27.

Light breeze. Several canoes came off and traded for fish but were most
abominably saucy, continualy threatning us, at last they began to heave
stone[s] with more courage than any boats we had seen. This made it
nescessary to punish them: the Captn went upon the Poop where they
immediately threw at him, he leveld a gun loaded with small shot at the
man who held a stone in his hand in the very action of throwing and struck
him. He sunk down so immediately into the Canoe that we suspected he
was materialy hurt; this however did not prevent another Canoe from
coming up with stones in their hands who met another load of small shot at
about 50 yards distant which struck several of them and at once stopd their
speed. The two canoes which had been fird at went immediately for the
shore, the others dropd astern and we left them behind. The land appeard
rocky and full of Islands, the Continent behind them rose in a gradual slope
and seemd fertile; some cultivation was in sight. In the even foul wind.


1769 November 28.

Foul wind continued and this morn the ship was 2 leagues at least to
leward of yesterday. The Continent rose in gentle hills but did not appear
so fertile when near it as it did at a distance; several large heppas were in
sight one the largest we have seen, to appearance far inland.


1769 November 29.

Wind as foul as ever and the ship moved more to leward, so we res[o]lvd
to bear away for a bay which we had Passd. We did so and by 10 came to
an anchor in a most spatious and well shelterd harbour or rather collection
of harbours almost innumerable formd by Islands.

Canoes crowded upon us from all quarters so that we soon had 37 large
and small about us; the people in them traded very fairly for what they had
and shewd much fear of us, especialy if they saw any thing like a gun
which they were well acquainted with. They became however soon a little
more bold and while we were at dinner one of them went to the Buoy
which they atempted to tow away: a musquet was fird over them without
effect [and?] small shot at them but they were too far off for that to take
effect. A ball was then fird at them which was thought to strike one of
them as they immediately threw out the Buoy which by this time they had
got into their Canoe; a round shot was then fird over them which struck the
water and then went ashore; 2 or 3 canoes landed immediately and the men
ran about on the beach as if in search of it. After this we calld to them and
in a little time they all returnd to the ship.

By this time she was properly moor'd and the Boats out, so we set out for
the shore. At our parting from the ship not a canoe stirrd which we Judgd a
good sign, but no sooner had we set a foot on the shore about ¾ of a mile
from the ship but every Canoe put off in a moment and pulld towards us.
We were in a sandy cove behind the two heads of which the most of them
landed, one or 2 only in sight; out of these they came running with every
man his arms, others appeard on the tops of the hills and numbers from
behind each head of the Cove so that we were in a moment surrounded by
(the gentlemen in the ship say) 5 or 600 men tho we I beleive never saw
more than 200 of them. We now every man expected to be attackd but did
not chuse to begin hostilities so the Captn and myself marchd up to meet
them. They crouded a good deal but did not offer to meddle with us, tho
every man had his arms almost lifted up to strike. We brought them
towards the party and made a line signing to them that they were not to
pass it: they did not at first but by this time a party from the other side had
come up and mixd with our people. They now began to sing their war song
but committed no hostility till 3 steppd to each of our boats and attempted
to draw them ashore. It was now time to fire, we whose Guns were loaded
with small shot did so which drove them back. One man attempted to Rally
them; he who was not 20 yards from us came down towards us waving his
Patoo patoo and calling to his companions; Dr Solander whose gun was not
dischargd fird at him on which he too ran. They now got upon rising
ground about us from whence we dislogd them by firing musquet balls,
none of which took effect farther than frightning them. In this way we were
about ¼ of an hour, resolving to maintain our ground, when the ship had
brought her broadside to bear and fird at the Indians who were on the topps
of the hills. The balls went quite over them notwithstanding which they
went off and at last left us our cove quite to ourselves, so that the musquets
were laid down upon the ground and all hands employd in gathering
Cellery which was here very plentifull. An Old Indian now appeard who
had been on board in the morn with two more, they came immediately to
us and provd to be his wife and brother. He said that another brother of his
was struck with the small shot and askd whether he would dye: we told
him no and gave him a musquet ball with some small shot telling him that
it was the latter with which he was struck, but that if they again attackd us
we would shoot them with the former which would infallibly kill them.

After this we went into the boats and rowd to another Cove in the same
Island near which was a high hill from whence we might have a good view
of the bay. We climbd up it and from thence saw that the bay we were in
was indeed a most surprizing place: it was full of an innumerable quantity
of Islands forming as many harbours, which must be as smooth as mill
pools as they Landlock one another numberless times. Every where round
us we could see large Indian towns, houses and cultivations: we had
certainly seen no place near so populous as this one was very near us, from
whence several Indians came to us taking however great pains to shew us
that they were unarmd. They acompanied us down to the boat. Night
coming on we went onboard carrying much Celery, the only plant of any
use even to us, for of all the places I have landed in this was the only one
which did not produce one new vegetable.


1769 November 30.

Several canoes came off to the ship very Early but sold little or nothing,
indeed no merchandice that we can shew them seems to take with them.
Our Island cloth which usd to be so much esteemd has now intirely lost its
value: they have for some days told us that they have of it ashore and
shewd us small peices in their Ears which they said was of their own
manufacture, this at once accounts for their having been once so fond of it
and now setting so little value upon it. Towards noon however they sold a
little dryd fish for paper cheifly or very white Island Cloth. Among other
things they told us that the man who was shot at with small shot on the [2]
7th was dead, 3 shot they said struck his Eye and I suppose found there an
easy passage to his brain.

In the Even we went ashore upon the Continent: the people receivd us
very civily and as tame as we could wish. One general observation I here
set down, that they Always after one nights consideration have
acknowledgd our superiority but hardly before: I have often seen a man
whose next neighbour was wounded or killd by our shot not give himself
the trouble to enquire how or by what means he was hurt, so that at the
time of their attacks they I beleive work themselves up into a kind of
artificial Courage which does not allow them time to think much.


1769 December 1.

Several Canoes were on board by Day break and sold some things cheifly
for Indian Cloth and quart bottles. The day misty and stewy: the boats were
on shore on the Island which we searchd on the 29th with so little success
that we did not think it worth while to go ashore.

It is now a long time since I have mentiond their custom of Eating human
flesh, as I was loth a long time to beleive that any human beings could
have among them so brutal a custom. I am now however convincd and
shall here give a short account of what we have heard from the Indians
concerning it. At Taoneroa the first place we landed in on the Continent the
boys who we had on board mentiond it of their own accords, asking
whether the meat they eat was not human flesh, as they had no Idea of any
animal but a man so large till they saw our sheep: they however seemd
ashamd of the custom, saying that the tribe to which they belongd did not
use it but that another very near did. Since that we have never faild
wherever we went ashore and often when we convers'd with canoes to ask
the question; we have without one exception been answerd in the
affirmative, and several times as at Tolaga and today the people have put
themselves into a heat by defending the Custom, which Tubia who had
never before heard of such a thing takes every Occasion to speak ill of,
exhorting them often to leave it off. They however as universaly agree that
they eat none but the bodies of those of their enemies who are killd in war,
all others are buried.


1769 December 2.

Boats went ashore on the Island again. I do not know what tempted Dr
Solander and myself to go there where we almost knew nothing was to be
got but wet skins, which we had very sufficiently for it raind all the time
we were ashore as hard as I ever saw it.


1769 December 3.

Many Canoes were on board in the morn, one very large which carried
82 people. After breakfast Dr Solander and myself went ashore on the
Continent; we found few plants and saw but few people but they were most
perfectly civil; we went by their invitation to their little town which was
situated in the bottom of a cove without the least defence. One of the old
men here shewd us the instruments with which they stain their bodies
which was exactly like those usd at Otahite. We saw also here the man who
was shot at on the 29th in atempting to steal the Buoy; the ball had gone
through the fleshy part of his arm and grazd his breast; the wound was
open to the air without the smallest application upon it yet it had as good
an appearance and seemd to give him as little pain as if he had had the best
dressings to it. We gave him a musquet ball and with a little talking to he
seemd very fully sensible of the escape he had had.

In the Even we went ashore on another Island where were many more
people than we had seen in the morn, who livd in the same peacable stile
and had very large plantations of sweet potatoes, yamms etc. all about their
village. They receivd us much as our freinds in the morning had done and
like them shewd much satisfaction at the little presents of necklaces etc.
which were given to them.


1769 December 4.

Our Old man came on board and brought with him his brother who had
been shot with small shot on the 29th; it had slanted along his thigh which I
suppose had not less than 100 shotts in it. This wound was likewise
without any application and seemd to give him little or no pain but was
crusted over with a hard crust, natures plaister, equal maybe when she
chuses to apply it to any that art has contrivd.

After breakfast we went ashore at a large Indian fort or heppah; a great
number of people immediately crouded about us and sold almost a boat
load of fish in a very short time. They then went and shewd us their
plantations which were very large of Yamms, Cocos, and sweet potatoes;
and after having a little laught at our seine, which was a common kings
seine, shewd us one of theirs which was 5 fathom deep and its lengh we
could only guess, as it was not stretchd out, but it could not from its bulk
be less than 4 or 500 fathom. Fishing seems to be the cheif business of this
part of the countrey; about all their towns are abundance of netts laid upon
small heaps like hay cocks and thatchd over and almost every house you go
into has netts in it making.

After this they shewd us a great rarity 6 plants of what they calld Aouta
from whence they made cloth like the Otahite cloth; the plant provd
exactly the same, as the name is the same, as is usd in the Islands, Morus
papyrifera Linn., the same plant as is usd by the Chinese to make paper.
Whether the Climate does not well agree with it I do not know, but they
seemd to value it very much and that it was very scarce among them I am
inclind to beleive, as we have not yet seen among them peices large
enough for any use but sticking into the holes of their Ears.
In the afternoon we went to a very distant part of the bay, the people here
were very few. All but one old man ran away from us; he accompanied us
where ever we went and seemd much pleasd with the little presents we
made him. Near where we landed was a little fort built upon a small rock,
surrounded by the sea at high water and accessible only by a ladder. We
expressd a desire to go there; he said there was his wife but if we would
promise to practice no indecencies towards her he would accompany us;
this we most readily did and he was as good as his word. The ascent was so
difficult that tho there were stepps and a pole we found it dangerous
enough. When we came up there were in it 3 women who on our first
coming cried, but presents soon put them into better humour. There were in
all only 3 houses, but the situation as I have before describd was so steep
that the inhabitants of them might easily defend themselves against almost
any force that could be brought against them.


1769 December 5.

A small spirt of fair wind before day break made us heave up the anchor
in a great hurry, but before we were well underway it was as foul as ever so
we were obligd to atempt turning out. Many canoes came from all parts of
the bay which is by far the most populous place we have been in. In the
middle of the day we were becalmd and caught many fish with hooks.
About 10 at night as we were going through the outer heads on a sudden
we wer[e] becalmd so that the ship would neither wear nor stay: in a
moment an eddy tide took hold of us and hustled us so fast towards the
land that before the Officers resolvd what was best to be done the ship was
within a Cables lengh of the breakers, we had 13 fathom water but the
ground so foul that they dar'd not drop an anchor. The eddy now took
another turn and set her along shore opening another bay but we were too
near the rocks to trust to that: the pinnace was orderd to be hoisted out in
an instant to take the ship in tow, Every man in her was I beleive sensible
of the Danger we were in so no one spard to do his best to get her out fast.
The event however shewd how liable such situations must be to Confusion:
they lowerd down too soon and she stuck upon a gun: from this she must
be thrust by main force, in doing which they had almost ove[r]set her
which would have tumbled out her oars: no man thought of running in the
gun: at last that was done and she was afloat, her crew was soon in her and
she went to her duty. A faint breeze of wind now sprung up off the land
and with that and towing she to our great Joy got head way again, at a time
when she was so near the shore that Tupia who was not sensible of our
danger was conversing with the Indians ashore, who made themselves very
distinctly heard notwithstanding the roaring of the breakers.

We were all happy in our breeze and fine clear moonlight; myself went
down to bed and sat upon my cott undressing myself when I felt the ship
strike upon a rock, before I could get upon my leggs she struck again. I ran
upon deck but before I could get there the danger was over; fortunately the
rock was to wind ward of us so she went off without the least damage and
we got into the proper channel, where the officers who had examind the
bay declard there to be no hidden dangers--much to our satisfaction as the
almost certainty of being eat as soon as you come ashore adds not a little to
the terrors of shipwreck.


1769 December 6.

In the morn we were clear of all our dangers and at sea to our no small
satisfaction notwithstanding the wind was as foul as possible.


1769 December 7.

Wind not much better than yesterday.


1769 December 8.

Very light breeze: we have ran off so far from the land that we can
distinguish nothing upon it. In the evening fair wind.


1769 December 9.

Fair wind tho but little of it. Many Canoes came off who shewd much
fear of us and after some time said that they had heard of our Guns. Tupia
at last persuaded them to come under the stern and after having bought of
them some of their cloths, which they sold very fairly, began to enquire
about the countrey. They told him that at the distance of three days rowing
in their canoes, at a place calld Moorewhennua, the land would take a short
turn to the southward and from thence extend no more to the West. This
place we concluded must be Cape Maria Van Diemen, and finding these
people so intelligent desird him to enquire if they knew of any Countries
besides this or ever went to any. They said no but that their ancestors had
told them to the NW by N or NNW was a large countrey to which some
people had saild in a very large canoe, which passage took them up a
month: from this expedition a part only returnd who told their countreymen
that they had seen a countrey where the people eat hogs, for which animal
they usd the same name (Booah) as is usd in the Islands. And have you no
hoggs among you? said Tupia.--No.--And did your ancestors bring none
back with them?--No.--You must be a parcel of Liars then, said he, and
your story a great lye for your ancestors would never have been such fools
as to come back without them. Thus much as a specimen of Indian
reasoning. After much conversation our freinds left us but promisd to
return at night and bring with them fish, which they did and sold it very
reasonably.


1769 December 10.

This morn we were near the land which was as barren as it is possible to
conceive: hills within hills and ridges even far inland were coverd with
white sand on which no kind of vegetable was to be seen, it was conjecturd
by some that the wind blow[s] the sand quite across it. Some Indian forts or
Heppah's were seen and from them some canoes put off but did not
overtake us.


1769 December 11.

Wind as heard hearted as ever: we turnd all day without loosing any
thing, much to the credit of our old Collier, who we never fail to praise if
she turns as well as this.


1769 December 12.

Wind etc. as yesterday.


1769 December 13.

Wind as foul as ever and rather overblows so that in this days turning we
lost all we had [gaind?] last week.


1769 December 14.

Blows almost as fresh as it did yesterday but rather more fair; a heavy
swell from the west made us almost conclude that there was no land to the
Northward of us.


1769 December 15.

More moderate but not more fair: we begin to think this Cape our Ne
plus ultra.


1769 December 16.

We stood out to sea yesterday and last night so that we could in the morn
only Just see the land from the mast head: stood in for it and at night made
it plain.


1769 December 17.

This morn we were in with the land which trends a little to the Southward
so we hoped that our troubles are nearly at an end; during the days turning
however we contrivd to lose near a leag[u]e, no great comfort to us.


1769 December 18.

Still more to leeward this morn and in the even still more. On a rock
pretty near us an Indian fort was seen through our glasses which we all
thought was encircled with a mud wall; if so tis the only one of the kind we
have seen.


1769 December 19.

Stood out to sea last night: tonight were in with the land and found we
had gaind something as we did also the last time we stood far off, which
made the seamen conclude that some small current along shore must be the
reason why we could never get any thing by our short trips.


1769 December 20.

Some hopes of a fair wind in the morn but they soon left us and it began
to blow hard with violent claps of thunder, on which we again stood out to
sea.


1769 December 21.

Wind not quite so bad as yesterday but a great swell from the West
hinderd the ship much.


1769 December 22.

Swell as yesterday but the wind has come more to the Southward so that
we cannot come in with the land at all.


1769 December 23.

Little wind more favourable than yesterday so that at night the land was
seen from the Mast head.


1769 December 24.

Land in sight, an Island or rather several small ones most probably 3
Kings, so that it was conjecturd that we had Passd the Cape which had so
long troubled us. Calm most of the Day: myself in a boat shooting in which
I had good success, killing cheifly several Gannets or Solan Geese so like
Europaean ones that they are hardly distinguishable from them. As it was
the humour of the ship to keep Christmas in the old fashiond way it was
resolvd of them to make a Goose pye for tomorrows dinner.


1769 December 25.

Christmas day: Our Goose pye was eat with great approbation and in the
Evening all hands were as Drunk as our forefathers usd to be upon the like
occasion.


1769 December 26.

This morn all heads achd with yesterdays debauch. Wind has been
Easterly these 3 or 4 days so we have not got at all nearer the Island than
we were.


1769 December 27.

Blows very hard a[t] SE so that we were again drove off the Land, not
much displeasd as we all rejoicd much that it was not an on shore wind.


1769 December 28.

Wind now SW right on shore but thank god we have so good an offing
that we are in not the least danger. All our sea people said that they never
before were in so hard a summers Gale.


1769 December 29.

Wind more moderate but still blows prodigiously fresh with a monstrous
sea. No such summer Gales as this to the Norward sayd our Captn.


1769 December 30.

Blew very fresh still tho the heart of the Gale seemd to be broke: we have
been driven much to the Northward so that today we once more passd in
sight of Cape Maria and the 3 Kings.


1769 December 31.

Wind as yesterday, sea something abated: stood in for the Land which we
had not now seen for some time: dared not venture very near as the wind
was right on shore, it appeard very sandy and barren.


1770 January 1.

The new year began with more moderate weather than the old one ended
with, but wind as foul as ever. We venturd to go a little nearer the land
which appeard on this side the cape much as it had done on the other,
almost intirely occupied by vast sands: our Surveyors suppose the Cape
shapd like a shoulder of mutton with the Knuckle placd inwards, where
they say the land cannot be above 2 or 3 miles over and that here most
probably in high winds the sea washes quite over the sands which in that
place are low.


1770 January 2.

Weather not yet setled: in the morn we stood S and soon lost sight of the
land which we saw no more all day.


1770 January 3.

Stood in for the land with weather more moderate than it has been for
some days past: it appeard high but the sides of the hills often interspersd
with long tracts of sand even high up, their bottoms were every where
coverd with it. Many Albatrosses were about the ship today swimming
upon the water in small companies 10 or 20 together.


1770 January 4.

Stood rather nearer the land than yesterday but not near enough to see
whether or not it was inhabited: indeed we were obligd to hawl off rather
in a hurry for the wind freshning a little we found ourselves in a bay which
it was a moot point whether or not we could get out of: indeed I beleive
most people thought that we should not till a lucky change in the wind at
once allowd us to weather every thing, to our no small Joy who had so
lately been in so severe and long a Gale of wind blowing right upon the
shore which we had now just weatherd.


1770 January 5.

Blew fresh and we stood out all day maybe rather too sensible of the
danger we had escapd yesterday.


1770 January 6.

Calm today: myself in the Boat shot Procellaria longipes, velox and
Diomedaea exulans (the Albatross). I had an opportunity to see this last
setting upon the water and as it is commonly said by seamen that they
cannot in a calm rise upon the wing I tryd the experiment. There were two
of them, one I shot dead, the other who was near him swam off near as fast
as my small boat could row; we gave chase and came up a little; he
attempted to fly by taking the moment of a waves falling but did not
succeed. I who was so far off that I knew I could not hurt him fird at him to
make his attempts more vigourous, which had the effect for the third effort
he got upon the wing, tho I beleive had it not been for a little swell upon
the water he could not have done it.


1770 January 7.

Calm again: Myself shooting killd Procellaria longipes and melanopus
and saw a turtle Just before sunset who being awake divd immediately.
What wind there was was fair tho scarce a breath of it, yet even that made
us hope for better times.


1770 January 8.

Our fair wind continued but still so little of it that was there any plenty of
Birds or hopes of new ones I could outrow the ship in much. More Land
just in sight.


1770 January 9.

Much as yesterday, Land in sight but so faintly seen that a Landsman
would scarce distinguish it from Clouds.


1770 January 10.

In the morn a breeze of fair wind put us all into high spirits. The countrey
we passd by appeard fertile, more so I think than any part of this countrey I
have seen, rising in gentle slopes not over wooded but what trees there
were well grown. Few signs of inhabitants were seen, a fire and a very few
houses.
About noon we passd between the main and a small Island or rock which
seemd almost totaly coverd with birds probably Gannets; towards evening
a very high hill was in sight but very distant.


1770 January 11.

Calm this morn, some fish were caught: in the even foul wind. Our high
hill has been sometimes seen and sometimes wrapped up in clouds, some
of our people think it is as high as the Pike of Teneriffe; tho I cannot be of
half that opinion yet it is certainly in appearance very like it.


1770 January 12.

This morn we were abreast of the great hill but it was wrappd up in
clouds and remaind so the whole day; it is probably very high as a part of
its side which was for a moment seen was coverd with snow. The countrey
beyond it appeard very pleasant and fertile, the sides of the hills sloping
gradualy; with our glasses we could distinguish many white lumps in
companies of 50 or 60 together which probably were either stones or tufts
of grass but bore much the resemblance of flocks of sheep. At night a small
fire which burnd about ½ an hour made us sure that there were inhabitants
of whoom we had seen no signs since the 10th.


1770 January 13.

This morn soon after day break we had a momentary view of our great
hill the top of which was thick coverd with snow, tho this month answers
to July in England. How high it may be I do not take upon me to judge, but
it is certainly the noblest hill I have ever seen and it appears to the utmost
advantage rising from the sea without another hill in its neighbourhood one
4th part of its hight. At sun set the top appeard again for a few minutes but
the whole day it was coverd with clouds.


1770 January 14.

In a large bay calld in the Draughts Murderers bay. We stood across it all
day: at night had the appearance of a harbour just ahead of us on the shore
of which the natives made a fire: resolvd to stand off and on all night and
in the morn go in.


1770 January 15.

In the course of the last night we were drove to the Eastward more than
we had any reason to expect, so much that we found ourselves in the morn
past the harbour we intended to go into. Another however was in sight into
which we went: the land on both sides appeard most miserably barren till
we got pretty deep in when it began to mend by gradual degrees. Here we
saw some canoes who instead of coming towards us went to an Indian
town or fort built upon an Island nearly in the middle of the passage, which
appeard crowded with people as if they had flockd to it from all parts; as
the ship aproachd it they wavd to us as if to invite us to come to them but
the moment we had passd by they set up a loud shout and every man
brandishd his weapons which none of them were without. The countrey
about us was now very fertile to appearance and well wooded so we came
to an anchor about long cannon shot from the fort, from whence 4 Canoes
were immediately dispatchd to reconoitre I suppose and in case they were
able to take us, as they were all well armd. The men in these boats were
dressd much as they are represented in Tasmans figure, that is 2 corners of
the cloth they wore were passd over their shoulders and fastned to the rest
of it just below their breast, but few or none had feathers in their hair. They
rowd round and round the ship defying and threatning us as usual and at
last hove some stones aboard which we all expected to be a prelude of
some behaviour which would oblige us to fire upon them; but just at this
time a very old man in one of the boats express'd a desire of coming on
board, which we immediately encouraged, and threw a rope into his canoe
by which she was immediately hawld up along side and the old man
(contrary to the opinion of all the other Indians who went so far as to hold
him fast for some time) came on board, where he was receivd in as freindly
a manner as we possibly could and had many presents given to him, with
which he returnd to the canoes who immediately joind in a war dance--
whether to shew their freindship or enmity it is impossible to say, we have
so often seen them do it upon both those occasions. After this they retird to
their town and we went ashore abreast of the ship where we found good
wood and water and caught more fish in the Seine than all our people could
possibly destroy, besides shooting a multitude of Shaggs. The countrey
however did not answer so well to Dr Solander and myself as to the ship,
we finding only 2 new plants in the whole even.


1770 January 16.

At day break this morn 3 Canoes and about 100 Indians came to the ship
bringing their women with them, a sign tho not a sure one of peacable
inclinations. Soon after our longboat put off from the ship with Cask in her,
they atempted to follow her on which a musquet loaded with small shot
was fird at them which made them immediately return, tho as they were
full 100 yards from the ship it is improbable that blood was drawn from
any of them. They had in their canoes some fish which they offerd to sell
and we to buy, so a man in a small boat was dispatchd among them to
trade; he bought several bundles which they sold very fairly when one
Indian seeing his opportunity snatchd at the trade which he had in his hand,
but missing immediately put himself in a posture of defence flourishing his
patoo-patoo as if he meant to strike. A musquet load of small shot was fird
at him a few of which struck his knee, the rest missd him, on which they all
left of to trade but paddled peaceably enough round the ship and at last
came under the stern to Tupia and discoursd with him about their antiquity
and Legends of their ancestors.

The women in these canoes and some of the men had a peice of Dress
which we had not before seen--a bunch of black feathers made round and
tied upon the top of their heads which it intirely coverd, making them look
twice as large as they realy were. On seeing this my Judgement paid an
involuntary compliment to my fair English countrey women; for led astray
by this head dress which in some measure resembles their high foretops I
was forward to declare it as my opinion that these were much the
hansomest women we had seen upon the coast, but upon their nearer
aproach I was convincd that nothing but the head dress had misled me as I
saw not one who was even tolerably hansome.

After dinner we went in the boat towards a cove about a mile from the
ship. As we rowd along something was seen floating upon the water which
we took to be a dead seal; we rowd up to it and it provd to our great
surprize to be the body of a Woman who seemd to have been dead some
time. We left it and proceeded to our cove where we found a small family
of Indians who were a little afraid of us as they all ran away but one; they
soon however returnd except an old man and a child who staid in the
woods but not out of sight of us; of these people we inquird about the body
we had seen. They told Tupia that the woman was a relation of theirs and
that instead of Burying their dead their custom was to tie a stone to them
and throw them into the sea, which stone they supposd to have been
unloosd by some accident.

The family were employd when we came ashore in dressing their
provisions, which were a dog who was at that time buried in their oven and
near it were many provision baskets. Looking carelessly upon one of these
we by accident observd 2 bones, pretty clean pickd, which as apeard upon
examination were undoubtedly human bones. Tho we had from the first of
our arrival upon the coast constantly heard the Indians acknowledge the
custom of eating their enemies we had never before had a proof of it, but
this amounted almost to demonstration: the bones were clearly human,
upon them were evident marks of their having been dressd on the fire, the
meat was not intirely pickd off from them and on the grisly ends which
were gnawd were evident marks of teeth, and these were accidentaly found
in a provision basket. On asking the people what bones are these? they
answerd, The bones of a man.--And have you eat the flesh?--Yes.--Have
you none of it left?--No.--Why did not you eat the woman who we saw
today in the water?--She was our relation.--Who then is it that you do
eat?--Those who are killd in war.--And who was the man whose bones
these are?--5 days ago a boat of our enemies came into this bay and of
them we killd 7, of whoom the owner of these bones was one.--The
horrour that apeard in the countenances of the seamen on hearing this
discourse which was immediately translated for the good of the company is
better conceivd than describd. For ourselves and myself in particular we
were before too well convincd of the existence of such a custom to be
surprizd, tho we were pleasd at having so strong a proof of a custom which
human nature holds in too great abhorrence to give easy credit to.


1770 January 17.

This morn I was awakd by the singing of the birds ashore from whence
we are distant not a quarter of a mile, the numbers of them were certainly
very great who seemd to strain their throats with emulation perhaps; their
voices were certainly the most melodious wild musick I have ever heard,
almost imitating small bells but with the most tuneable silver sound
imaginable to which maybe the distance was no small addition. On
enquiring of our people I was told that they had observd them ever since
we have been here, and that they begin to sing at about 1 or 2 in the morn
and continue till sunrise, after which they are silent all day like our
nightingales.

A small canoe came this morn from the Indian town: as soon as they
came along side Tupia began to enquire into the truth of what we had heard
yesterday and was told over again the same story. But where are the sculls,
sayd Tupia, do you eat them? Bring them and we shall then be convinced
that these are men whose bones we have seen.--We do not eat the heads,
answerd the old man who had first come on board the ship, but we do the
brains and tomorrow I will bring one and shew you.--Much of this kind of
conversation passd after which the old man went home.


1770 January 18.

Among other things that the Indians told us yesterday one was that they
expected their enimies to come and revenge the death of the 7 men, and
some of our people thought they said that they had intelligence that they
were to come as today; which made us observe the Indians town where we
thought the people more quiet than usual and seemingly not atending their
usual occupations of fishing etc. and no one canoe atempted to come near
the ship. After breakfast we went in the pinnace to explore some parts of
the bay which we had not seen, as it was immensely large or rather
consisted of numberless small Harbours, coves etc.; we found the countrey
on our side of the Bay very well wooded every where but on the opposite
side very bare. In turning a point today we saw a man in a small canoe
fishing who to our surprize shewd not the least fear of us. We went to him
and quite alongside his Canoe, he all the while following his occupation.
On our desiring him he took up his netts and shewd us his machine, which
was a circular net about 7 or 8 feet in diameter extended by 2 hoops; the
top of this was open and to the bottom was tied sea Ears etc. as bait; this he
let down upon the ground and when he thought that fish enough were
asembled over it he lifted it up by very gentle and even motion, so that the
fish were hardly sensible of being lifted till they were almost out of the
water. By this simple method he had caught abundance of fish and I
beleive it is the general way of Fishing all over this coast, as many such
netts have been seen at almost every place we have been in. In this bay
indeed fish were so plenty that it is hardly possible not to catch abundance
whatever way is made use of.

In the course of this days excursion we shot many shaggs from their nests
in the trees and on the rocks. These birds we roast or stew and think not
bad provisions, so between shaggs and fish this is the place of the greatest
plenty of any we have seen.


1770 January 19.

Indians came this morn from another part of the bay where they said was
a town which we had not seen: they brought plenty of fish which they sold
for nails of which they hade by this time learnt the value.


1770 January 20.

Our old man came this morn according to his promise, with the heads of
4 people which were preservd with the flesh and hair on and kept I suppose
as trophies, as posibly scalps were by the North Americans before the
Europaeans came among them; the brains were however taken out as we
had been told, maybe they are a delicacy here. The flesh and skin upon
these heads were soft but they were somehow preservd so as not to stink at
all.

We made another excursion today. The bay every where where we have
yet been is very hilly, we have hardly seen a flat large enough for a potatoe
garden. Our freinds here do not seem to feel the want of such places as we
have not yet seen the least apearance of cultivation, I suppose they live
intirely upon fish dogs and Enemies.


1770 January 21.

Dr Solander and myself were fishing today with hook and line and
caught an immence number of fish every where upon the rocks in 4 or 5
fathom water. We have indeed immence plenty, the Seine is hawld every
night and seldom fails to furnish us with as much fish as we can possibly
destroy.


1770 January 22.

Made an excursion today in the pinnace in order to see more of the Bay.
While Dr Solander and Myself were botanizing the captn went to the top of
a hill and in about an hour returnd in high spirits, having seen the Eastern
sea and satisfied himself of the existence of a streight communicating with
it, the Idea of which had Occurd to us all from Tasmans as well as our own
observations.


1770 January 23.

Disagreable day squally with rain so we all staid at home. Mr
Monkhouse told me today that the day before yesterday he was ashore in a
place where were many Indian houses deserted: here he saw several things
tied up to the branches of trees, particularly hair of a man which he brought
away with him, enough to have made a sizeable wig. This inducd him to
think the place he had seen was a place consecrated to religious purposes.
Possibly it was as they certainly have such places among them tho I have
not yet been lucky enough to meet with them.


1770 January 24.

Went today to the Heppah or Town to see our freinds the Indians, who
receivd us with much confidence and civility and shewd us every part of
their habitations which were neat enough. The town was situated upon a
small Island or rock divided from the main by a breach in a rock so small
that a man might almost Jump over it; the sides were every where so steep
as to render fortifications even in their way almost totaly useless,
accordingly there was nothing but a slight Palisade and one small fighting
stage at one end where the rock was most accessible. The people brought
us several Bones of men the flesh of which they had eat, which are now
become a kind of article of trade among our people who constantly ask for
and purchase them for whatever trifles they have. In one part we observd a
kind of wooden Cross ornamented with feathers made exactly in the form
of a Crucifix cross. This engagd our attention and we were told that it was
a monument for a dead man, maybe a Cenotaph as the body was not there:
thus much they told us but would not let us know where it was.
All the while we were among the Indians they kept still talking
something about gunns and shooting people which we could not at all
understand. They did it however so much that it engagd us all so much that
we talkd about it in our return, but the more we thought the more dark was
the subject till we came on board, when on mentioning [it] I was told that
on the 21st one of our officers who went out on pretence of fishing came to
the heppah intending at a distance to look at the people: but 2 or 3 canoes
coming off towards his boat he imagind that they meant to attack him and
in consequence thereof fird 3 musquets, one with shot and 2 with ball, at
them on which they very precipitately retird, as well they might who
probably came out with freindly intentions (so at least their behaviour both
before and since seems to shew) and little expected so rough usage from
people who had always acted in a freindly manner to them, and whoom
they were not at all conscious of having offended.


1770 January 25.

Dr Solander and myself (who have now nearly exhausted all the Plants in
our neighbourhood) went today to search for Mosses and small things, in
which we had great success gathering several very remarkable ones. In the
evening we went out in the Pinnace and fell in with a large family of
Indians, who have now begun to disperse themselves as I beleive is their
custom into the different creeks and coves where fish is most plenty, a few
only remaining in the Heppah or town to which they all fly in times of
danger. These people came a good way to meet us at a place where we
were shooting shags and invited us to the place where the rest of them
were, 20 or 30 in number, men, women, children, Dogs etc. We went and
were receivd with all possible demonstrations of freindship, if the
numberless huggs and kisses we got from both sexes old and young in
return for our ribbands and beads may be accounted such: they also sold
and gave us a good many fish with which we went home well pleasd with
our new acquaintance.


1770 January 26.

Went today to take an other view of our new streights the Westermost
end of which the Captn was not quite sure of; we found however a hill in a
tolerably convenient situation upon which we got and saw the Streight
quite open and 4 or 5 leagues wide. We then erected a small monument of
stone such a[s] 5 stout men could do in half an hour and laid in it musquet
balls beads shot etc. that if perchance any Europeans should find and pull it
down they will be sure it is not Indian workmanship. This done we returnd
to our dinners of Shags and fish which we had shot and caught in coming
and were dressd by the boats crew. In the place we had apointed to dine in
was a family of Indians who as usual behavd with much freindship and
civility to us, shewing us water etc. from whence we went to the town from
whence Indians came on the 19th which was in this arm of the bay. Here
we were receivd as usual, every body seemd glad to see us and conducted
us through the whole works. The town was much like the other, situated
upon an Island or rock so steep in all parts that it was almost in danger of
our necks that we climbd up to it; like the other it had also only one
fighting stage; it containd maybe from 80 to 100 houses about as many as
the other. Just as we were going away our freinds took so great a fancey to
our merchandise that they filld our boat full of Dryd fish for which they
took nails, ribbands, Paper etc.


1770 January 27.

Indians came aboard in the morn and traded a little, afterwards the Dr
and myself went ashore but could find no plants at all. We have I beleive
got all that are in our neighbourhood, tho the immense thickness of the
woods which are almost renderd impassable by climbing plants intangling
every way has not a little retarded us.


1770 January 28.

This morn at day break it Raind very hard but not enough to disturb the
concert of our little musical [neighbours] which we every morning attend
to with the greatest pleasure, they sung their time till the sun disturbd them
as usual; the rain however continued the whole day.


1770 January 29.

This morn Our Old Man (Topaa by name, he that came first on board the
ship) came with 3 more Indians in a canoe and unfolded the story of the
19th, saying that 2 Indians were struck with the balls one of whoom was
dead, this causd a good deal of conversation in the ship and totaly unfolded
the whole affair which had till now been kept a secret from most people.
After breakfast the Captn and Dr Solander went out in the Pinnace, myself
went ashore to air plants etc. etc. In the even when we all returnd Tupia
who had been with some of our people and seen the Indians Told us that
what we heard in the morn was absolutely false, that so far from dead
nobody was even hurt by the shot. Our Freind Topaa is he says given too
much to Lying.


1770 January 30.

Bad weather today rainy: myself out gathering Shells in which I had
some success.


1770 January 31.

Day but indifferent so of course but little could be done. Dr Solander and
myself fishd a little in the Evening and had good sport.


1770 February 1.

Raind this morn very hard, as hard I think as it possibly could; our poor
little wild musicians were totaly disturbd by it. In the Even it came on to
blow very hard, so much so that the ship drove and for the first time in the
Voyage we had 3 anchors down.


1770 February 2.

Still rainy so little could be done today, indeed little remaind to be done.


1770 February 3.

Fine weather: the ship began to prepare for sailing so the Dr and myself
employd ourselves in getting together our last specimens of seeds, shells
etc. I stayd at the watering place, he went with the Captn to the farther
Heppah who wanted to buy Dry fish for sea stock, and did buy so much
that at last the Old men fairly told him that he must go away or he would
leave them without provisions, which they enforcd by some threats;
matters were however so well conducted that they parted peacably.

One of our gentlemen came home to day abusing the natives most
heartily whoom he said he had found to be given to the detestable Vice of
Sodomy. He, he said, had been with a family of Indians and paid a price
for leave to make his adresses to any one young woman they should pitch
upon for him; one was chose as he thought who willingly retird with him
but on examination provd to be a boy; that on his returning and
complaining of this another was sent who turnd out to be a boy likewise;
that on his second complaint he could get no redress but was laught at by
the Indians. Far be it from me to attempt saying that that Vice is not
practisd here, this however I must say that in my humble opinion this story
proves no more than that our gentleman was fairly trickd out of his cloth,
which none of the young ladies chose to accept of on his terms, and the
master of the family did not chuse to part with.


1770 February 4.

Prevented from sailing by our hay which had been so thoroughly soked
by the late rains that it was too wet to put on board. Some conversation
passd today concerning a report we heard yesterday. Two of our boats went
out different ways and returnd at different times; the people of one said that
they had met a double canoe who told them that they had a few days ago
lost a female child who they suspected had been stole and eat by some of
their neighbours; the other said that they had also met a double canoe
whose people told them that they had yesterday eat a child, some of whose
bones they sold them. From hence many of our gentlemen were led to
conclude that thefts of this kind are frequent among these Indians. This
story in my opinion throws very little light upon the subject as I am inclind
to beleive that our two boats who went out at very different times in the
morn both in the same direction, one only farther than the other, saw one
and the same canoe and only differently interpreted the conversation of the
people, as they know only a few words of the language, and eating people
is now always the uppermost Idea in their heads. This however I must say,
that when such families have come off to the ship even with an intention to
fight with us they have very often brought Women and young children in
arms as if they were afraid to leave them behind.


1770 February 5.

Ship employd in Warping herself into a better berth for sailing, When
after the anchor was carried out a fortunate eddy wind blew her into it. Our
Old Man Topaa was on board, of whoom Tupia askd many questions
concerning the Land etc. His answers were nearly as follows: 'that the
streights which we had seen from the hills were realy a passage into the
Eastern sea; that the Land to the South consisted of 2 Islands or several
which might be saild round in 3 or 4 days in their canoes; that he knew of
no other great land than that we had been upon, Aehia no Mauwe, of which
Terawhitte was the southern part; that he beleivd his ancestors were not
born there but came originaly from Heawye (the place from whence Tupia
and the Islanders also derive their origin) which lay to the Northward
where were many lands; that neither himself his father or his grandfather
ever heard of ships as large as this being here before, but that [they] have a
tradition of 2 large vessels, much larger than theirs, which some time or
other came here and were totaly destroyd by the inhabitants and all the
people belonging to them killd'. This Tupia says is a very old tradition,
much older than his great grandfather, and relates to two large canoes
which came from Olimaroa, one of the Islands he has mentiond to us.
Whether he is right, or whether this is a tradition of Tasmans ships whose
size in comparison to their own they could not from relation conceive a
sufficient Idea of, and whoom their Warlike ancestors had told them they
had destroyd, is dificult to say. Tupia all along warnd us not to beleive too
much any thing these people told us; For says he they are given to lying,
they told you that one of their people was killd by a musquet and buried
Which was absolutely false.

Myself and the Dr went ashore today to wind up our bottoms and fell in
by accident with the most agreable Indian family we had seen upon the
coast, indeed the only one in which we have observd any order or
subordination. It consisted of 17 people; the head of it was a pretty child of
about 10 years old who they told us was the owner of the land about where
we wooded, the only instance of property we have met with among these
people. He and his mother (who mournd for her husband tears of blood
according to their custom) sat upon matts, the rest sat round them; houses
they had none, nor did they attempt to make for themselves any shelter
against the inclemencies of the weather which I suppose they by custom
very easily endure. Their whole behaviour was so affable, obliging and
unsuspicious that I should certainly have accepted their invitation of
staying the night with them had not the ship been to sail in the morn. Most
unlucky I shall always esteem it that we did not sooner get acquainted with
these people, from whoom we might have learnt more in a day of their
manners and dispositions than from all that we have yet seen.


1770 February 6.

Foul wind continued but we contrivd to turn out and get into the
streights, which are to be calld Cooks streights. Here we were becalmd and
almost imperceptibly drawn by the tide near the land. The lead was dropd
and gave 70 fathom; soon after saw an apearance like breakers towards
which we drove fast. It was now sunset and night came on apace. The ship
drove into this which provd to be a strong tide which set her directly upon
a rock to which she aproachd very near, when the anchor was dropd which
brought her up about a Cables lengh from it; now we were sensible of the
force of the tide which roard like a mill stream and ran at 4 knotts at least
when it came in its strongest pushes, for it varied much. It ran in this
manner till 12 O'Clock, when with the slack water we got up the anchor
with great dificulty which lay in 70 fathom, and a light breeze from the
Northward cleard very soon from our dangers.


1770 February 7.

Sensible again of the Violence of the tides here which past us in great
ripples, even in the middle of the streights, tho they were judgd to be 5
leagues over in the narrowest part. A large hill was seen with much snow
upon it on the SW side: at noon we were almost abreast of it and clear of
the streights, it provd to be so far inland that we could hardly trace its
outline so probably it is very high indeed. The land between us and it was
flat for a large extent but seemd barren and swampy Land, after this barren
and sandy and rounded away fast to the Southward; a small smoak upon it
in the Even was the only sign of inhabitants that we saw.


1770 February 8.

As some of the officers declard last night that they though[t] it probable
that the land we have been round might communicate by an Isthmus situate
somewhere between where we now are and Cape Turnagain (tho the
Whole distance is estimated at no more than 90 miles) the captn resolv'd to
stand to the Northward till he should see that cape, which was accordingly
done in the morning the wind being fair tho but a light breeze. As soon as
we were in with the land it appeard more fertile than any we had seen for
some time, and the flatts larger, but the weather was so hazey that we could
not make use of our glasses. About this time 3 Canoes put off from the
shore and followd us and had patience to do so till 3 O'Clock, when they
overtook us and immediately with very little invitation came on board.
They appeard richer and more cleanly than any people we have seen since
we were in the Bay of Islands, and their canoes were also ornamented in
the same manner as those we had formerly seen on the N and this side of
the Island, but have not now seen since the river Thames if even there; they
were also more civil in their behavior and on having presents made them
immediately made presents to us in return (an instance we have not before
met with in this Island). All these things inclind me to beleive that we were
again come into the Dominions of Teratu but on asking them they said no
he was not their King.


1770 February 9.

Weather rather more clear than Yesterday. On the land white chalky
cliffs appeard such as we us'd to see; by 11 O'Clock Cape Turnagain was in
sight which convincd every body that the land was realy an Island on
which we once more turnd our heads to the southward.


1770 February 10.

Stood along shore nearer the land than when we passd it before: it made
in low hills which seemd pretty well clothd with trees but at the bottom of
them was lowish land making in tables, the topps of which were coverd
with white sand that through the glass had much the appearance of ripe
corn; between these were a few vallies in which were wood and in one of
these we saw a few houses. In the Evening the countrey rather mended
upon us I suppose, as many fires were seen by which I suppose it to be
better inhabited.


1770 February 11.

Calm this morn: 2 Canoes came off and sold us a few fish and some of
their fishing hooks made upon a peice of wood, which I beleive serves
instead of bait in towing as the mother of Pearl does on the Islanders
towing hooks. Light breeze: the land did not look to so much advantage as
when we passd it in our passage to the Northward.


1770 February 12.

This morn the seamen all imagind that we had passd the mouth of the
streights when to our surprize the great snowy hill which we had seen on
the 7th appeard right ahead. At nigh[t] however we were abreast of the
streights which was it not for the hill might be dificult to find in Cloudy
weather.


1770 February 13.

Calm which gave me an opportunity of going out in the boat and
shooting some Albatrosses. The air today was so hazey that we could
scarce see the least traces of land and yet the snow on the top of the
mountain was very visible.


1770 February 14.

Shooting again, killd Nectris munda and Procellaria saltatrix. While I
was out 4 Canoes came off from the shore which I had not the least
suspicion of, as we were farther from the shore than ever canoes had come
before. Signals were made but as the ship was right in the wake of the sun
none of them were seen by us till we saw the canoes themselves, when we
immedi[a]tely pulld for the ship and got aboard I beleive without the
Indians ever seing us so much was their attention taken up with looking at
the ship; indeed if they had no bad consequence could have ensued as they
were so timourous that they hardly dard venture within call of the ship.
They stayd but a little while and then went away, not time enough to get
ashore before it was dark, for at sunset we saw them not more than half
way between us and the shore. I had two or three oppertunities this even of
seeing Albatrosses raise from the Water which they did with great ease;
maybe when they are not able to do so (which I have seen) is when they
are Gorgd with food.


1770 February 15.

Calm again: at Noon I went out and shot in less than an hour 6
Albatrosses: had the calm continued I beleive I might have shot 60, but a
fair breeze of wind came which made me not much regret the Loss of the
rest.


1770 February 16.

Land this morn lookd fertile enough. We had now enterd upon a new
Island on which few signs of inhabitants were seen: a fire however made us
certain that howsoever thin they might be it was not totaly destitute of
them. All day the Weather was very clear. In the morn early Mr Gore
imagind that he saw land to the S. Eastward.


1770 February 17.

This morn we were close onboard of the land which made in ridges not
unlike the South Sea Islands (between the tropicks); the tops of these were
bare but in the Valleys was plenty of wood. On the SE part was an opening
which had all possible appearance of an excellent harbour; near this on the
top of a hill we saw two people setting. Mr Gore notwi[th]standing
Yesterdays run was of opinion that what he saw yesterday morning might
be land, so he declard on the Quarter deck: on which the Captn who
resolvd that nobody should say he had left land behind unsought for orderd
the ship to be steerd SE.


1770 February 18.

All yesterday, last night and this morn we stood for Mr Gore's land but
not seing any and at noon today finding ourselves in Lat.45..17 Every body
in the ship was convincd, except possibly Mr Gore, that it was impossible
to have on the 17th seen as far as where we were now, so we again stood to
the Westward. At night it was Haizey and a large shoal of Bottle nosd
Porpoises were about the ship, soon after which it began to flow brisk but
fair.


1770 February 19.

Last night about one the officer of the watch came down to the captn
with the disagreable news of land right ahead and very near, which the
wind which blew strong blew directly upon; we were soon however set at
ease by the Captn comeing down and telling us that it was only a white
cloud. In the morn it blew hard and before noon (to our great surprize) land
was indeed in sight very high and far off. Many conjectures were made
whether or not it was part of the land we had left but that can only be
determind by future observations. We had most of us put great confidence
in the intelligence we had got of the Indians in the last anchoring place,
notwithstanding Tupia had even then warnd us much not to depend upon
the people who he said he was sure were liars. We had been told however
at different times by the inhabitants of both the towns that the streights
realy joind the two seas and that the land to the Southward might be saild
round in three or four days: the first we had found to be true and from
thence there appeard the highest probability that the other was so likewise,
nor could we devise any reason the Indians could have in wishing to
deceive us, especialy as we had ask'd the question of two different societies
who we had reason to think had not had any intercourse in the intermediate
time, which had made us rather stretch the bounds of probability in
allowing the practicability of a canoe sailing round the first part of the land
we had seen in the time given. There was however between the farthest
part of both the lands a space which we had not seen of more than 20
leagues in lengh: supposing that to be a streight the Indians certainly could
not see over it, and the countrey they inhabited being very thinly peopled
they might at this time be ignorant that there was land beyond it. This
much for conjectures, but be it remembred that they are merely such and
upon a subject that future observations will most probably clear up.
Tho we saw the land by noon and at that time we had a fresh breeze of
Wind, yet it dropping nearly calm soon after we were at night very distant
from it. We had however soundings a great way off and the land appeard
very high, so that we once more cherishd strong hopes that we had at last
compleated our wishes and that this was absolutely a part of the Southern
continent; especialy as we had seen a hint thrown out in some books that
the Duch, not contented with Tasmans discoveries, had afterwards sent
other ships who took the land upon the same lat. as he made it in and
followd it to the Southward as high as Lat 64¡S.


1770 February 20.

This morn we were close in with the land which appeard flat, sandy and
very barren near the shore but rising into high hills inland. We stood in
pretty near to it but saw no signs of inhabitants. W[ind] Southerly all day
blowing fresh.


1770 February 21.

Weather rather more moderate but still foul so that we saw again today
the same part of the coast as yesterday.


1770 February 22.

Still more moderate but will not let us proceed at all to the southward.


1770 February 23.

At noon today calm which gives us hopes that we may have a fair wind.
As we have now been 4 days upon nearly the same part of the coast
without seing any signs of inhabitants I think there is no doubt that this
part at least is without inhabitants.


1770 February 24.

Fresh breeze of wind and fair so we went along shore briskly but kept so
far off from it that no observations could be made: we can only say that we
did not see any fires, other signs of people we could not have seen by
reason of our distance had they been ever so numerous or conspicuous. In
the evening the land ahead inclind a good deal to the West. We were now
on board of two parties, one who wishd that the land in sight might, the
other that it might not be a continent: myself have always been most firm
for the former, tho sorry I am to say that in the ship my party is so small
that I firmly beleive that there are no more heartily of it than myself and
one poor midshipman, the rest begin to sigh for roast beef.


1770 February 25.

Wind whiffling all round the compass, at night settled at SW and blew
hard.


1770 February 26.

Still Blew hard, in some squalls very much so. Thermometer today at
noon was 48 which pinchd us a little.


1770 February 27.

Weather a little more moderate but no standing upon legs without the
assistance of hands as yet: hope however that the heart of this long-winded
gale is broke according to the sea phraze.


1770 February 28.

Weather a little more moderate so that we got a little respite and our
different occupations went on as usual. Opend today a Cask of Cabbage
put up by the receipt p. 210 of this Journal which provd most excellently
good, scarce at all worse for keeping in my opinion.


1770 March 1.

Wind variable and weather sufficiently troublesome.


1770 March 2.

More moderate but a heavy swell from SW made the ship very
troublesome.


1770 March 3.

More moderate but SW swell almost as high as ever which gave great
spirits to the no Continent party.


1770 March 4.

Pleasant weather and fair wind so that we ran in towards the land. In the
morn 1 or 2 Penguins were about us that swam as fast as the ship saild
making a noise something like the shreiking of a goose; the[y] seemd to be
like Diomedaea demersa but whether they were or not I cannot be certain.
In the evening ran along shore but kept so far of that little could be seen; a
large smoak was however, which at night shewd itself in an immence fire
on the side of a hill which we supposd to be set on fire by the natives; for
tho this is the only sign of people we have seen yet I think it must be an
indisputable proof that there are inhabitants, tho probably very thinly
scatterd over the face of this very large countrey.


1770 March 5.

Thick misty weather, the smoak of last nights fire still in sight. A point of
land seen this morn which inclind much to the Westward was supposd by
the no Continents the end of the land; towards even however it cleard up
and we Continents had the pleasure to see more land to the Southward.


1770 March 6.

Very moderate and exceedingly clear. Land seen as far as South so our
unbeleivers are almost inclind to think that Continental measures will at
last prevail.


1770 March 7.

Almost calm so we remaind in the same place nearly all day, to[o] far
from the land to see any thing of it at least to depend upon our
observations.


1770 March 8.

Little wind and fair, which carried us to the Southward far enough to
ascertain that the appearance seen to the Southward in the eve of the 6th
was nothing but clouds, tho from its fixd and steady appearance nobody at
that time doubted in the least its being land.


1770 March 9.

At the first dawn of day a ledge of rocks were discoverd right to leward
and very near us, so we had much reason to be thankfull that the wind in
the night had been very gentle otherwise we must in all human probability
have ran right among them, at least we could have had no chance of
escaping them but by hearing them as there was no moon. The land
appeard barren and seemd to end in a point to which the hills gradualy
declind--much to the regret of us Continent mongers who could not help
thinking this, a great swell from SW and the broken ground without it a
pretty sure mark of some remarkable Cape being here. By noon we were
pretty near the land which was uncommonly barren; the few flat places we
saw seemingly produc'd little or nothing and the rest was all bare rocks,
which were amazingly full of Large Veins and patches of some mineral
that shone as if it had been polishd or rather lookd as if they were realy
pavd with glass; what it was I could not at all guess but it certainly was
some mineral and seemd to argue by its immense abundance a countrey
abounding in minerals, where if one may judge from the corresponding
latitudes of South America in all human probability something very
valuable might be found.


1770 March 10.

Blew fresh all day but carried us round the Point to the total demolition
of our aerial fabrick calld continent.


1770 March 11.

Fresh gales still and wind that will not let us get to the northward. We
stood in with the shore which provd very high and had a most romantick
appearance from the immence steepness of the hills, many of which were
conical and most had their heads coverd with snow, on their sides and
bottoms was however a good deal of wood, so much we could see and no
more and the wind baulking us would not let us stand nearer the shore than
two leagues.


1770 March 12.

Blew hard all day: immense quantities of Albatrosses and other sea birds
were seen which we had been without for some time.


1770 March 13.

Wind fair but still blew fresh with very unsetled weather. In the evening
we saw a harbour, stood in towards it and found it to have all the
appearances of a good one but it was too late to stand near. The countrey
about it was high inland tho not so much so as that seen on the 11th as
there was no snow on any part of it. Here were veins in the rocks, very
large, filld with a whiteish appearance different from what we saw on the
9th. The sides of the hills appeard to be well wooded and the countrey in
general as fertile as in so hilly a countrey could be expected, but not the
least signs of inhabitants.


1770 March 14.

Stood along shore with a fair breeze and passed 3 or 4 places that had
much the appearance of harbours, much to my regret who wishd to
examine the mineral appearances from which I had formd great hopes. The
countrey rose immediately from the sea side in steep hills which however
were tolerably coverd with wood; behind these were another ridge of hills
coverd in many places with snow, which from its pure whiteness and
smoothness in the morn and the many cracks and intervals that appeard
among it at night we conjecturd to be newly falln.


1770 March 15.

Little wind in the morn, towards Even a brisk breeze. The countrey today
appeard coverd with steep hills, whose sides were but ill wooded but on
their tops was large quantities of snow especialy on the sides that lookd
towards the South. We imagind that about noon we passd by some
considerable river as the sea was almost coverd with leaves, small twigs
and blades of Grass. Many Albatrosses about the ship today, we have not
been absolutely without them since we came on this side the land.


1770 March 16.

Much snow on the ridges of the high hills, two were however seen on
which was little or none: whatever the cause of it might be I could not
guess, they were quite bare of trees or any kind of Vegetables and seemd to
consist of a mouldering soft stone of the colour of Brick or light red ocre.
About noon the countrey near the sea changd much for the better,
appearing in broad Valleys clothd with prodigious fine woods out of which
came many fine streams of water, but notwithstanding the fineness of the
countrey there was not the smallest signs of inhabitants, nor indeed have
we seen any since we made this land except the fire on the 4th.


1770 March 17.

Passd today by several large flatts which seemd low. The day in general
was foggy so that little could be seen.


1770 March 18.

Immense quantities of snow on the hills new falln which by noon was
plainly seen to begin to melt. The countrey near the shore was to
appearance fertile and pleasant enough.


1770 March 19.

Hazey weather and foul wind put us all out of spirits.


1770 March 20.

Blew fresh all day with much rain and hazey weather; at night however
wind came fair.


1770 March 21.

Hazey: the land was wrap'd in a cloak of fog all day Above which the
tops of some hills appeard. At night saw a Phaenomenon which I have but
seldom seen, at sun set the flying clouds were of almost all colours among
which was green very conspicuous tho rather faint colourd.


1770 March 22.

Cloudey mistey and calm all day. Once we were very near the shore on
which we saw that there was a most dreadfull surf, occasiond by the S and
SW swell which has reignd without intermission ever since we have been
upon this side of the land.


1770 March 23.

Fine weather and light breezes.


1770 March 24.

Just turnd the Westernmost point and stood into the mouth of the
streights intending to anchor in the first harbour we could find when an
Easterly wind met us right in the teeth, to our no small dissatisfaction as I
beleive there has been no other part of the time since we have left Cape
Turnagain the first time when such a wind would have been disagreable.


1770 March 25.

Light breezes but wind still at East. The sea is certainly an excellent
school for patience.


1770 March 26.

Light breezes and wind fair to our no small comfort. Afternoon we saw a
ripple near an Island which had something the appearance of Breakers, but
differd from them in the small waves breaking only without any swell or
large ones. Our boat sounded upon it but could get no ground; we suppos'd
it to be the effect of a strong tide such as we felt in the streights a[s] we
passd them. At night came to an anchor in a Bay in some part of which it is
probable that Tasman anchord.


1770 March 27.

Went ashore this morn: the countrey hilly but not very high, little or no
flats were however to be seen. In the place where we waterd were the
remains of two or three Indian houses which clearly had not been inhabited
this year at least, but no signs that people had been here since that time.
While Dr Solander and self botanizd Tupia and his boy caught almost a
boat load of fish by angling in 2 or 3 fathom water.


1770 March 28.

Raind and blew so hard all today that going ashore was scarce
practicable, at least when we had so little hopes of success as our
yesterdays search had given us in which we found not one new plant.


1770 March 29.

Raind and blew as hard as yesterday. Myself ill with sickness at stomack
and most violent headach, a complaint which in some of our people has
been succeeded by a fever. During the day many fish were taken in the ship
90 out of the Cabbin windows alone.


1770 March 30.

Myself quite recoverd except a little soreness at my stomack occasiond I
suppose by reaching yesterday. The weather being fair I resolvd to climb
some hill in hopes of meeting some plants in the upper regions as none had
been found in the lower. I did with great dificulty, walking for more than a
mile in fern higher than my head; success however answerd my wishes and
I got 3 plants which we had not before seen.

After coming down I examind the stones which lay on the beach. They
shewd evident signs of mineral tendency being full of Veins but I had not
the fortune to discover any ore of metal (at least that I knew to be so) in
them. As the place we lay in had no bare rocks in its neighbourhood this
was the only method I had of even Conjecturing.


1770 March 31.

Our rout being settled in the manner above mentiond we this morn
weighd and saild with a fair breeze of wind inclind to fall in with Van
Diemens Land as near as possible to the place where Tasman left it.


ACCOUNT OF NEW ZEALAND


30 March 1770


As we intend to leave this place tomorrow morn, I shall spend a few
sheets in drawing together what I have observd of this countrey and its
inhabitants; premising in the mean time that in this, and all others of the
same kind which may occur in this Journal, I shall give myself liberty of
conjecturing and drawing conclusions from which I have observd, in which
I may doubtless often be mistaken; in the daily Journal however the
Observations may be seen, and any one who referrs to that may draw his
own conclusions from them, attending as little as he pleases to any of mine.
This countrey was first discoverd by Abel Jansen Tasman on the 13th of
December 1642 and calld by him New Zealand; he however never went
ashore upon it, probably for fear of the natives; who when he had come to
an anchor set upon one of his boats and killd 3 or 4 our of 7 people that
were in her.

Tasman certainly was an able navigator: he saild into the mouth of Cooks
streights, and finding himself surrounded in all appearance with land
observd the tide of flood to come from the SE; from thence he conjecturd
that there was in that place a passage through the land, which conjecture
we provd to be true and he himself had certainly done, had not the Wind
changd as he though[t] in his favour, giving him an opportunity of
returning the way he came in, which he preferrd to standing into a bay with
an on shore wind. Upon the strengh of conjecture only again, when he
came the lengh of cape Maria Van Dieman he observd hollow waves to
come from the NE, from whence he concluded it to be the northermost part
of the Land, which we realy found it to be: Lastly, to his eternal credit be it
spoken, tho he had been four months absent from Batavia when he made
this land, and had saild both Westward and Eastward, his longitude
(allowing for an Error of [] in that of Batavia as he himself has stated it)
differs no more than [] from ours, which is corrected by an innumerable
number of observations of the Moon and Sun etc. as well as a transit of
Mercury over the Sun; all calculated and observd by Mr Green, a
mathematician of well known abilities, who was sent out in this ship by the
Royal Society to observe the transit of Venus. Thus much for Tasman: it
were much to be wish'd however that we had a fuller account of his voyage
than that publis'd by Dirk Rembranse, which seems to be no more than a
short extract; and that other navigators would Imitate him in mentioning
the Latitudes and Longitudes in which they account the places from
whence they take their departure to be situated; which precaution, usefull
as it is, may almost be said to have been usd by Tasman alone.
The face of the countrey is in general Mountanous, especialy inland,
where probably runs a chain of very high hills parts of which we saw at
several times; they were generaly coverd with snow and certainly very
high--some of our officers, men of experience, did not scruple to say as
much so as The pike of Teneriffe; in that particular however I cannot quite
agree with them, tho that they must be very high is sufficiently provd by
the hill to the Northward of the mouth of Cooks streights, which was seen,
and made no inconsiderable figure, at the distance of [] Leagues.

The sea coast (should it ever be examind) will probably be found to
abound in good harbours: we saw several, of which the Bay of Islands or
Motuaro, and Queen Charlots Sound or Totarra nue, are as good as any
seaman need desire to come into, either for good anchorage or convenience
of Wooding and watering. The outer ridge of Land which lies open to the
Sea is (as I beleive is the case in most countries) generaly Barren, especialy
to the Southward, but within that the hills are Coverd with thick woods
quite to the top, and every Valley produces a rivulet of Water.

The soil is in general light, and consequently admirably adapted to the
uses for which the natives cultivate it, whose crops consist intirely of roots.
On the Southern and western sides it is the most barren, the Sea being there
generaly bounded with either steep hills or vast tracts of Sand, which
probably is the reason why the people in these parts were so much less
numerous, and livd almost intirely upon fish. The Northern and Eastern
sides make however some amends for the Barrenness of the others: in them
we often saw very large tracts of Ground which either actualy were or very
lately had been cultivated, and an immense quantity of Woodland, which
was yet uncleard, but promisd great returns to the people who would take
the trouble of Clearing it--of the latter especialy in Taoneroa or Poverty
bay, and Tolaga--besides Swamps, which might doubtless Easily be
draind, and sufficiently evincd the richness of their soil by the great size of
all the plants that grew upon them, and more particularly of the timber
trees which were the streightest, cleanest, and I may say the largest I have
ever seen--at least speaking of them in the Gross; I may have seen several
times single trees larger than any I Observd among them, but it was not one
but all these trees which were enormous, and doubtless had we had time
and opportunity to Search, we might have found much larger ones than any
we saw, as we were never but once ashore among them, and that but for a
short time on the banks of the River Thames; where we rowd for many
miles between woods of these trees, to which we could see no bounds. The
River Thames is indeed in every respect the properest place we have yet
seen for establishing a Colony; a ship as large as Ours might be carried
several miles up the river, where she would be moord to the trees as safe as
alongside a wharf in London river, a safe and sure retreat in case of an
attack from the natives, as she might even be laid on the mud and a abridge
built to her. The Noble timber, of which there is such abundance, would
furnish plenty of materials either for the building defences, houses, or
Vessels. The River would furnish plenty of Fish, and the Soil make ample
returns of any European Vegetables sown in it. I have some reason to think
from observations made upon the vegetables that the Winters here are
extreemly mild, much more so than in England; the Summers we have
found to be scarce at all hotter, tho more equably Warm.

The South part, which is much more hilly and barren than the North, I
firmly beleive to Abound with minerals in a very high degree. This
however is only conjecture; I had not, to my great regret, an opportunity of
landing in any place where the signs of them were promising except the
last; nor indeed in any one, where from the ship the Countrey appeard
likely to produce them, which it did to the Southward in a very high
degree, as I have mentiond in my Daily Journal.

I[n] all the times that we have landed in this Countrey, we have seen I
had almost said no Quadrupeds realy original natives of it. Dogs and rats
indeed there are; the former as in other countries companions of the men,
and the latter probably brought hither by the men, especialy as they are so
scarce that I myself have not had an opportunity of seeing even one. Of
Seals indeed we have seen a few, and one Sea Lion; but these were in the
sea, and are certainly very scarce, as we have seen no signs of them among
the natives except a few teeth of the latter, which they make into a kind of
Bodkins and value much. It appears not improbable that there realy are no
other species of Quadrupeds in the countrey; for the natives, whose cheif
luxury of Dress consists in the skins and hair of Dogs and the skins of
divers birds, and who wear for ornaments the bones and beaks of birds and
teeth of Dogs, would probably have made use of some part of any other
animal they were acquainted with: a circumstance which tho we carefully
sought after, we never saw the least signs of.

Of Birds there are not many species, and none except perhaps the Gannet
the same as those of Europe. There are however ducks and shags of several
kinds sufficiently like the European ones to be calld the same by the
seamen, Both which we eat and accounted good food, especialy the former
which are not at all inferior to those of Europe. Beside these there are
hawks, owls and Quails differing but little at first sight from those of
Europe, and several small birds that sing much more melodiously than any
I have heard. The sea coast is also frequently visited by many Oceanick
birds as Albatrosses, Shearwaters, Pintados etc. and has also a few of the
birds calld by Sr Jno Narbourough Penguins, which are truly what the
French call Nuance, between birds and fishes, as their feathers especialy on
their wings differ but little from Scales; and their wings themselves, which
they use only in diving and by no means in atempting to fly or even
accelerate their motion on the surface of the water (as young birds are
observd to do), might thence almost as properly be calld fins.

Neither are insects in greater plenty than birds: a few Butterflys and
Beetles, flesh flies very like those in Europe, Musquetos, and sandflies
maybe exactly the same as those of North America, make up the whole list.
Of these last however, which are most Justly accounted the curse of any
countrey where they abound, we never met with any great abundance; a
few indeed there were in almost every place we went into but never enough
to make any occupations ashore troublesome, or to give occasion for using
shades for the face which we had brough[t] out to defend ourselves from
them.

For this scarcity of animals on the land the Sea however makes abundant
recompense. Every creek and corner produces abundance of fish not only
wholesome but at least as well tasted as our fish in Europe: the ship seldom
anchord in or indeed passd over (in light winds) any place whose bottom
was such as fish resort to in general but as many were caught with hook
and line as the people could eat, especialy to the Southward, where when
we lay at an anchor the boats by fishing with hook and line very near the
rocks could take any quantity of fish; besides that the Seine seldom faild of
success, insomuch that both the times that we anchord to the Southward of
Cooks streights every Mess in the ship that had prudence enough salted as
much fish as lasted them many weeks after they went to sea.

For the Sorts, there are Macarel of several kinds, one precisely the same
as our English ones and another much like our horse macarel, besides
several more; these come in immence shoals and are taken by the natives in
large Seines from whoom we bought them at very easy rates. Besides these
were many species which tho they did not at all resemble any fish that I at
least have before seen, our seamen contrivd to give names to, so that hakes,
breams, Cole fish etc. were appellations familiar with us, and I must say
that those who bear these names in England need not be ashamd of their
nam[e]sakes in this countrey. But above all the luxuries we met with the
lobsters or sea crawfish must not be forgot, which are possibly the same
that in Lord Ansons Voyage are mentiond to be found at the Island of Juan
Fernandes; they are large tho not quite so large as those at Juan Fernandes
and differ from ours in England in having many more prickles on their
backes, and being red when taken out of the water. Of them we bought
great quantities of the natives every where to the Northward, who catch
them by diving near the shore, feeling first with their feet till they find out
where they lie. We had also that fish describd by Frezier in his voyage to
Spanish South America by the name of Elefant, Pejegallo, or Poisson Coq,
which tho coarse we made shift to Eat, several species of Skates or sting
rays which were abominably coarse, but to make amends for that we had
among several sorts of dog fish one that was spotted with a few white
spots, whose flavour was similar to but much more delicate than our skate.
We had flat fish also like Soles and flounders, Eels and Congers of several
sorts, and many others which any Europaeans who may come here after us
will not fail to find the advantage of, besides excellent oysters and many
sorts of shell fish and cockles, clams etc.

Tho the countrey is generaly coverd with an abundant verdure of grass
and trees yet I cannot say that it is productive of so great a variety as many
countries I have seen. The intire novelty however of the greatest part of
what we found recompens'd us as natural historians for the want of variety.
Sow thistle, garden nightshade, and perhaps 1 or 2 kinds of Grasses were
exactly the same as in England, 3 or 4 kinds of Fern the same as those of
the West Indies, and a plant or 2 that are common to almost all the world:
these were all that had before been describd by any botanist out of about
400 species, except 5 or 6 which we ourselves had before seen in Terra del
Fuego.

Eatable Vegetables there are very few. We indeed as people who had
been long at sea found great benefit in the article of health by eating
plentifully of wild Celery, and a kind of Cresses which grew every where
abundan[t]ly near the sea side. We also once or twice met with an herb like
that which the countrey people in England call Lambs Quarters or Fat hen,
which we boild instead of Greens, and once only a Cabbage tree the
Cabbage of which made us one delicious meal. These with the Fern roots
and one other vegetable (Pandanus [] ) totaly unknown in Europe, which
tho eat by the natives no Europaean will probably ever relish, are the whole
of the vegetables which I know to be eatable, except those which they
cultivate and have probably brought with them from the countrey from
whence they themselves have originaly come.

Nor does their cultivated grounds produce many speceis of Esculent
plants, three only I have seen--Yams, sweet potatoes, and Coccos, all three
well known in both East and West Indies and much esteemd of these,
especialy the two former. They cultivate often peices of many acres, and I
beleive any ship that was to be to the Northward in the Autumn about the
time of digging them up might purchase any quantity. Besides these they
cultivate gourds, the fruits of which serve them to make bottles, Jugs etc.
and a very small quantity of the Chinese paper mulberry tree, the same as
the Inhabitants of the South Sea Islands use to make their garments of. This
they very much value, but it is so scarce with them probably having been
brought from a hotter countrey and not thriving here, that tho they likewise
beat it out into cloth we never saw peices of it larger than what servd to put
into the holes they bore in their ears, making an ornament they are very
fond of, and this was doubtless the reason why they preferrd the Cloth
which we had brought from the South Sea Islands with us to any
merchandise we could shew them, and next to it white paper.

Fruits they have none, except I should reckon a few kind of insipid
berries which had neither sweetness nor flavour to recommend them and
which none but the boys took the pains to gather. The woods however
abound with excellent timber trees fit for any kind of building in size,
grain, and apparent durability. One which bears a very conspicuous scarlet
flower made up [of?] many threads, and is a large tree as big as an oak in
England, has a very heavy hard wood which seems well adapted for the
Cogs of Mill wheels etc. or any purpose for which very hard wood is us'd.
That which I have before mentiond to grow in the swamps, which has a
leaf not unlike Yew and bears small bunches of Berries, is tall streight and
thick enough to make Masts for vessels of any size, and seems likewise by
the streight direction of the fibres to be tough but is too heavy: this
however I have been told is the case with the pitch pine in North America,
the timber of which this very much resembles, and that the North
Americans know how to lighten by tapping it properly and actualy use for
Masts. But of all the plants we have seen among these people that which is
the most excellent in its kind, and which realy excells most if not all that
are put to the Same uses in other Countries, is the plant which serves them
instead of Hemp and flax. Of this there are two sorts: the leaves of Both
much resemble those of flags: the flowers are smaller and grow many more
together, in one sort they are Yellowish in the other of a deep red. Of the
leaves of these plants with very little preparation all their common wearing
apparel are made and all Strings, lines, and Cordage for every purpose, and
that of a strengh so much superior to hemp as scarce to bear a comparison
with it. From the same leaves also by another preparation a kind of snow
white fibres are drawn, shining almost as silk and likewise surprizingly
strong, of which all their finer cloaths are made; and of the leaves without
any other preparation than splitting them into proper breadths and tying
those strips together are made their fishing nets. So usefull a plant would
doub[t]less be a great acquisition to England, especialy as one might hope
that it would thrive there with little trouble, as it seems hardy and affects
no particular soil, being found equaly on hills and in Valleys, in dry soil
and the deepest bogs, which last land it seems however rather to prefer as I
have always seen it in such places of a larger size than any where else.

When first we came ashore we imagind the countrey to be much better
peopled than we afterwards found it, concluding from the Smoaks that we
saw that there were inhabitants very far inland, which indeed in Poverty
bay and the Bay of Plenty, which are much the best peopled parts of the
countrey that we have seen, may yet be the case. In all the other parts we
have been in we have however found the sea coast only inhabited and that
but sparingly, insomuch that the number of inhabitants seem to bear no
kind of proportion to the size of the countrey which they possess, and this
probably is owing to their frequent wars. Besides this the whole Coast from
Cape Maria Van Diemen to Mount Egmont and seven eights of the
Southern Island seems totaly without people.

The men are of the size of the larger Europaeans, Stout, Clean Limnd and
active, fleshy but never fat as the lazy inhabitants of the South Sea Isles
are, vigorous, nimble and at the same time Clever in all their excersizes. I
have seen 15 paddles of a side in one of their Canoes move with
immensely quick strokes and at the same time as much Justness as if the
movers were animated by one Soul: not the fraction of a second could be
observd between the dipping and raising any two of them, the Canoe all the
While moving with incredible swiftness; and to see them dance their War
dance was an amusement which never faild to please every spectator, so
much strengh, firmness and agility in their motions and at the same time
such excellent time kept that I have often heard above 100 paddles etc.
struck against the sides of their boats, as directed by their singing, without
a mistake being ever made. In Colour they vary a little, some being
browner than others, but few are browner than a Spaniard a little sun burnd
might be supposd to be. The women without being at all delicate in their
outward appearance are rather smaller than Europaean women, but have a
peculiar softness of Voice which never fails to distinguish them from the
men tho both are dressd exactly alike. They are like those of the fair sex
that I have seen in other countries, more lively, airy and laughter loving
than the men and have more volatile spirits, formd by nature to soften the
Cares of more serious man who takes upon [him] the laborious toilsome
part as War, tilling the Ground etc. That disposition appears even in this
uncultivated state of nature, shewing in a high degree that as well in
uncivilizd as the most polishd nations Mans ultimate happiness must at last
be plac'd in Woman. The dispositions of Both Sexes seems mild, gentle,
and very affectionate to each other but implacable towards their enemies,
who after having killd they eat, probably out of a princ[i]ple of revenge,
and I beleive never give quarter or take prisoners. They seem innurd to war
and in their attacks work themselves up by their War Dance to a kind of
artificial courage which will not let them think in the least. Whenever they
met with us and thought themselves superior they always attackd us, tho
seldom seeming to mean more than to provoke us to shew them what we
were able to do in this case. By many trials we found that good usage and
fair words would not avail the least with them, nor would they be convincd
by the noise of our fire arms alone that they were superior to theirs; but as
soon as they had felt the smart of even a load of small shot and had had
time allowd them to recollect themselves from the Effects of their artificial
courage, which commonly took up a day, they were sensible of our
generosity in not taking the advantage of Our superiority and became at
once our good freinds and upon all occasions placd the most unbounded
confidence in us. They are not like the Islanders addicted to stealing, but
would sometimes before peace was concluded, if they could be offering
any thing they had to sale entice us to trust something of ours into their
hands, refuse to return it with all the coolness in the world, seeming to look
upon it as the plunder of an enemy.

Both sexes were much more modest in their carriage and decent in their
Conversation than the Islanders, which such of our people who had a mind
to form any connexions with the Women soon found, but they were not
impregnable: if the consent of their relations was askd and the Question
accompanied with a proper present it was seldom refusd, but then the
strictest decency must be kept up towards the young lady or she might
baulk the lover after all. Upon one of our gentlemen making his adresses to
a family of the better sort the following answer was made him by the
mistress of the family: 'Any of these young ladies will think themselves
honourd by your adresses but you must first make me a proper present and
must come and sleep with us ashore, for daylight should by no means be a
witness of such proceedings'.

Neither sex are quite so cleanly in their persons as the Islanders, not
having the advantage of so warm a climate they do not wash so often. But
the most disgustfull thing about them is the Oil with which they daub their
hair: this is melted from the fat either of fish or Birds: the better sort indeed
have it fresh and then it is intirely void of smell, but the inferior often use
that that is rancid and consequently smell something like Greenland dock
when they are trying Whale Blubber.

Both sexes stain themselves with the colour of black in the same manner
and som[e]thing in the same method as the South Sea Islanders,
introducing it under the skin by a sharp instrument furnish'd with many
teeth, but the men carry this custom to much greater lenghs and the women
not so far, they are generaly content with having their lips black'd but
sometimes have patches of black on different parts of their bodies. The
men on the contrary seem to add to their quantity every Year of their lives
so that some of the Elder were almost coverd with it. There faces are the
most remarkable, on them they by some art unknown to me dig furrows in
their faces a line deep at least and as broad, the edges of which are often
again indented and most perfectly black. This may be done to make them
look frightfull in war; indeed it has the Effect of making them most
enormously ugly, the old ones at least whose faces are intirely coverd with
it. The young again often have a small patch on one cheek or over an eye
and those under a certain age (may be 25 or 26) have no more than their
lips black. Yet ugly as this certainly looks it is impossible to avoid
admiring the immence Elegance and Justness of the figures in which it is
form'd, which in the face is always different spirals, upon the body
generaly different figures resembling something the foliages of old
Chasing upon gold or silver; all these finishd with a masterly taste and
execution, for of a hundred which at first sight you would judge to be
exactly the same, on a close examination no two will prove alike; nor do I
remember to have seen any two alike, for their wild imaginations scorn to
copy as appears in almost all their works. In different parts of the coast
they varied very much in the quantity and parts of the body on which this
Amoco as they call it was placd, but in the spirals upon their faces they
generaly agreed, and I have generaly observd that the more populous a
countrey was the greater quantity of this Amoco they had; possibly in
populous countreys the emulation of Bearing pain with fortitude may be
carried to greater lenghs than where there are fewer people and
consequently fewer examples to encourage. The Buttocks which in the
Islands was the principal seat of this ornament in general here escapes
untouchd: in one place only we saw the contrary: possibly they might on
this account be esteemd as more noble, as having transferrd the seat of
their ornament from the dishonourable cheeks of their tail to the more
honourable ones of their heads.

Besides this dying in grain as it may be calld they are very fond of
painting themselves with Red Ocre which they do in two ways, either
rubbing it Dry upon their skins, which some few do, or daubing their faces
with large patches of it mixd with oil which consequently never drys: this
latter is generaly practisd by the women and was most universaly
condemnd by us, for if any of us had unthinkingly ravishd a kiss from one
of these fair Savages our transgressions were wrote in most legible
Characters on our noses, which our companions could not fail to see on our
first interview.

The common dress of these people is certainly to a stranger at first one of
the most uncouth and extrordinary sights that can be imagind. It is made of
the leaves of the Flag describd before which are split into 3 or 4 Slips each,
and these as soon as they are dry are wove into a kind of Stuff between
netting and cloth, out of the upper side of which all the ends, of 8 or 9
inches long each, are sufferd to hang in the same manner as thrums out of a
thrum mat. Of these peices of cloth 2 serve for a compleat dress one of
which is tied over the shoulders and reaches about their knees, the other
about the waist which reaches near the ground; but they seldom wear more
than one of these and when they have it on resemble not a little a thachd
house. These dresses however, ugly as they are, are well adapted for their
convenience who are often obligd to sleep in the open air and live some
time without the least shelter even from rain, so that they must trust intirely
to their Cloaths as the only chance they have of keeping themselves dry,
for which they are certainly not ill adapted as every strip of leaf becomes in
that case a kind of Guttar which serves to conduct the rain down and hinder
it from soaking through the cloath beneath. Besides this they have several
kinds of Cloth which is smooth and ingeniously enough workd: they are
cheifly of two sorts, one coarse as our coarsest canvass and ten times
stronger but much like it in the lying of the threads, the other is formd by
many threads running lenghwise and a few only crossing them which tie
them together. This last sort is sometimes stripd and always very pretty, for
the threads that compose it are prepard so as to shine almost as much as
silk; to both these they work borders of different colours in fine stiches
something like Carpeting or girls Samplers in various patterns with an
ingenuity truly surprizing to any one who will reflect that they are without
needles. They have also Mats with which they sometimes cover
themselves, but the great pride of their dress seems to consist in dogs fur,
which they use so sparingly that to avoid waste they cut into long strips
and sew them at a distance from each other upon their Cloth, varying often
the coulours prettily enough. When first we saw these dresses we took
them for the skins of Bears or some animal of that kind, but we were soon
undeceivd and found upon enquiry that they were acquainted with no
animal that had fur or long hair but their own dogs. Some there were who
had these dresses ornamented with feathers and one who had an intire dress
of the red feathers of Parrots, but these were not common.

The men always wore short beards and tied their hair in a small knot on
the top of their heads, sticking into it a kind of comb and at the top two or 3
white feathers. About their Waists was tied a belt from which hung a string
which was tied round the preputium and in this seemd to consist most or all
of their decency in that particular; for when that was tied they often exposd
by different motions every part of their bodies to our view and indeed not
seldom threw off all other dress, but shewd visible reluctance and signs of
shame when we desird them to untie it from a curiosity to see the manner
in which it was tied. The first man we saw when we went ashore at Poverty
bay who was killd by one of our people had his dress tied on exactly in the
same manner as is represented in Mr Dalrymples account of Tasmans
Voyage, in a plat which I beleive is copied from Valentynes history of the
East Indies; it was tied over his shoulders cross his breast, again under his
armpits, likwise across his breast and round his loins. Of this dress we saw
however but one more in[s]tance during our whole stay on the Coast, tho it
seems convenient as it leaves the arms quite at liberty while the body is
coverd; in general indeed when they chose to set their arms at liberty they
at the same time freed all their other limbs by casting off their cloaths
intirely.

The Women contrary to the custom of the Sex in general seemd to affect
dress rather less than the men. Their hair which they wore short was
seldom tied, and if it was it was behind their heads and never ornamented
with feathers. Their cloaths were of the same stuff and in the same form as
those of the men but in decently covering themselves they far exceeded
them; their lower garments were at all times bound fast round them and
they never exposd to view any thing even in the neighbourhood of those
parts which nature co[n]ceals, except when they gatherd lobsters and shell
fish in which occupation they were frequently obligd to dive, but then they
never meant to be seen by men and when once or twice accidentaly met by
us shewd most evident signs of Confusion, veiling as well as they could
their naked beauties with sea weed the only covering their situation
afforded. Round their waists instead of a belt they constantly wore a girdle
of many platted strings made of the leaves of a very fragrant Grass; into
this were tuckd the leaves of some sweet scented plant fresh gatherd which
like the fig leaf of our first mother servd as the ultimate guard of their
modesty.

Both sexes bord their ears and wore in them a great variety of ornaments;
the holes by stretching were generaly large enough to admit a finger at
least. These generaly (as if to keep them upon the stretch) were filld up
with a plug of some sort or other, either cloth, feathers, Bones of large
birds, or sometimes only a stick of wood; into this hole they often also put
nails or any [thing] we gave them which could be put there. The women
also often wore bunches of the down of the albatross which is snow white
near as large as a fist, which tho very odd made by no means an unelegant
appearance. Besides these they hung to them by strings many very
different thing[s], often chissels or bodkins made of a kind of green talk
which they value much, the nails and teeth also of their deceasd relations,
dogs teeth, and in short every thing they could get which was either
valuable or ornamental. Besides these the Women wore sometimes
Bracelets and anclets made of the Bones of Birds, shells, etc. and the men
often had the figure of a distorted man made of the beforementiond green
talk, or the tooth of a whale cut slauntwise, so as something to resemble a
tongue, and furnishd with two eyes; these they wore about their necks and
seemd to Value almost above every thing else. I saw one instance also of a
very extrordinary ornament, which was a feather stuck through the bridge
of the nose and projecting on each side of it over the cheeks; but this I only
mention as a singular thing, having met with it only once among the many
people I have seen, and never observd in any other even the marks of a
hole which might occasionaly serve for such a purpose.

Their houses are certainly the most inartificialy made of any thing among
them, scarce equal to an European dog kennel and resembling one in the
door at least, which is barely high and wide enough to admit a man
crawling upon all fours. They are seldom more than 16 or 18 feet long, 8 or
10 broad and five or 6 high from the ridge pole to the Ground and built
with a sloping roof like our Europaean houses. The materials of both walls
and roof is dry grass or hay and very tightly it is put together, so that
nescessarily they must be very warm. Some are lind with bark of trees on
the inside, and many have either over the door or fixd somewhere in the
house a peice of Plank coverd with their carving, which they seem to value
much as we do a picture, placing it always as conspicuously as possible.
All these houses have the door at one end and near it is generaly a square
hole which serves for a window or probably in winter time more for a
chimney, for then they light a fire in the middle of the house. At the same
end where this door and window are placed the side walls and roof project,
generaly 18 inches or 2 feet beyond the end wall, making a kind of Porch
in which are benches where the people of the house often set. Within is a
square place fencd of with either boards or stones from the rest, in the
middle of which they can make a fire; round this the sides of the house are
thick layd with straw on which they sleep. As for furniture they are not
much troubled with it: one chest commonly contains all their riches,
consisting of Tools, Cloaths, arms, and a few feathers to stick into their
hair; their gourds and Baskets made of Bark which serve them to keep
fresh water, provision baskets, and the hammers with which they beat their
fern roots, are generaly left without the door.

Mean and low as these houses are they most perfectly resist all
inclemencies of the weather and answer consequently the purposes of mere
shelter as well as larger would do. The people I beleive spend little of the
day in them (except may be in winter): the porch seems to be the place for
work, and those who have not room there must set upon a stone or the
ground in its neighbourhood.

Some few of the better sort have kind of Court Yards, the walls of which
are made of poles and hay 10 or 12 feet high, which as their families are
large incloses 3 or 4 houses. But I must not forget the ruins or rather frame
of a house (for it had never been finishd) which I saw at Tolaga, as it was
so much superior in size to any thing of the kind we have met with in any
other part of the land. It was 30 feet in lengh, in breadth and [] high; the
sides of it were ornamented with many broad carvd planks of a
workmanship superior to any we saw upon the land; but for what purpose
this was built or why deserted we could not find out.

Tho these people when at home defend themselves so well from the
inclemencies of the Weather, yet when abroad upon their excursions which
they often make in search of fern roots fish etc. they seem totaly indifferent
of shelter: sometimes they make a small shade to wind ward of them but
oftener omit that precaution. During our stay at Opoorage or Mercury bay
such a party of Indians were there consisting of 40 or 50, who during all
that time never erected the least covering tho it twice raind almost without
ceasing for 24 hours together.

Their food, in the use of which the[y] seem to be moderate, consists of
Dogs, Birds, especialy sea fowl as penguins albatrosses etc., fish, sweet
potatoes, Yams, Coccos, some few wild plants as sow thistles, Palm
Cabbage etc. but Above all and which seems to be to them what bread is to
us, the roots of a species of Fern very common upon the hills and which
very nearly resembles that which grows on our hilly commons in England
and is calld indifferently Fern, Bracken, or Brakes. As for the flesh of men,
although they certainly do eat it I cannot in my own opinion Debase human
nature so much as to imagine that they relish as a dainty or even look upon
it as a part of common food. Tho Thirst of Revenge may Drive men to
great lenghs when the Passions are allowd to take their full swing Yet
nature through all the superior part of the creation shews how much she
recoils at the thought of any species preying upon itself: Dogs and cats
shew visible signs of disgust at the very sight of a dead carcass of their
species, even Wolves or Bears were never sayd to eat one another except in
cases of absolute nescessity, when the stings of hunger have overcome the
precepts of nature, in which case the same has been done by the inhabitants
of the most civilizd nations.

Among fish and insects indeed there are many instances which prove that
those who live by prey regard little whither what they take is of their own
or any other species; but any one who considers the admirable chain of
nature in which Man, alone endowd with reason, justly claims the highest
rank and next to him are placd the half reasoning Elephant, the sagacious
dog, the architect Beaver, etc. in Whoom instinct so nearly resembles
reason as to have been mistaken for it by men of no mean capacitys, from
these descending through the less informd Quadrupeds and birds to the fish
and insects, which seem besides the instinct of Fear which is given them
for self preservation to be movd only by the stings of hunger to eat and
those of lust to propagate their species, which when born are left intirely to
their own care, and at last by the medium of the Oyster, etc. etc. which not
being able to move but as tost about by the waves must in themselves be
furnishd with both sexes that the species may be continued, shading itself
away into the vegetable kingdom for the preservation of whoom neither
sensation nor instinct is wanting--whoever considers this I say will easily
see that no Conclusion in favour of such a practise can be drawn from the
actions of a race of beings placd so infinitely below us in the order of
Nature.

But to return to my subject. Simple as their food is their Cookery as far
as I saw is as simple: a few stones heated hot and laid in a hole, their meat
laid upon them and coverd with Hay seems to be the most dificult part of
it. Fish and birds they generaly broil or rather toast, spitting them upon a
long skewer, the bottom of which is fixd under a stone and another stone
being put under the fore part of the skewer it is raisd or lowerd by moving
that stone as the circumstances may require. The Fern roots are layd upon
the open fire untill they are thouroughly hot and the bark of them burnt to a
coal, they are then beat with a wooden hammer over a stone which causes
all the bark to fly off and leaves the inside consisting of a small proportion
of a glutinous pulp mixt with many fibres, which they generaly spit out
after having suckd each mouthfull a long time. Strange and unheard of as it
must appear to an Europaean to draw nourishment from a class of Plant
which in Europe no animal, har[d]ly even insects, will taste, I am much
inclind to think that it affords a nourishing and wholesome diet: these
people eat but little and this is the foundation of their meals, all summer at
least from the time that their roots are planted till the season for digging
them up. Among them I have seen many very healthy old men and in
general the whole of them are as vigorous a race as can be imagind.
To the Southward where little or nothing is planted Fern roots and fish
must serve them all the Year. Here therefore we saw that they had made
vast piles of Both, especialy the latter which were dryd in the sun very
well, I suppose meant for winter stock when possibly Fish is not so
plentifull or the trouble of catching it greater than in Winter.
Water is their universal drink nor did I see any signs of any other liquor
being at all known to them, or any method of Intoxication. If they realy
have not happy they must be allowd to be above all other nations that I at
least have heard of.

So simple a diet accompanied with moderation must be productive of
sound health, which indeed these people are blessd with in a very high
degree. Tho we were in several of their towns where Young and old
crowded to see us, actuated by the same curiosity as made us desirous of
seing them, I do not remember a single instance of a person distemperd in
any degree that came under my inspection, and among the numbers of
them that I have seen naked I have never seen an eruption on the skin or
any signs of one by scars or otherwise. Their skins indeed when they came
off to us in their canoes were often markd in patches with a white flowery
appearance which at first deceivd us, but we afterwards found that that was
owing to their having been in their Passage wetted with the spray of the
sea, which when it was dry left the salt behind it in a fine white powder.
Such health drawn from so sound principles must make physicians
almost useless: indeed I am inclind to think that their knowledge of
Physick is but small from the state of their surgery which more than once
came under my inspection. Of this art they seemd totaly ignorant; I saw
several who were wounded by our shot without the smallest application
upon their wounds, one in particular who had a musquet ball shot through
the fleshy part of his arm; he came out of his house and shewd himself to
us making a little use of the wounded arm; the wound which was then of
several days standing was totaly void of inflammation, seemd well
digested, in short appeard to me to be in so good a state that had any
application been made use of I should not have faild to enquire carefully
what it had Been which had had so good an Effect.

A farther proof and not a weak one of the sound health that these people
enjoy may be taken from the number of old people we saw; hardly a canoe
came off to us that did not bring one or more and every town had several
whoom if we may judge by gray hairs and worn out teeth were of a very
advancd age. Of these few or none were decrepid, indeed the greatest
number of them seemd in vivacity and chearfullness to equal the young,
indeed to be inferior to them in nothing but the want of equal strengh and
agility.

That these people have a larger share of ingenuity than usualy falls to the
lot of nations who have had so little or indeed no commerce with any
others appears at first sight. Their boats, the better sort of them at least,
shew it most evidently. They are built of very thin planks sewd together,
their sides rounding up like ours, but very narrow for their lengh. Some are
immensely long: One I saw which the people laid alongside the ship as if
to measure how much longer she was than the Canoe, which fairly reachd
from the anchor that hung at the bows quite aft, and consequently could not
be less than [] feet long; but indeed we saw few so large as that. All except
a few that we saw at Opoorage or Mercury bay, which were merely trunks
of trees hollowd out by fire, were more or less ornamented by carving. The
common fishing canoes had nothing but the face of a man with a
monstrous tongue and whose eyes were generaly inlayd with a kind of
shell like mother of Pearl in the fore part of them, but the larger sort which
seemd to be intended for war were realy magnificently adornd. Their heads
were formd by a Plank projecting about 3 feet before the canoe, and on
their sterns stood up another proportiond to the size of the canoe, from ten
to 18 feet high; both these were richly carvd with open work and coverd
with loose fringes of Black feathers that had a most gracefull effect; the
gunnel boards were often also carvd in a grotesque taste and ornamentd
with white feathers in bunches placd upon a black ground at certain
intervals. They sometimes joind two small canoes together and now and
then made use of an outrigger as is practisd in the Islands, seldom towards
the north rather oftener to the Southward.

In managing these canoes they are very expert, in the padling of them at
least, in one I counted 16 padlers of a side and never did men I beleive
keep better time with their strokes, driving on the boat with immense
velocity. Their paddles are often ornamented with carving, their blade is of
an oval shape pointed towards the bottom, broadest in the middle and again
sloping towards the handle, which is about 4 feet long, the whole being
generaly near 6 feet long more or less. But in sailing they are not so expert,
we very seldom saw them make use of Sails and indeed never unless when
they were to go right before the wind. They were made of mat and instead
of a mast were hoisted upon two sticks which were fastned one to each
side, so that they requird two ropes which answerd the purpose of sheets
and were fastned to the tops of these sticks; in this clumsey manner they
saild with a good deal of swiftness and were steerd by two men who sat in
the stern with each a paddle in his hand. I shall set down the dimensions of
one that we measurd that was of the largest size: it was in lengh 68½feet,
breadth 5, depth 3½; this was the only one that we measurd or indeed had
an opportunity of measuring.

For the beauty of their carving in general I fain would say something
more about it but find myself much inferior to the task. I shall therefore
content myself with saying that their taste varied into two materialy
different Stiles, I will call them. One was intirely formd of a number of
Spirals diff[er]ently connected, the other was in a much more wild taste
and I may truly say was like nothing but itself. Of the former the truth with
which the lines were drawn was surprizing, but above all their method of
connecting several spirals into one peice, which they did inimitably well,
intermingling the ends of them in so dextrous a manner that it was next to
impossible for the eye to trace their connections. For the other I shall say
nothing but referr intirely to the few drawings which I had an opportunity
of getting made of them; premising however that the beauty of all their
carvings depended intirely on the design, for the execution was so rough
that when you came near it was difficult to find any bea[u]ties in the things
which struck you most at a distance.

After having said so much of their workmanship it will be nescessary to
say something of their tools. As they have no metal among them these are
made of Stone of different kinds, their hatchets especialy of any hard stone
they can get but cheifly of a kind of Green Talk which is very hard and at
the same time tough; with axes of this stone they cut so clean that it would
often puzzle a man to say if the wood they have shapd was or was not cut
with an Iron hatchet. These axes they value above all their riches and
would seldom part with them for any thing we could offer. But their nicer
work which requires nicer edge tools they do with fragments of Jasper,
which they break and use the edges of it that are sharp like flints till they
are blunt, after which they are thrown away as useless, for it impossible
ever again to sharpen them; with these fragments of Jasper I suppose it was
that at Tolaga they bord a hole through a peice of Glass that we had given
to them, just large enough to admit a thread in order to convert it into an
ornament. But what method they make use of to cut and polish their
weapons calld by them patoo patoo, which are made of very hard stone, I
must confess I am quite ignorant.

For their Cloths they are made exactly in the same manner as is usd by
the inhabitants of South America, some of whose workmanship procurd at
Rio de Janeiro I have on board: the warp or long threads are laid very close
together and each crossing of the woof is distant from another an inch at
least. But they have besides this several other kinds of cloth and work
borders to them all, which I have before mentiond, but as to their manner
of doing I must confess myself totaly ignorant. I never but once saw any of
this work going forwards, that was done in a kind of frame of the breadth
of the Cloth, across which it was spread, and the cross threads workd in by
hand which must be very tedious; but howsoever they may be made the
workmanship sufficiently proves the workmen to be dextrous in their way.
One peice of notability in them I must not forget, which is that to every
garment of the better kind is fixd a Bodkin, as if to remind the wearer that
if it should be torn by any accident no time should be lost before it is
mended.

Netts for fishing they make in the same manner as ours, of an amazing
size. A seine seems to be the joint work of a whole town and I suppose the
joint property: of these I think I have seen as large as ever I saw in Europe.
Besides this they have fish pots and baskets workd with twiggs, and
another kind of net which they most generaly make use of that I have never
seen in any countrey but this. They are circular and about 7 or 8 feet in
diameter and 2 or 3 deep; they are stretchd by two or three hoops and open
at the top for near but not quite their whole extent; on the bottom is fastned
the bait, a little basket containing the gutts etc. of fish and sea ears which
are tied to different parts of the net. This is let down to the bottom where
fish are and when enough are supposd to be gatherd together are drawn up
with a very gentle motion by which means the fish are insensibly lifted
from the bottom; in this manner I have seen them take vast numbers of fish
and indeed it is a most general way of fishing all over the coast. Their
hooks are but ill made, generaly of bone or shell fastned to a peice of
wood; indeed they seem to have little occasion for them for with their netts
they take fish much easier than they could do with them.

In tillage they excell, as people who are themselves to eat the fruit of
their industry and have little else to do but to cultivate nescessarily must.
When we first came to Tegadu their crops were just coverd and had not yet
began to sprout: the mould was as smooth as in a garden, and every root
had its small hillock rangd in a regular Quincunx by lines which with the
pegs still remaind in the feild. We had not an opportunity of seeing them
work but once saw their tool, which is a long and narrow stake flatted a
little and sharpned, across this is fixd a peice of stick for the convenience
of pressing it down with the foot; with this simple tool industry teaches
them to turn up peices of ground of 6 or 7 acres in extent; indeed the soil is
generaly sandy, is therefore easily turnd up, and the narrowness of the tool
the blade of which is not more than 3 inches broad makes it meet with the
less resistance.

Tillage, weaving and the rest of the arts of peace are best known and
most practisd in the North Eastern parts; indeed in the Southern there is
little to be seen of any of them. But War seems to be equaly known to all
tho most practisd in the South West parts. The mind of man, ever ingenious
in inventing instruments of destruction, has not been Idle here. Their
weapons tho few are well calculated for bloody fights and the destruction
of numbers, defensive weapons they have none and no Missive ones except
stones and darts which are cheifly usd in defending their forts, so that if
two bodies should meet either in boats, or upon the plain ground, they must
fight hand to hand and the slaughter be consequently immense. Their
Weapons are Spears made of hard wood and pointed at both ends,
sometimes headed with human bones; of these some are 14 or 15 feet long;
they are graspd by the middle so that the end which hangs behind, serving
as a balance to keep steady that which is before, makes it much more
dificult to parry a push from one of them than it would be from one of a
spear only half as long which was held by the end. Battle axes made
likewise of a very hard wood about 6 feet long, the bottom of the handle
pointed, and the blade which is perfectly like the blade of an axe but
broader made very sharp; with these they chop at the heads of their
antagonists when an opportunity offers. Patoo patoos as they calld them, a
kind of small hand bludgeon of stone, bone or hard wood most admirably
calculated for the cracking of sculls; they are of different shapes, some like
an old fashiond chopping knife, others of this [] or always however having
sharp edges and a sufficient weight to make a second blow unnescessary if
the first takes place; in these they seemd to put their cheif dependance,
fastning them by a strong strap to their wrists least they should be wrenchd
from them. The principal people seldom stirrd out without one of them
sticking in his girdle, generaly made of Bone (of Whales as they told us) or
of coarse black Jasper very hard, insomuch that we were almost led to
conclude that in peace as well as war they wore them as a warlike
ornament in the same manner as we Europaeans wear swords. Darts about
8 feet long made of wood bearded and sharpned, but intended cheifly for
the defence of their forts where they have the advantage of throwing them
from a hight down upon their enemy; they often brought them out in their
boats when they meant to attack us, but so little were they able to make use
of them against us who were by reason of the hight of the ship above them
that they never but once attempted it, and that dart tho thrown with the
utmost effort of the man who held it barely fell on board. Sometimes I have
seen them pointed with the stings of stingrays but very seldom: why they
do not oftener use them I do not know, nothing is more terrible to a
Europae[a]n than the sharp Jagged beards of those bones, but I beleive they
seldom cause death tho the wounds made by them must be most
troublesome and painfull. Stones however they use much more dextrou[s]
ly. Tho ignorant of the use of Slings they throw by hand a considerable
distance; when they have pelted us with them on board the ship I have seen
our people attempt to throw them back and not be able to reach the Canoes,
tho they had so manifest an advantage in the hight of their situation.

These are all that can properly be calld arms. But besides these the cheifs
when they came to attack us carried in their hands a kind of ensign of
distinction in the same manner as ours, or spontoons: they were either the
rib of a Whale as white as snow carvd very much and ornamented with
dogs hair and feathers, or a stick about 6 feet long carvd and ornamented in
the same manner and generaly inlayd with shell like mother of Pearl. Of
these cheifs there were in their War Canoes one two or 3 according to the
size of them. When within about a Cables lengh of the ship these generaly
rose up, dressd themselves in a distinguishing dress, often of Dogs skin,
and holding in their hands either one of their Spontoons or a Weapon
directed the rest of the people how to proceed; they were always old or at
least past the middle age and had upon them a larger quantity than common
of the black stains that they call amoco. These Canoes commonly paddled
with great vigour till they came within about a stones throw of the ship
(having no Idea that any missive weapon could reach them farther) and
then began to threaten us, this indeed the smaller canoes did as soon as
they were in hearing. Their words were almost universaly the same,
'haromai haromai harre uta a patoo patoo 'oge'--come to us, come to us,
come but ashore with us and we will kill you with our Patoo patoos: in this
manner they continued to threaten us, venturing by degrees nearer and
nearer till they were close alongside, at intervals talking very civily and
answering any questions we askd them but quickly renewing their threats
till they had by our non-resistance gaind courage enough to begin their war
song and dance; after which they either became so insolent that we found it
nescessary to chastise them by firing small shot at them, or else threw three
or four stones on board and as if content with having offerd such an insult
unreveng'd left us.

The War Song and dance consists of Various contortions of the limbs
during which the tongue is frequently thrust out incredibly far and the
orbits of the eyes enlargd so much that a circle of white is distinctly seen
round the Iris: in short nothing is omittd which can render a human shape
frightful and deformd, which I suppose they think terrible. During this time
they brandish their spears, hack the air with their patoo patoos and shake
their darts as if they meant every moment to begin the attack, singing all
the time in a wild but not disagreable manner and ending every strain with
a loud and deep fetchd sigh in which they all join in concert. The whole is
accompanied by strokes struck against the sides of the Boats etc. with their
feet, Paddles and arms, the whole in such excellent time that tho the crews
of several Canoes join in concert you rarely or never hear a single stroke
wrongly placd.

This we calld the War song, for tho they seemd fond of using it upon all
occasions whether in war or peace they I beleive never omit it in their
attacks. Besides this they have several other songs which their women sing
prettily enough in parts; they are all in a slow melancholy stile but certainly
have more taste in them than could be expected from untaught savages.
Instrumental musick they have not, unless a kind of wooden pipe or the
shell calld Tritons Trumpet with which they make a noise not much
differing from that made by boys with a Cows horn may be calld such.
They have indeed besides these a kind of small pipe of wood, crooked and
shapd almost like a large tobacco pipe head, but it has hardly more musick
in it than a whistle with a Pea in it; but on none of these did I ever hear
them attempt to play a tune or sing to their musick.

That they eat the bodies of such of their enemies as are killd in war is a
fact which, tho universaly acknowledg'd by them from our first landing at
every place we came into, I confess I was very loth to give credit to till I by
accident found the bones of men well pick'd in the very baskets where
these people keep their provision: so convincing a proof I could not
withstand, so I proceeded to inquire as well as I could with the small
knowledge of their language which I had and the Assistance of Tupia what
were their customs upon this occasion. They told us that a few days before
a canoe of their enemies had been surprizd by them and that out of her they
killd 7 persons, to one of whoom the bones in the basket had belongd, that
now all the flesh of these people was eat up and most of the bones thrown
away, which we found to be true for in almost every cove where we landed
fresh bones of Men were found near the places where fires had been made.
The whole was still more confirmd by the old man who we supposd to be
the cheif of an Indian town which was very near us, coming a few days
afterwards and at our desire bringing with him in his Canoe 6 or 7 heads of
men preservd with the flesh on. These it seems these people keep after
having eat the brains as trophies of their victories in the same manner as
the Indians of North America do scalps; they had their ornament in their
ears as when alive and some seemd to have false eyes. He was very jealous
of shewing them. One I bought tho much against the inclinations of its
owner, for tho he likd the price I offerd he hesitated much to send it up, yet
having taken the price I insisted either to have that returnd or the head
given, but could not prevail untill I enforc'd my threats by shewing Him a
musquet on which he chose to part with the head rather than the price he
had got, which was a pair of old Drawers of very white linnen. It appeard
to have belongd to a person of about 14 or 15 years of age, and evidently
shewd by the contusions on one side of it that it had receivd many violent
blows which had chippd of a part of the scull near the eye: from hence and
many more circumstances I am inclind to beleive that these Indians give no
quarter, or ever take prisoners to eat upon a future occasion as is said to
have been practisd by the Floridan Indians; for had they done so this young
creature who could not make much resistance would have been a very
proper subject.

The state of war in which they live, constantly in danger of being
surprizd when least upon their guard, has taught them not only to live
together in towns, but to fortify those towns; which they do by a broad
ditch and a pallisade within it of no despicable construction. For these
Towns or Forts, which they call Heppas, they chuse situations naturaly
strong; commonly Islands or Peninsulas where the sea or steep cliffs
defend the greatest part of their works; and if there is any part weaker than
the rest a stage is erected over it of a considerable hight, 18 or 20 feet, on
the top of which the defendants range themselves and fight with a great
advantage as they can throw down their darts and stones with so much
greater force than the assailants can throw them up. Within these forts the
greatest part of the tribe to whoom they belong reside and have large stocks
of provisions, Fern roots and dryd fish laid up but no water; for that article
in all that I have seen was not to be had but at some distance without the
lines, from whence we were led to conclude that sieges are not usd among
them. Some however are generaly out in small parties in the neighbouring
creeks and coves employd either in taking fish or collecting Fern roots etc.,
a large quantity of which they bring back with them, a reserve I suppose
for times when the neighbourhood of an enemy or other circumstances
make the procuring of fresh provision dificult or dangerous.

Of these Forts or towns we saw many, indeed the inhabitants constantly
livd in such from the Westermost part of the Bay of Plenty to Queen
Charlots Sound; but about Hawk's bay, Poverty Bay, Tegadu and Tolaga
there were none, and the houses were scatterd about; there were indeed
upon the sides of hills stages built, sometimes of a great lengh, which
might serve as a retreat to save their lives at the last extremity, and nothing
else, and these were mostly in ruins. Throughout all this district the people
seemd free from apprehension and as in a state of Profound peace. Their
cultivations were far more numerous and larger than we saw them any
where else and they had a far greater quantity of Fine boats, Fine cloaths,
Fine carvd work; in short the people were far more numerous, and livd in
much greater affluence, than any others we saw. This seemd to be owing to
their being joind together under one cheif or king, so at least they always
told us, Whose name is Teratu and who lives far up in the countrey. It is
much to be lamented that we could get no farther knowledge of this cheif
or king than only his name: his Dominions are certainly for an Indian
Monarch most extensive, he was acknowledgd for a lengh of coast of
upwards of [] Leagues and yet we do not know the eastern limits of his
dominions; we are sure however that they contain the greatest share of the
rich part of the Northermost Island and that far the greatest number of
people upon it are his subjects. Subordinate to him are lesser cheifs who
seem to have Obedience and respect paid them by the tribes to whoom they
belong and probably administer justice to them, tho we never saw an
instance of it except in the case of theft on board the ship, when upon our
complaint the offender receivd kicks and blows from the cheif with whoom
he came onboard. These cheifs were generaly old men; whether they had
the office of cheif by birth or on account of their age we never learnt, But
in the other parts where Teratu was not acknowledg'd we plainly learnt that
the cheifs whoom they obeyd, of which every tribe had some, receivd their
dignity by inheritance. In the Southern parts their societies seemd to have
many things in common, particularly their fine cloaths and netts, the
former of which they had but few. We never saw any body employd in
making [them?], it might be that what they had were the spoils of war.
They were kept in a small Hut erected for that purpose in the middle of the
town; the latter seemd to be the joint work of the whole society. Every
house had in it peices of netting upon which they were at work; by the
joining together these it is probable that they made the long Seins which
we saw.

The Women are less regarded here than at the South Sea Islands, at least
so Tupia thought who complaind of it as an insult upon the sex. They eat
with the men however. How the sexes divide labour I do not know but I am
inclind to beleive that the Men till the ground, fish in boats and take birds,
the Women dig up Fern roots, collect shell Fish and lobsters near the beach
and dress the Victuals and weave cloth, while the men make netts--thus at
least these employments have been distributed when I had an opportunity
of Observing them which was very seldom, for our approach generaly
made a holiday where ever we went; men women and children flocking to
us either to satisfy their curiosity or trade with us for whatever they might
have, taking in exchange cloth of any kind, especialy linnen or the Indian
cloth we had brought from the Islands, Paper, Glass bottles, sometimes
peices of broken glass, Nails etc.

We saw few signs of religion among these people: they had no publick
places of Worship among them as the inhabitants of the South Sea Islands,
and only one private one came under my observation, which was in the
neighbourhood of a plantation of their sweet potatoes. It was a small
square, borderd round with stones; in the middle was a spade, and on it was
hung a basket of fern roots, an offering (I suppose) to the Gods for the
success of the Crop, so at least one of the natives explaind it. They
however acknowledged the influence of superior beings and have nearly
the same account of the creation of the World, mankind etc. as Tupia; he
however seemd to be much better vers'd in such legends than any of them,
for whenever he began to preach as we calld it he was sure of a numerous
audience who attended with most profound silence to his doctrines.
The Burial of the Dead instead of being a Pompous ceremony as in the
Islands is here kept secret. We never saw so much as a grave where any
one had been interrd; nor were they always alike in the accounts they gave
of the manner of disposing of Dead bodies, in the Northern parts they told
us that they buried them in the ground and in the southern said that they
threw them into the sea, having first tied to them a sufficient weight to
cause their sinking. Howsoever they disposd of the dead their regret for the
loss of them was sufficiently visible; few or none were without scarrs and
some had them hideously large on their cheeks, arms, thighs, legs etc.
which proceeded from the cuts they had given themselves during their
mourning. I have seen several with such wounds of which the blood was
not yet staunchd and one only, a woman, while she was cutting herself and
lamenting. She wept much, repeating many sentences in a plaintive tone of
voice, at every one of which she with a shell cut a gash in some part of her
body; she however contrivd her cutts in such a manner that few of them
drew blood and those that did penetrated a small depth only. She was old
and had outlivd probably those violent impressions that greif as well as
other passions of the mind make upon young people, her greif also was
probably of long standing; the scarrs upon the bodies of the greater part of
these people evincd however that they had felt sorrows more severely than
she did.

Thus much for the manners and customs of these people as far as they
have come to my knowledge in the few opportunities I had of seeing them;
they differ in many things but agree in more with those of the inhabitants
of the South Sea Islands. Their Language I shall next give a short specimen
of which is almost precisely the same at least in fundamentals. It is true
that they have generaly added several letters to the words as usd by the
inhabitants of Otahite etc. but the original plainly appears in the
composition. The language of the Northern and southern parts differ
cheifly in this: the one has added more letters than the others, the original
words are however not less visible to the slightest observer. I shall give a
short table of each compard with the Otahite, taking care to mention as
many words as I know which are either of a doubtfull or different original,
Premising however two things: first that the words were so much disguisd
by their manner of pronouncing them that I found it very dificult to
understand them till I had wrote them down; secondly that Tupia at the
very first understood and conversd with them with great facility.

WORD           NORTHERN      SOUTHERN   OTAHITE
a cheif        Eareete       Eareete    Earee
a Man          Taata         Taata      Taata
a Woman        wahine        wahine     wahine
the head       Eupo          Heaowpoho  Eupo
the Hair       Macauwe       Heoooo     Roourou
the Ear        Terringa      Hetaheyei  Terrea
the Forehead   Erai          Heai       Erai
the Eyes       Mata          Hemata     Mata
the Cheeks     Paparinga     Hepapaeh   Paparea
the nose       Ahewh         Heeih      ahew
the Mouth      Hangoutou     Hegowai    Outou
the Chin       Ecouwai       Hekaoewai  ----
the Arm        Haringaringa  ----       Rema
the finger     Maticara      Hemaigawh  Maneow
the belly      Ateraboo      ----       Oboo
the navel      Apeto         Hecapeeto  Peto
Come here      Horomai       Horomai    Harromai
Fish           Heica         Heica      Eyca
a lobster      Kooura        Kooura     Tooura
Coccos         Taro          Taro       Taro
Sweet potatoes Cumala        Cumala     Cumala
Yamms          Tuphwhe       Tuphwhe    Tuphwhe
Birds          Mannu         Mannu      Mannu
No.            Kaoure        Kaoure     Oure
1.             Tahai         ----       Tahai
2.             Rua           ----       Rua
3.             Torou         ----       Torou
4.             Ha            ----       Hea
5.             Rema          ----       Rema
6.             Ono           ----       Ono
7.             Etu           ----       Hetu
8.             Warou         ----       Warou
9.             Iva           ----       Heva
10.            Angahourou    ----       Ahourou
the teeth      hennihu       heneaho    Nihio
the Wind       Mehow         ----       Mattai
a theif        Amootoo       ----       Teto
to examine     Mataketake    ----       Mataitai
to Sing        Eheara        ----       Heiva
Bad            Keno          Keno       Eno
Trees          Eratou        Eratou     Eraou
Grandfather    Toubouna      Toubouna   Toubouna

I must remark that the greatest part of the southern Language was not
taken down by myself and I am inclind to beleive that the person who did it
for me made use of more letters in spelling the words than were absolutely
nescessary. The Genius of the Language especialy in the Southern parts is
to add some particle before a noun as we do 'the' or 'a'; 'the' was generaly
He, or Ko; they also often add to the end of any word, especialy if it is in
answer to a question, the word Oeia which signifies yes, realy, or certainly.

This sometimes led our gentlemen into most longwinded words, one only
of which I shall mention as an example. In the Bay of Islands a very
remarkable Island was calld by the natives Motu Aro: some of our
gentlemen askd the name of this from one of the Natives, Who answerd I
suppose as usual Kemotu aro; the Gentleman not hearing well the word
repeated his question, on which the Indian again repeated his answer,
adding Oeia to the end of the name which made it Kemotuaroeiea: this way
at least and no other can I account for that Island being calld in the Log
book etc. Cumattiwarroweia. The same is practisd by the inhabitants of the
South Sea Islands only their Particle instead of He, or She, is To, or Ta;
their oeia is exactly the same which when first I began to learn the
language producd many difficulties and mistakes.

From the similarity of customs, the still greater of Traditions and the
almost identical sameness of Language between these people and those of
the Islands in the South Sea there remains little doubt that they came
originaly from the same source: but where that Source is future experience
may teach us, at Present I can say no more than that I firmly beleive that it
is to the Westward and by no means to the East.

Having now intirely circumnavigated New Zealand and found it, not as
generaly has been supposd part of a continent, but 2 Islands: and having
not the least reason to imagine that any countrey larger than itself lays in
its neighbourhood, it was resolvd to leave it and Proceed upon farther
discoveries in our return to England being determind to do as much as the
state of the Ship and provisions would allow. In consequence of this
resolution a consultation was held and 3 schemes proposd: One, much the
most elegible, to return by Cape Horn keeping all the way in the high
Latitudes, by which means we might with certainty determine whether or
not a Southern Continent existed; but this was unanimously agreed to be
more than the Condition of the ship would allow. Our provisions indeed
might be equal to it--we had six months at 2/3 allowance--but our Sails
and rigging, with which the former especialy we were at first but ill
provided, were renderd so bad by the blowing weather that we had met
with off New Zealand that we were by no means in a condition to weather
the hard Gales that must be expected in a winter passage through high
latitudes. The second was to steer to the southward of Van Diemens Land
and stand away directly for the Cape of Good Hope, but this was likewise
immediately rejected: if we were in too bad a condition for the former we
were in too good a one for this. 6 months provision was much more than
enough to carry us to any Port in the East Indies and the over plus was not
to be thrown away in a Sea Where so few navigators had been before us:
the third therefore was unanimously agreed to, which was to stand
immediately to the Westward, fall in with the Coast of New Holland as
soon as possible, and after following that to the northward as far as seemd
proper, to attempt to fall in with the Lands seen by Quiros in 1606. In
doing this, although we hopd to make discoveries more interesting to trade
at least than any we had yet made, we were obligd intirely to give up our
first grand object, the Southern Continent: this for my own part I confess I
could not do without much regret.--That a Southern Continent realy exists,
I firmly beleive; but if ask'd why I beleive so, I confess my reasons are
weak; yet I have a preposession in favour of the fact which I find it dificult
to account for. Ice in large bodies has been seen off Cape Horn now and
then; Sharp saw it in [1681] and Monsr Frezier, in his return from the
Coast of Chili, in the month of March 1714; he also mentions that it has
been seen by other French Ships in the same place. If this Ice (as is
generaly beleivd) is formd by fresh water only there must be land to the
Southward: for the Coast of Terra del Fuego is by no means cold enough to
produce such an Effect. I should be inclind to think also that it lays well
away to the Westward, as the West and South West Winds so generaly
prevail that the Ice must be supposd to have followd the direction of these
winds, and consequently have come from those points. When we saild to
the Southward, in the months of August and Septr 1769, we met with signs
of land, sea weed, and a seal: which, tho both of them are often seen at
large distances from Land, yet they are not met with in open oceans; and
we were at that time to[o] far from the Coast of New Zealand, and much
too far from that of South America, to have supposd them to have come
from either of these. The Body of this land must however be situated in
very high latitudes: a part of it may indeed come to the Northward, within
our track; but as we never saw any signs of land, except at the time
mentiond above, although I made it my particular business (as well as I
beleive the most of us) to look out for such, it must be prodigiously smaller
in extent than the theoretical continent makers have supposd it to be. We
have by our track provd the absolute falsity of above three fourths of their
positions, and after that the rema[in]ing part can not be much rely'd upon;
but above all, we have taken from them their firmest Ground work, in
Proving New Zealand to be an Island, which I beleive was lookd upon
even by the most thinking people to be in all probability at least a part of
some Vast Countrey. All this we have taken from them: the land seen by
Juan Fernandes, the land seen by the Duch squadron under Hermite, signs
of Continent seen by Quiros, and the same by Roggewein, etc. etc. have by
us been provd not to have at all related to a Continent. As for their
reasoning about the Balancing of the two poles, which always appeard to
me to be a most childish argument, we have already shorn off so much of
their supposd counterbalancing land that by their own account the South
pole would already be too light, unless what we have left should be made
of very ponderous materials. As much fault as I find with these gentlemen
will however probably recoil on myself, when I on so slight grounds as
those I have mentiond again declare it to be my opinion that a Southern
Continent exists, an opinion in favour of which I am strongly preposesd;
but foolish and weak as all prepossesions must be thought I would not but
declare myself so, least I might be supposd to have stronger reasons which
I conceald.

To search for this Continent then the best and readyest way by which at
once the existence or nonexistence of it might be Provd appears to me to be
this: Let the ship or ships destind for this service leave England in the
Spring and proceed directly to the Cape of Good hope, where they might
refresh their people and supply in some articles their expence of provision;
from thence to proceed round Van Diemens Land to the Coast of New
Zealand, where they might again refresh in any of the numerous harbours
at the mouth of Cooks streights where they would be sure to meet with
plenty of Water, Wood and fish. Here they should arrive by the month of
October that they might have the good season before them to run across the
South Sea, Which by reason of the Prevailing westerly winds they would
easily be able to do in any Latitude; and if in doing this they should not fall
in with a Continent they might still be of service by exploring the Islands
in the Pacifick Ocean where they might refresh themselves and proceed
home by the East Indies. Such a Voyage, as a Voyage of Mere Curiosity,
should be promoted by the Royal Society to whoom I doubt not but his
majesty would upon a proper application grant a ship, as the subject of
such a voyage seems at least as interesting to Science in general and the
increase of knowledge as the Observation which gave rise to the Present
one. The small expence such an equipment is to goverment is easily
shown: I will venture roundly to affirm that the Smallest Station Sloop in
his majesties service is every year more expensive than this ship where
every rope, every sail, every rope yarn even, is obligd to do its duty most
thouroughly before it can be dismissd; how trifling then must this expence
appear when in return for it the nation acquires experiencd seamen in those
who execute it, and the Praise which is never denied to countries who in
this publick spirited manner promote the increase of knowledge.

At the Cape of Good Hope might be procurd Beef, Bread, Flower, Pease,
Spirit, or indeed any kind of Provision at Reasonable Rates. The Beef must
be bought alive and salted, for which purpose it would be proper to take
out salt from Europe; the general price which i[n[deed never varies is two
pence a pound, it is tolerable meat but not so fat as ours in England. Pork is
scarce and dear, of that therefore a larger proportion might be taken out.
Bread, which varies in price, is of the Rusk kind, very good but rather
brown. Spirit is Arrack from Batavia, the Price of which after having paid
the Duties of Import and Export is 60 Rd, 12 lb Sterling, a Legger of 150
Galls. Wine is in vast plenty and very cheap and while I was there they
began to Distill a kind of Brandy, which however at that time was as dear
as Arrack and much inferior to it both in Strengh and goodness.
Should a ship upon this Expedition be obligd to go into False Bay, into
which the Dutch remove on the 12th of May, most of these articles might
be got there at a small advance occasiond by the carriage which is very
cheap; and any be wanted which could not, they might be brought from the
Cape town either by Dutch Scoots of which there are several belonging to
the Company in the Harbour, or by Waggons over land as the Road is good
and much frequented at that season of the Year.


1770 April 1.

Fresh breeze and fair all day.


1770 April 2.

Wind more to the westward but still fair.--Our malt having turnd out so
indifferent that the Surgeon made little use of it a method was thought of
some weeks ago to bring it into use, which was to make as strong a wort
with it as possible and in this boil the wheat which is servd to the People
for breakfast. It made a mess far from unpleasant which the people soon
grew very fond of: myself who have for many months constantly
breakfasted upon the same wheat as the people, either did or at least
thought that I receivd great benefit from the use of this mess, it totaly
banishd in me that troublesome Costiveness which I beleive most people
are subject to when at sea. Whether or no this is a more beneficial method
of administering wort as a preventative than the common must be left to
the faculty, especialy that excellent surgeon Mr M'Bride whose ingenious
treatise on the sea scurvy can never be enough commended. For my own
part I should be inclind to beleive that the salubrious qualities of the wort
which arise from fermentation might in some degree at least be
communicated to the wheat when thouroughly saturated with its particles,
which would consequently acquire a virtue similar to that of fresh
vegetables, the most powerfull resisters of Sea scurvy known.


1770 April 3.

Wind as yesterday: we got fast on to the Westward but the Compass
shewd that the hearts of our people hanging that way caus'd a considerable
North variation which was sensibly felt by our navigators, who calld it a
current as they usualy do every thing which makes their reconings and
observations disagree.


1770 April 4.

Wind and weather precisely as yesterday.


1770 April 5.

Wind is rather abated and weather considerably milder. The Captn told
me that he has during this whole vo[y]age observd that between the
degrees of 40¡ and 37¡ South latitude the Weather becomes suddenly
milder in a very great degree, not only in the temperature of the air but in
the Strenght and frequency of the gales of wind, which increase very much
in going towards 40 and decrease in the same proportion as you aproach 37.


1770 April 6.

Almost calm, the air very mild. Some dusky colourd birds were seen by
Tupia and the Master who both sayd they were of a sort which they had not
seen before. Tupia also declard that he saw a flying fish, no one else
however observd it.


1770 April 7.

Almost calm: the air both yesterday and today was damp so that many
things began to mould. The sun today had greater power and heat than we
had felt for some months past.


1770 April 8.

No swell today, Very light breezes, sun and air much as yesterday.


1770 April 9.

Fair breeze tho very little of it: the Sea both yesterday and today was as
smooth as a millpool, no kind of swell ranging in any direction. In the
Morn a red taild Tropick bird was seen who hoverd some time over the
ship but except him few or no Birds appeard.


1770 April 10.

Another red taild tropick bird was seen today and a Flying fish. Weather
as it has now been for several days rather troublesomly warm and the Sea
most uncommonly smooth.


1770 April 11.

Calm: myself went out a shooting and killd Diomedea exulans and
impavida, saw profuga; Procellaria melanopus, Velox, Oceanica,
Vagabunda and longipes, Nectris fuliginosa, which I find to be the same
bird as was seen by the Master and Tupia on the 6th. Took up with dipping
net Mimus volutator, Medusa pelagica, Dagysa cornuta, Phyllodoce velella
and Holothuria obtusata, of which last an Albatross that I had shot dischar
[g]d a large quantity, incredible as it may appear that any animal should
feed upon this blubber, whose stings innumerable give a much more Acute
pain to a hand which touches them than Nettles.


1770 April 12.

Calm again: I again went out in my small boat and shot much the same
birds as yesterday; took up also cheifly the same animals to which was
added indeed Actinia natans. I again saw undoubted proofs that the
Albatrosses eat Holothurias or Portugese men of War as the sea men call
them. I had also an opportunity of observing the manner in which this
animal stings. The body of it Consists of a bladder on the upper side of
which is fixd a kind of Sail which he erects or depresses at pleasure; the
edges of this he also at pleasure gathers in so as to make it Concave on one
side and convex on the other, varying the concavity or convexity to which
ever side he pleases for the conveniency of catching the wind, which
moves him slowly upon the surface of the sea in any direction he pleases.
Under the bladder hang down two kinds of strings, one smooth and
transparent which are harmless, the other full of small round knobbs
having much the appearance of small beads strung, these he contracts or
extends sometimes to the lengh of 4 feet. Both these and the others are in
this species of a lovely ultramarine blew, but in the more common one
which is many times larger than this being near as large as a Goose egg,
they are of a fine red. With these latter however he does his mischeif,
stinging or burning as it is calld if touchd by any substance: they
immediately exsert millions of exceeding fine white threads about a line in
lengh which peirce the skin and adhere to it giving very acute pain. When
the animal exserts them out of any of the little knobbs or beads which are
not in contact with some substance into which they can peirce they appear
very visibly to the naked eye like small fibres of snow white cotton.


1770 April 13.

Calm and fine as Yesterday with the sun as powerfull as ever; last night a
great dew fell with which in the morn all the rigging etc. was wet. Myself
shooting as usual but saw no new birds except a Gannet which came not
near me: of those for these 4 or 5 days past killd a good many, indeed
during this whole time they have been tame and appeard unknowing and
unsu[s]picious of men, the generality of them flying to the boat as soon as
ever they saw it which is generaly the case when at large distances from
the land. Took up Dagysa vitrea and Gemma, Medusa radiata and Porpita,
Helix Janthina very large, Doris complanata and Beroe biloba. Saw a large
shoal of Esox Scombroides leaping out of the water in a very extrordinary
manner, pursued by a large fish which I saw but could not strike tho I did
two of the former. In the Evening saw several fish much Resembling
Bonitos.


The weather we have had for these Nine days past and the things we have
seen upon the sea are so extrordinary that I cannot help recapitulating a
little. The Weather in the first place which till the fifth was cool or rather
cold became at once troublesomely hot bringing with it a mouldy
dampness such as we have experiencd between the tropicks: the
Thermometer at this time although it shewd a considerable difference in
the degree of heat was not near so sensible of it as our bodies, which I
beleive is generaly the case when a damp air accompanies warmth. During
the continuance of this weather the inhabitants of the seas between the
tropicks appeard: the Tropick bird, flying fish and Medusa Porpita are
animals very seldom seen out of the influence of trade winds, several
others also are such as I have never before seen in so high a latitude and
never before in such perfection as now except between the tropicks. All
these uncommon appearances I myself can find no other method of
accounting for than the uncommon lengh of time that the wind had
remaind in the Eastern quarter before this, which Possibly had all that time
blown home from the trade wind, and at the same time as it kept the sea in
a quiet and still state had brought with it the Produce of the Climates from
whence it came.


1770 April 14.

A great dew this morn and Weather as calm as ever; in the afternoon
however a small breeze sprang up and increasd gradualy till towards night
when a large quantity of Porpoises were seen about the ship.


1770 April 15.

Little or no Dew this morn: the Breeze freshned and came to WNW
which soon raisd a sea. Several flying fish were seen today; tho I was not
fortunate enough to see any of them yet they were seen by people who I am
sure could not be mistaken. After dinner a small Bird of the Sterna kind
came about the ship much like the Sterna [] of New Zealand but browner
upon the back; it stayd a long time about the ship and seemd to me as if it
had lost its way. At night the wind moderated but with it came a kind of
invisible spray or mist which thouroughly wetted my hair as I walkd the
deck.


1770 April 16.

No dew this morn: weather moderate and cloudy. In the Morn Tupia saw
a large float of sea weed and shewd it to one other man; it was however so
far from the ship that no one else saw it. At noon Our second Lieutenant
observd a small Butterfly as he thought. At night some Thunder and a fresh
gale at SW, with a heavy swell which seemd to keep rather to the
Westward of the Wind. Many Albatrosses and black shearwaters were
about the ship. At night a small land bird came on board about the size of a
sparrow; some of the boys tried to catch it but it got from them in the
rigging and was never seen after.


1770 April 17.

During last night and this morn the weather was most Variable with
continual squalls and wind shifting all round the compass; such weather is
often met with in the neighbourhood of land so that with this and the
former signs our seamen began to prophesy that we were not now at any
great distance from it. A Gannet was seen which flew towards the NW
with a steady uninterrupted flight as if he knew the road that he was going
led to the shore. In the evening a Port Egmont hen was seen. At night it
blew strong at WSW.


1770 April 18.

Stiff gales and a heavy sea from the Westward. In the morn a Port
Egmont hen and a Pintado bird were seen, at noon two more of the former.
At night the weather became rather more moderate and a shoal of
Porpoises were about the Ship which leapd out of the water like Salmons,
often throwing their whole bodies several feet high above the surface.


1770 April 19.

With the first day light this morn the Land was seen, at 10 it was pretty
plainly to be observd; it made in sloping hills, coverd in Part with trees or
bushes, but interspersd with large tracts of sand. At Noon the land much
the same. We were now sailing along shore 5 or 6 Leagues from it, with a
brisk breeze of wind and cloudy unsettled weather, when we were calld
upon deck to see three water spouts, which at the same time made their
appearance in different places but all between us and the land. Two which
were very distant soon disapeard but the third which was about a League
from us lasted full a quarter of an hour. It was a column which appeard to
be of about the thickness of a mast or a midling tree, and reachd down
from a smoak colourd cloud about two thirds of the way to the surface of
the sea; under it the sea appeard to be much troubled for a considerable
space and from the whole of that space arose a dark colourd thick mist
which reachd to the bottom of the pipe. When it was at its greatest distance
from the water the pipe itself was perfectly transparent and much
resembled a tube of glass or a Column of water, if such a thing could be
supposd to be suspended in the air; it very frequently contracted and
dilated, lenghned and shortned itself and that by very quick motions; it
very seldom remaind in a perpendicular direction but Generaly inclind
either one way or the other in a curve as a light body acted upon by wind is
observd to do. During the whole time that it lasted smaler ones seemd to
attempt to form in its neighbourhood; at last one did about as thick as a
rope close by it and became longer than the old one which at that time was
in its shortest state; upon this they Joind together in an instant and gradualy
contracting into the Cloud disapeard.


1770 April 20.

The countrey this morn rose in gentle sloping hills which had the
appearance of the highest fertility, every hill seemd to be cloth'd with trees
of no mean size; at noon a smoak was seen a little way inland and in the
Evening several more.


1770 April 21.

In the morn the land appeard much as it did yesterday but rather more
hilly; in the even again it became flatter. Several smoaks were seen from
whence we concluded it to be rather more populous; at night five fires.


1770 April 22.

The Countrey hilly but rising in gentle slopes and well wooded. A hill
was in sight which much resembled those dove houses which are built four
square with a small dome at the top. In the morn we stood in with the land
near enough to discern 5 people who appeard through our glasses to be
enormously black: so far did the prejudices which we had built on
Dampiers account influence us that we fancied we could see their Colour
when we could scarce distinguish whether or not they were men.--Since
we have been on the coast we have not observd those large fires which we
so frequently saw in the Islands and New Zealand made by the Natives in
order to clear the ground for cultivation; we thence concluded not much in
favour of our future freinds.--It has long been an observation among us
that the air in this Southern hemisphere was much clearer than in our
northern, these some days at least it has appeard remarkably so. A
headland calld Dromedaries Head, not remarkably high, had been seen at
the dist[ance] of 25 L'gs and judgd by nobody to be more than 6 or 8 from
us; it was now in sight plain and our distance from it by the ships run was
23 l'gs, yet the Sea men acknowledg'd that tho they knew how far it was
from them they could not think that it appeard more than 10 l'gs off. The
hill like a pigeon house was also seen at a very great distance; the little
dome on the top of it was first thought to be a rock standing up in the sea
long before any other part was seen, and when we came up with it we
found it to be several miles inland.


1770 April 23.

Calm today, myself in small boat but saw few or no birds. Took with the
dipping net Cancer Erythroptamus, Medusa radiata, pelagica, Dagysa
gemma, strumosa, cornuta, Holothuria obtusata, Phyllodoce Velella and
Mimus volutator. The ship was too far from the shore to see much of it; a
larger fire was however seen than any we have seen before.
The Master today in conversation made a remark on the Variation of the
Needle which struck me much, as to me it was new and appeard to throw
much light on the Theory of that Phaenomenon. The Variation is here very
small, he says: he has three times crossd the line of no variation and that at
all those times as well as at this he has observd the Needle to be very
unsteady, moving very easily and scarce at all fixing: this he shewd me: he
also told me that in several places he has been in the land had a very
remarkable effect upon the variation, as in the place we were now in: at 1
or 2 Leagues distant from the shore the variation was 2 degrees less than at
8 Lgs distance.


1770 April 24.

The wind was unfavourable all day and the ship too far from the land for
much to be seen; 2 large fires however were seen and several smaller. At
night a little lightning to the Southward.


1770 April 25.

Large fires were lighted this morn about 10 O'Clock, we supposd that the
gentlemen ashore had a plentifull breakfast to prepare. The countrey tho in
general well enough clothd appeard in some places bare; it resembled in
my imagination the back of a lean Cow, coverd in general with long hair,
but nevertheless where her scraggy hip bones have stuck out farther than
they ought accidental rubbs and knocks have intirely bard them of their
share of covering. In the even it was calm. All the fires were put out about
5 O'Clock. Several brown patches were seen in the sea looking much as if
dirt had been thrown into it, but upon a nearer examination they provd to
be myriads of small dagysas.


1770 April 26.

Land today more barren in appearance that we hade before seen it: it
consisted cheifly of Chalky cliffs something resembling those of old
England; within these it was flat and might be no doubt as fertile. Fires
were seen during the day the same as yesterday but none so large.


1770 April 27.

The Countrey today again made in slopes to the sea coverd with wood of
a tolerable growth tho not so large as some we have seen. At noon we were
very near it; one fire only was in sight. Some bodies of 3 feet long and half
as broad floated very boyant past the ship; they were supposd to be cuttle
bones which indeed they a good deal resembled but for their enormous
size. After dinner the Captn proposd to hoist out boats and attempt to land,
which gave me no small satisfaction; it was done accordingly but the
Pinnace on being lowerd down into the water was found so leaky that it
was impracticable to attempt it. Four men were at this time observd
walking briskly along the shore, two of which carried on their shoulders a
small canoe; they did not however attempt to put her in the water so we
soon lost all hopes of their intending to come off to us, a thought with
which we once had flatterd ourselves. To see something of them however
we resolvd and the Yawl, a boat just capable of carrying the Captn, Dr
Solander, myself and 4 rowers was accordingly prepard. They sat on the
rocks expecting us but when we came within about a quarter of a mile they
ran away hastily into the countrey; they appeard to us as well as we could
judge at that distance exceedingly black. Near the place were four small
canoes which they left behind. The surf was too great to permit us with a
single boat and that so small to attempt to land, so we were obligd to
content ourselves with gazing from the boat at the productions of nature
which we so much wishd to enjoy a nearer acquaintance with. The trees
were not very large and stood seperate from each other without the least
underwood; among them we could discern many cabbage trees but nothing
else which we could call by any name. In the course of the night many fires
were seen.


1770 April 28.

The land this morn appeard Cliffy and barren without wood. An opening
appearing like a harbour was seen and we stood directly in for it. A small
smoak arising from a very barren place directed our glasses that way and
we soon saw about 10 people, who on our approach left the fire and retird
to a little emminence where they could conveniently see the ship; soon
after this two Canoes carrying 2 men each landed on the beach under them,
the men hauld up their boats and went to their fellows upon the hill. Our
boat which had been sent ahead to sound now aproachd the place and they
all retird higher up on the hill; we saw however that at the beach or landing
place one man at least was hid among some rocks who never that we could
see left that place. Our boat proceeded along shore and the Indians followd
her at a distance. When she came back the officer who was in her told me
that in a cove a little within the harbour they came down to the beach and
invited our people to land by many signs and word[s] which he did not at
all understand; all however were armd with long pikes and a wooden
weapon made something like a short scymetar. During this time a few of
the Indians who had not followd the boat remaind on the rocks opposite the
ship, threatning and menacing with their pikes and swords--two in
particular who were painted with white, their faces seemingly only dusted
over with it, their bodies painted with broad strokes drawn over their
breasts and backs resembling much a soldiers cross belts, and their legs and
thighs also with such like broad strokes drawn round them which imitated
broad garters or bracelets. Each of these held in his hand a wooden weapon
about 2½ feet long, in shape much resembling a scymeter; the blades of
these lookd whitish and some though[t] shining insomuch that they were
almost of opinion that they were made of some kind of metal, but myself
thought they were no more than wood smeard over with the same white
pigment with which they paint their bodies. These two seemd to talk
earnestly together, at times brandishing their crooked weapons at us as in
token of defiance. By noon we were within the mouth of the inlet which
appeard to be very good. Under the South head of it were four small
canoes; in each of these was one man who held in his hand a long pole
with which he struck fish, venturing with his little imbarkation almost into
the surf. These people seemd to be totaly engag'd in what they were about:
the ship passd within a quarter of a mile of them and yet they scarce lifted
their eyes from their employment; I was almost inclind to think that
attentive to their business and deafned by the noise of the surf they neither
saw nor heard her go past them. At 1 we came to an anchor abreast of a
small village consisting of about 6 or 8 houses. Soon after this an old
woman followd by three children came out of the wood; she carried several
peice[s] of stick and the children also had their little burthens; when she
came to the houses 3 more younger children came out of one of them to
meet her. She often lookd at the ship but expressd neither surprize nor
concern. Soon after this she lighted a fire and the four Canoes came in
from fishing; the people landed, hauld up their boats and began to dress
their dinner to all appearance totaly unmovd at us, tho we were within a
little more than ½ a mile of them. Of all these people we had seen so
distinctly through our glasses we had not been able to observe the least
signs of Cloathing: myself to the best of my judgement plainly discernd
that the woman did not copy our mother Eve even in the fig leaf.

After dinner the boats were mann'd and we set out from the ship
intending to land at the place where we saw these people, hoping that as
they regarded the ships coming in to the bay so little they would as little
regard our landing. We were in this however mistaken, for as soon as we
aproachd the rocks two of the men came down upon them, each armd with
a lance of about 10 feet long and a short stick which he seemd to handle as
if it was a machine to throw the lance. They calld to us very loud in a harsh
sounding Language of which neither us or Tupia understood a word,
shaking their lances and menacing, in all appearance resolvd to dispute our
landing to the utmost tho they were but two and we 30 or 40 at least. In this
manner we parleyd with them for about a quarter of an hour, they waving
to us to be gone, we again signing that we wanted water and that we meant
them no harm. They remaind resolute so a musquet was fird over them, the
Effect of which was that the Youngest of the two dropd a bundle of lances
on the rock at the instant in which he heard the report; he however snatchd
them up again and both renewd their threats and opposition. A Musquet
loaded with small shot was now fird at the Eldest of the two who was about
40 yards from the boat; it struck him on the legs but he minded it very little
so another was immediately fird at him; on this he ran up to the house
about 100 yards distant and soon returnd with a sheild. In the mean time
we had landed on the rock. He immediately threw a lance at us and the
young man another which fell among the thickest of us but hurt nobody; 2
more musquets with small shot were then fird at them on which the Eldest
threw one more lance and then ran away as did the other. We went up to
the houses, in one of which we found the children hid behind the sheild and
a peice of bark in one of the houses. We were conscious from the distance
the people had been from us when we fird that the shot could have done
them no material harm; we therefore resolvd to leave the children on the
spot without even opening their shelter. We therefore threw into the house
to them some beads, ribbands, cloths etc. as presents and went away. We
however thought it no improper measure to take away with us all the lances
which we could find about the houses, amounting in number to forty or
fifty. They were of various lenghs, from 15 to 6 feet in lengh; both those
which were thrown at us and all we found except one had 4 prongs headed
with very sharp fish bones, which were besmeard with a greenish colourd
gum that at first gave me some suspicions of Poison. The people were
blacker than any we have seen in the Voyage tho by no means negroes;
their beards were thick and bushy and they seemd to have a redundancy of
hair upon those parts of the body where it commonly grows; the hair of
their heads was bushy and thick but by no means wooley like that of a
Negro; they were of a common size, lean and seemd active and nimble;
their voices were coarse and strong. Upon examining the lances we had
taken from them we found that the very most of them had been usd in
striking fish, at least we concluded so from sea weed which was found
stuck in among the four prongs.--Having taken the resolution before
mentiond we returnd to the ship in order to get rid of our load of lances,
and having done that went to that place at the mouth of the harbour where
we had seen the people in the morn; here however we found nobody.--At
night many moving lights were seen in different parts of the bay such as
we had been usd to see at the Islands; from hence we supposd that the
people here strike fish in the same manner.


1770 April 29.

The fires (fishing fires as we supposd) were seen during the greatest part
of the night. In the morn we went ashore at the houses, but found not the
least good effect from our present yesterday: No signs of people were to be
seen; in the house in which the children were yesterday was left every
individual thing which we had thrown to them; Dr Solander and myself
went a little way into the woods and found many plants, but saw nothing
like people. At noon all hands came on board to dinner. The Indians, about
12 in number, as soon as they saw our boat put off Came down to the
houses. Close by these was our watering place at which stood our cask:
they lookd at them but did not touch them, their business was merely to
take away two of four boats which they had left at the houses; this they did,
and hauld the other two above high water mark, and then went away as
they came. In the Evening 15 of them armd came towards our waterers;
they sent two before the rest, our people did the same; they however did
not wait for a meeting but gently retird. Our boat was about this time
loaded so every body went off in her, and at the same time the Indians
went away. Myself with the Captn etc. were in a sandy cove on the
Northern side of the harbour, where we hauld the seine and caught many
very fine fish, more than all hands could Eat.


1770 April 30.

Before day break this morn the Indians were at the houses abreast of the
Ship: they were heard to shout much. At su[n]rise they were seen walking
away along the beach; we saw them go into the woods where they lighted
fires about a mile from us. Our people went ashore as usual, Dr Solander
and myself into the woods. The grass cutters were farthest from the body
of the people: towards them came 14 or 15 Indians having in their hands
sticks that shone (sayd the Sergeant of marines) like a musquet. The officer
on seeing them gatherd his people together: the hay cutters coming to the
main body appeard like a flight so the Indians pursued them, however but a
very short way, for they never came nearer than just to shout to each other,
maybe a furlong. At night they came again in the same manner and acted
over again the same half pursuit. Myself in the Even landed on a small
Island on the Northern side of the bay to search for shells; in going I saw
six Indians on the main who shouted to us but ran away into the woods
before the boat was within half a mile of them, although she did not even
go towards them.


1770 May 1.

The Captn Dr Solander, myself and some of the people, making in all 10
musquets, resolvd to make an excursion into the countrey. We accordingly
did so and walkd till we compleatly tird ourselves, which was in the
evening, seeing by the way only one Indian who ran from us as soon as he
saw us. The Soil wherever we saw it consisted of either swamps or light
sandy soil on which grew very few species of trees, one which was large
yeilding a gum much like sanguis draconis, but every place was coverd
with vast quantities of grass. We saw many Indian houses and places where
they had slept upon the grass without the least shelter; in these we left
beads ribbands etc. We saw one quadruped about the size of a Rabbit, My
Greyhound just got sight of him and instantly lamd himself against a stump
which lay conceald in the long grass; we saw also the dung of a large
animal that had fed on grass which much resembled that of a Stag; also the
footsteps of an animal clawd like a dog or wolf and as large as the latter;
and of a small animal whose feet were like those of a polecat or weesel.
The trees over our heads abounded very much with Loryquets and
Cocatoos of which we shot several; both these sorts flew in flocks of
several scores together.

Our second Leutenant went in a boat drudging: after he had done he
landed and sent the boat away, keeping with him a midshipman with
whoom he set out in order to walk to the Waterers. In his Way he was
overtaken by 22 Indians who followd him often within 20 yards, parleying
but never daring to attack him tho they were all armd with Lances. After
they had joind our people 3 or 4 more curious perhaps than prudent, went
again towards these Indians who remaind about ½ a mile from our
watering place. When they came pretty near them they pretended to be
afraid and ran from them; four of the Indians on this immediately threw
their lances which went beyond our people, and by their account were
thrown about 40 yards; on this they stoppd and began to collect the lances,
on which the Indians retird slowly. At this time the Captn Dr Solander and
myself came to the waterers; we went immediately towards the Indians;
they went fast away, the Captn Dr Solander and Tupia went towards them
and every one else stayd behind; this however did not stop the Indians who
walkd leasurely away till our people were tird of following them. The
accounts of every one who saw the Indians near today was exactly
Consonant with what had been obse[r]vd on the first day of our landing:
they were black but not negroes, hairy, naked etc. just as we had seen
them.


1770 May 2.

The morn was rainy and we who had got already so many plants were
well contented to find an excuse for staying on board to examine them a
little at least. In the afternoon however it cleard up and we returnd to our
old occupation of collecting, in which we had our usual good success.
Tupia who strayd from us in pursuit of Parrots, of which he shot several,
told us on his return that he had seen nine Indians who ran from him as
soon as they perceivd him.


1770 May 3.

Our collection of Plants was now grown so immensly large that it was
necessary that some extrordinary care should be taken of them least they
should spoil in the books. I therefore devoted this day to that business and
carried all the drying paper, near 200 Quires of which the larger part was
full, ashore and spreading them upon a sail in the sun kept them in this
manner exposd the whole day, often turning them and sometimes turning
the Quires in which were plants inside out. By this means they came on
board at night in very good condition. During the time this was doing 11
Canoes, in each of which was one Indian, came towards us. We soon saw
that the people in them were employd in striking fish; they came within
about ½ a mile of us intent on their own employments and not at all
regarding us. Opposite the place where they were several of our people
were shooting; one Indian may be prompted by curiosity landed, hauld up
his canoe and went towards them; he stayd about a quarter of an hour and
then launchd his boat and went off, probably that time had been spent in
watching behind trees to see what our people did. I could not find however
that he was seen by any body.--When the damp of the Even made it
necessary to send my Plants and books on board I made a small excursion
in order to shoot any thing I could meet with and found a large quantity of
Quails, much resembling our English ones, of which I might have killd as
many almost as I pleasd had I given my time up to it, but my business was
to kill variety and not too many individuals of any one species.--The
Captn and Dr Solander employd the day in going in the pinnace into
various parts of the harbour. They saw fires at several places and people
who all ran away at their approach with the greatest precipitation, leaving
behind the shell fish which they were cooking; of this our gentlemen took
the advantage, eating what they found and leaving beads ribbands etc. in
return. They found also several trees which bore fruit of the Jambosa kind,
much in colour and shape resembling cherries; of these they eat plentifully
and brought home also abundance, which we eat with much pleasure tho
they had little to recommend them but a light acid.


1770 May 4.

Myself in the woods botanizing as usual, now quite void of fear as our
neighbours have turnd out such rank cowards. One of our midshipmen
stragling by himself a long way from any one else met by accident with a
very old man and woman and some children: they were setting under a tree
and neither party saw the other till they were close together. They shewd
signs of fear but did not attempt to run away. He had nothing about him to
give to them but some Parrots which he had shot: these they refusd,
withdrawing themselves from his hand when he offerd them in token either
of extreme fear or disgust. The people were very old and grey headed, the
children young. The hair of the man was bushy about his head, his beard
long and rough, the womans was crop'd short round her head; they were
very dark colourd but not black nor was their hair wooley. He stayd
however with them but a very short time, for seing many canoes fishing at
a small distance he feard that the people in them might observe him and
come ashore to the assistance of the old people, who in all probability
belongd to them. 17 Canoes came fishing near our people in the same
manner as yesterday only stayd rather longer, emboldend a little I suppose
by having yesterday met with no kind of molestation. Myself in the
afternoon ashore on the NW side of the bay, where we went a good way
into the countrey which in this place is very sandy and resembles
something our Moors in England, as no trees grow upon it but every thing
is coverd with a thin brush of plants about as high as the knees. The hills
are low and rise one above another a long way into the countrey by a very
gradual ascent, appearing in every respect like those we were upon. While
we were employd in this walk the people hawld the Seine upon a sandy
beach and caught great plenty of small fish. On our return to the ship we
found also that our 2nd lieutenant who had gone out striking had met with
great success: he had observd that the large sting rays of which there are
abundance in the bay followd the flowing tide into very shallow water; he
therefore took the opportunity of flood and struck several in not more than
2 or 3 feet water; one that was larger than the rest weigh'd when his gutts
were taken out 239 pounds. Our surgeon, who had strayd a long way from
the people with one man in his company, in coming out of a thicket
observd 6 Indians standing about 50 yards from him; one of these gave a
signal by a word pronouncd loud, on which a lance was thrown out of the
wood at him which however came not very near him. The 6 Indians on
seeing that it had not taken effect ran away in an instant, but on turning
about towards the place from whence the lance came he saw a young lad,
who undoubtedly had thrown it, come down from a tree where he had been
Stationd probably for that purpose; he descended however and ran away so
quick that it was impossible even to atempt to pursue him.


1770 May 5.

As tomorrow was fixd for our sailing Dr Solander and myself were
employd the whole day in collecting specimens of as many things as we
possibly could to be examind at sea. The day was calm and the Mosquetos
of which we have always had some more than usualy troublesome. No
Indians were seen by any body during the whole day. The 2nd Lieutenant
went out striking and took several large Stingrays the biggest of which
weighd without his gutts 336 pounds.


1770 May 6.

Went to sea this morn with a fair breeze of wind. The land we saild past
during the whole forenoon appeard broken and likely for harbours; in the
afternoon again woody and very pleasant. We dind to day upon the stingray
and his tripe: the fish itself was not quite so good as a scate nor was it
much inferior, the tripe every body thought excellent. We had with it a dish
of the leaves of tetragonia cornuta boild, which eat as well as spinage or
very near it.


1770 May 7.

During last night a very large dew fell which wetted all our sails as
compleatly as if they had been dippd overboard; for several days past our
dews have been uncommonly large. Most part of the day was calm, at night
a foul wind.


1770 May 8.

Very light breezes and weather sultry all day. We had lost ground
yesterday so the land was what we had seen before; upon it however we
observd several fires upon it. At night a foul wind rose up much at the
same time and much in the same manner as yesterday.


1770 May 9.

Wind continued foul and we turnd to windward all day to no manner of
purpose.


1770 May 10.

Last night a very heavy squall came off from the land which according to
the seamens phrase made all sneer again; it pay'd however for the trouble it
gave by bringing a fair wind. In the morn the land appeard broken and
likely for harbours; its face was very various, some parts being well
wooded and others coverd with bare sand.


1770 May 11.

Fair wind continued. Land today trended rather more to the Northward
than it had lately done, look'd broken and likely for inlets. At Sunset three
remarkable hills were abreast the ship standing near the shore, of nearly
equal size and shape; behind them the countrey rose in gradual slopes
carrying a great shew of fertility.


1770 May 12.

Land much as yesterday, fertile but varying its appearance a good deal,
generaly however well clothd with good trees. This evening we finishd
Drawing the plants got in the last harbour, which had been kept fresh till
this time by means of tin chests and wet cloths. In 14 days just, one
draughtsman has made 94 sketch drawings, so quick a hand has he acquird
by use.


1770 May 13.

Wind off shore today, it let us however come in with the land. Many
porpoises were about the ship. At Noon several fires ashore, one very large
which I judgd to be at least a league inland. Innumerable shoals of fish
about the ship in the afternoon and some birds of the Nectris kind.


1770 May 14.

For these three nights last much lightning has been seen to the Eastward.
Early in the morn it was calm and some few fish were caught; after the
weather became squally. The wind however after some time settled at
South, the briskest breeze I think that the Endeavour has gone before
during the voyage. In the afternoon the land was rather more hilly than it
has been. Several fires were seen and one high up on a hill side 6 or 7
miles at least from the beach.


1770 May 15.

Wind continued fair, a brisk breeze. The land in the Morning was high
but before noon it became lower and was in general well wooded. Some
people were seen, about 20, each of which carried upon his back a large
bundle of something which we conjecturd to be palm leaves for covering
their houses; we observd them with glasses for near an hour during which
time they walkd upon the beach and then up a path over a gently sloping
hill, behind which we lost sight of them. Not one was once observd to stop
and look towards the ship; they pursued their way in all appearance intirely
unmovd by the neighbourhood of so remarkable an object as a ship must
necessarily be to people who have never seen one. The Thermometer was
at 60 which rather pinchd us. In the evening two small turtle were seen. At
sun set a remarkable peakd hill was in sight 5 or 6 Leagues of in the
countrey, which about it was well wooded and lookd beautifull as well as
fertile. We were fortunate enough just at this time to descry breakers ahead
laying in the very direction in which the ship saild; on this we went upon a
wind and after making a sufficient offing brought too, but it blowing rather
fresh and a great sea running made the night rather uncomfortable.


1770 May 16.

In the morn we were abreast of the hill and saw the breakers which we
last night escapd between us and the land. It still blew fresh; at noon we
were abreast of some very low land which lookd like an extensive plain in
which we supposd there to be a Lagoon, in the neighbourhood of which
were many fires.


1770 May 17.

Continued to blow tho not so fresh as yesterday. Land trended much to
the westward; about 10 we were abreast of a large bay the bottom of which
was out of sight. The sea in this place suddenly changd from its usual
transparency to a dirty clay colour, appearing much as if chargd with
freshes, from whence I was led to conclude that the bottom of the bay
might open into a large river. About it were many smoaks especialy on the
Northern side near some remarkable conical hills. At sun set the land made
in one bank over which nothing could be seen; it was very sandy and
carried with it no signs of fertility.


1770 May 18.

Land this morn very sandy. We could see through our glasses that the
sands which lay in great patches of many acres each were moveable: some
of them had been lately movd, for trees which stood up in the middle of
them were quite green, others of a longer standing had many stumps
sticking out of them which had been trees killd by the sand heaping about
their roots. Few fires were seen. Two water snakes swam by the ship; they
were in all respects like land snakes and beautifully spotted except that
they had broad flat tails which probably serve them instead of fins in
swimming. In the evening I went out in the small boat but saw few birds of
three sorts, Men of War birds (Pelecanus aquilus) Bobies (Pelicanus Sula)
and Nectris munda, of which last shot one, and took up 2 cuttle bones
differing from the European ones in nothing but the having a small sharp
peg or prickle at one end.


1770 May 19.

Countrey as sandy and barren as ever. Two snakes were seen, a man of
war bird, and a small Turtle. At sun set the land appeard in a low bank to
the sea over which nothing was seen, so that we imagind it was very
narrow and that some deep bay on the other side ran behind it.


1770 May 20.

At day break the land in sight terminated in a sandy cape behind which a
deep bay ran in, across which we could not see; our usual good fortune
now again assisted us, for we discoverd breakers which we had certainly
ran upon had the ship in the night saild 2 or 3 leagues farther than she did.
This shoal extended a long way out from the land for we ran along it till 2
O'Clock and then passed over the tail of it in seven fathom water; the Sea
was so clear that we could distinctly see the bottom and indeed when it was
12 and 14 fathom deep the colour of the sand might be seen from the mast
head at a large distance. While we were upon the shoal innumerable large
fish, Sharks, Dolphins etc. and one large Turtle were seen; A grampus of
the middle size Leapd with his whole body out of water several times
making a Splash and foam in the sea as if a mountain had fallen into it. At
sun set a few Bobies flew past towards the NW.


1770 May 21.

Land seen only from the mast head. Innumerable bobies for near 2 hours
before and after Sun rise flew by the ship comeing from NNW and flying
SSE, I suppose from some bird Island in that direction where they roosted
last night. At 9 new land was in sight the other side of the bay which we
left last night; as we aproachd it the depth of water gradualy decreasd to 9
fathom. At 4 in the evening the land appeard very low but coverd with fine
wood; on it were many very large Smoaks several of which were seen
before we could see the land itself. At night water still shoal, land low and
well wooded, fertile to appearance as any thing we have seen upon this
coast. At 8 came to an anchor till morn.


1770 May 22.

In the course of the night the tide rose very considerably. In the morn we
got under sail again. The land as last night fertile and well wooded; at noon
the land appeard much less fertile, near the beach it was sandy and we
plainly saw with our glasses that it was coverd with Palm nut trees,
Pandanus Tectorius which we had not seen since we left the Islands within
the tropicks. Along shore we saw 2 men walking along who took no kind
of notice of us. At night we were working into a bay in which seemd to be
good anchorage, where we came to an anchor resolvd to go ashore
tomorrow and examine a little the produce of the countrey.


1770 May 23.

Wind blew fresh off the land so cold that our cloaks were very necessary
in going ashore; as the ship lay a good way from the land we were some
time before we got there; when landed however the sun recoverd its
influence and made it sufficiently hot, in the afternoon almost intolerably
so. We landed near the mouth of a large lagoon which ran a good way into
the countrey and sent out a strong tide; here we found a great variety of
Plants, several however the same as those we ourselves had before seen in
the Islands between the tropicks and others known to be natives of the east
Indies, a sure mark that we were upon the point of leaving the Southern
temperate Zone and for the future we must expect to meet with plants etc. a
part of which at least have been before seen by Europaeans. The Soil in
general was very sandy and dry: tho it producd a large variety of Plants yet
it never was coverd with a thick verdure. Fresh water we saw none, but
several swamps and boggs of salt water; in these and upon the sides of the
lagoon grew many Mangrove trees in the branches of which were many
nests of Ants, one sort of which were quite green. These when the branches
were disturbd came out in large numbers and revengd themselves very
sufficiently upon their disturbers, biting sharper than any I have felt in
Europe. The Mangroves had also another trap which most of us fell into, a
small kind of Caterpiler, green and beset with many hairs: these sat upon
the leaves many together rangd by the side of each other like soldiers
drawn up, 20 or 30 perhaps upon one leaf; if these wrathfull militia were
touchd but ever so gently they did not fail to make the person offending
them sensible of their anger, every hair in them stinging much as nettles do
but with a more acute tho less lasting smart. Upon the sides of the hills
were many of the trees yeilding a gum like Sanguis draconis: they differd
however from those seen in the last harbour in having their leaves longer
and hanging down like those of the weeping willow, tho notwithstanding
that I beleive that they were of the same species. There was however much
less gum upon them; only one tree that I saw had any upon it, contrary to
all theory, which teaches that the hotter a climate is the more gums exsude.
The same observation however held good in the plant yeilding the Yellow
gum, of which tho we saw vast numbers we did not see any that shewd
signs of gum.

On the shoals and sand banks near the shore of the bay were many large
birds far larger than swans which we judg'd to be Pelicans, but they were
so shy that we could not get within gunshot of them. On the shore were
many birds, one species of Bustard, of which we shot a single bird as large
as a good Turkey. The sea seemd to abound in fish but unfortunately at the
first hawl we tore our seine to peices; on the mud banks under the
mangrove trees were innumerable Oysters, Hammer oysters and many
more sorts among which were a large proportion of small Pearl oysters.
Whither the sea in deeper water might abound with as great a proportion of
full grown ones we had not an opportunity to examine, but if it did a pearl
fishery here must turn out to immence advantage.

Those who stayd on board the ship saw about 20 of the natives, who
came down abreast of the ship and stood upon the beach for some time
looking at her, after which they went into the woods; we on shore saw
none. Many large fires were made at a distance from us where probably the
people were. One small one was in our neighbourhood, to this we went; it
was burning when we came to it, but the people were gone; near it was left
several vessels of bark which we conceivd were intended for water
buckets, several shells and fish bones, the remainder I suppose of their last
meal. Near the fires, for their were 6 or 7 small ones, were as many peices
of soft bark of about the lengh and breadth of a man: these we supposd to
be their beds: on the windward side of the fires was a small shade about a
foot high made of bark likewise. The whole was in a thicket of close trees,
defended by them from the wind; whether it was realy or not the place of
their abode we can only guess. We saw no signs of a house or any thing
like the ruins of an old one, and from the ground being much trod we
concluded that they had for some time remaind in that place.


1770 May 24.

At day break we went to sea. The weather was fine; we however were
too far from the land to distinguish any thing but that there were some fires
upon it tho not many. At Dinner we eat the Bustard we had shot yesterday,
it turnd out an excellent bird, far the best we all agreed that we have eat
since we left England, and as it weighd 15 pounds our Dinner was not only
good but plentyfull. In the evening it drop'd calm and we caught some fish
tho not many.


1770 May 25.

Land in the morn rocky, varied here and there with reddish sand, but
little wood was to be seen. In the evening it was calm, some few fish were
caught. At night perceiving the tide to run very strong we anchord. No fires
were seen the whole day.

We examind the orange juice and brandy which had been sent on board
as prepard by Dr Hulmes directions: See his letter p. [291]. It had never
been movd from the cag in which it came on board. About ½ of it had
been usd or leakd out; the remainder was coverd with a whitish mother but
otherwise was not at all damagd either to taste or sight when it came out of
the cag, but when put into a bottle in 3 or 4 days it became ropey and good
for nothing. On this we resolvd to have it evaperated immediately to a
strong essence and put up in Bottles immediately.


1770 May 26.

Standing into a channel with land on both sides of us and water very
shoal, many rocky Islets, the main land very rocky and barren; at 1 the
Water became so shallow that we came to an anchor. While the ships boats
were employd in sounding round about her myself in my small boat went a
shooting and killd several bobies and a kind of white bird calld by the
seamen Egg bird, Sterna....... Before I went out we tried in the cabbin to
fish with hook and line but the water was too shoal (3 fhm) for any fish.
This want was however in some degree [supplied] by Crabs of which vast
numbers were on the ground who readily took our baits, and sometimes
held them so fast with their claws that they sufferd themselves to be hawld
into the ship. They were of 2 sorts, Cancer pelagicus Linn. and another
much like the former but not so beautifull. The first was ornamented with
the finest ultramarine blew conceivable with which all his claws and every
Joint was deeply tingd; the under part of him was a lovely white, shining as
if glazd and perfectly resembling the white of old China; the other had a
little of the ultramarine on his Joints and toes and on his back 3 very
remarkable brown spots. 2 fires were seen upon an Island, and those who
went to sound in the boats saw people upon an Island also who calld to
them and seemd very desirous that they should land.--In examining a fig
which we had found at our last going ashore we found in the fruit of it a
Cynips, very like if not exactly the same species with the Cynips sycomori
Linn. describd by Haselquist in his Iter Palestinum; a strong proof of the
fact that figgs must be impregnated by means of insects, tho indeed that
fact wanted not any additional proofs.


1770 May 27.

The boats who sounded yesterday having brought back word that there
was no passage ahead of the Ship we were obligd to return, which we did
and soon fell in with the main land again which was barren to appearance;
on it were some smoaks. We passd by many Islands. In the Eve the breeze
was stronger than usual with Cloudy weather.


1770 May 28.

This morn at day break the water appeard much discolourd as if we had
Passd by some place where a river ran into the sea; the land itself was high
and abounded with hills. Soon after we came round a point into a bay in
which were a multitude of Islands. We stood into the middle of them, a
boat was sent a head to sound and made a signal for a shoal, on which the
ship came too but before the anchor went she had less than 3 fathm water;
the boats now sounded all round her and found that she was upon the
shoalest part, on which the anchor was got up and we stood on. Weather
was hazey; at night anchord.


1770 May 29.

Early this morn we got up our anchor and stood in for an opening in
which by nine O'Clock we came to an anchor. We saw in coming in no
signs of People. After breakfast we went ashore and found several Plants
which we had not before seen; among them were however still more East
Indian plants than in the last harbour. One kind of Grass which we had also
seen there was very troublesome to us: its sharp seeds were bearded
backwards and whenever they stuck into our cloths were by these beards
pushd forward till they got into the flesh: this grass was so plentifull that it
was hardly possible to avoid it and with the Musketos that were likewise
innumerable made walking almost intolerable. We were not however to be
repulsd but proceeded into the countrey. The gum trees were like those in
the last bay both in leaf and producing a very small proportion of Gum; on
the branches of them and other trees were large ants nests made of Clay as
big as a bushel, something like to those describd in Sr Hans Sloanes Hist of
Jamaica Voll. II, p. 221, t. 258, but not so smooth: the ants also were small
and had whitish abdomens. In another species of tree Xanthoxiloides mite,
a small sort of black ants had bord all the twigs and livd in quantities in the
hollow part where the pith should be, the tree nevertheless flourishing,
bearing leaves and flowers upon those very branches as freely and well as
upon others that were sound. Insects in general were plentifull, Butterflies
especialy: of one sort of these much like P. Similis Linn. the air was for the
space of 3 or 4 acres crowded with them to a wonderfull degree: the eye
could not be turnd in any direction without seeing milions and yet every
branch and twig was almost coverd with those that sat still: of these we
took as many as we chose, knocking them down with our caps or any thing
that came to hand. On the leaves of the gum tree we found a Pupa or
Chrysalis which shone almost all over as bright as if it had been silverd
over with the most burnishd silver and perfectly resembled silver; it was
brought on board and the next day came out into a butterfly of a velvet
black changeable to blue, his wings both upper and under markd near the
edges with many light brimstone colourd spots, those of his under wings
being indented deeply at each end. We saw no fresh water but several
swamps of salt overgrown with mangroves; in these we found some
species of shells, Among them the Trochus perspectivus Linn. Here was
also a very singular Phaenomenon in a small fish of [space] of which there were
great abundance. It was about the size of a minnow in England and had two
breast finns very strong. We often found him in places quite dry where
may be he had been left by the tide: upon seeing us he immediately fled
from us leaping as nimbly as a frog by the help of his breast finns: nor did
he seem to prefer water to land for if seen in the water he often leapd out
and proceeded upon dry land, and where the water was filld with small
stones standing above its surface would leap from stone to stone rather
than go into the water: in this manner I observd several pass over puddles
of water and proceed on the other side leaping as before. In the afternoon
we went ashore on the opposite side of the bay: the productions were much
like those on the side we were on in the morn, but if any thing the Soil was
rather better. In neither morning nor evening were there any traces of
inhabitants ever having been where we were, except that here and there
trees had been burnt down.


1770 May 30.

Went again ashore in the same place as yesterday. In attempting to
penetrate farther into the countrey it was necessary to pass a swamp coverd
with mangrove trees; this we attempted chearfully tho the mud under them
was midleg deep, yet before we had got half way over we heartily
[repented of] our undertaking: so entangled were the archd branches of
those trees that we were continualy stooping and often slipping off from
their slimey roots on which we steppd; we resolvd however not to retreat
and in about an hour accomplishd our walk of about ¼ of a mile. Beyond
this we found a place where had been 4 small fires; near them were fish
bones, shells etc. that had there been roasted, and grass layd together upon
which 4 or 5 people had slept as I guessd about a fortnight before. Several
of our people were ashore on liberty, one of these saw a small pool of
standing water which he judgd to contain about a ton. Our second
lieutenant saw also a little laying in the bottom of a gully near which were
the tracks of a large animal of the Deer or Guanicoe kind; he who has been
in Port Desire on the Coast of South America seemd to incline to think
them like the latter. Some Bustards were also seen but none of them shot;
Great Plenty however of the Beautifull Loriquets seen in the last but one
anchoring place were seen and killd. The 2nd Lieutenant and one more
man who were in very different places Declard that they heard the voices
of Indians near them, but neither saw the People. The countrey in general
appeard barren and very sandy; most of the trees were gum trees but they
seemd not inclind to Yeild their gum, I saw only one tree which did. It was
most destitute of fresh water, probably that was the reason why so few
inhabitants were seen: it seemd to be subject to a severe rainy season, so at
least we judgd by the deep gullys which we saw had been plainly washd
down from hills of a small hight.

Whether the sea was more fruitfull than the land We had not an
opportunity to try. It did not seem to promise much as we with our hooks
and lines could catch nothing, nor were there any quantity of Oysters upon
the shore. The tide rose very much, how high was not measurd, but I think
I may venture to guess not less at spring tides than 18 or twenty feet,
perhaps much more.

The Captn and Dr Solander went today to examine the bottom of the inlet
which appeard to go very far inland; they found it to increase in its width
the farther they went into it, and concluded from that and some other
circumstances that it was a channel which went through to the sea again.
They saw two men who followd the boat along shore a good way but the
tide running briskly in their favour they did not chuse to stop for them; at a
distance from them far up the inlet they saw a large smoak. At night they
returnd and having found neither fresh water nor any other refreshment it
was resolvd to leave this place tomorrow morn.


1770 May 31.

Went out this morn, the weather misty and rainy and fresh breeze. As we
had found by experience that many sands and shoals lay off the coast a
boat was sent ahead; at noon she made a signal for shoal water on which
we came to an anchor; the boats sounded and found a Passage on which we
proceeded and at night came to an anchor under the shelter of an Island in
the midst of Innumerable Islands, rocks and shoals.


1770 June 1.

In the night it raind and at times blew strong not much to our satisfaction
who were in a situation not very desirable, as if our anchor should come
home or cable break we had nothing to expect but going ashore on some
one or other of the shoals which lay round us. The night passd however
without the least accident, and at day light in the morn the anchor was got
up and we proceeded, in hopes of getting out of our Archipelago. By noon
we got in with the main land, which made hilly and barren; on it were
some smoaks. In the Evening the weather settled fine and we saild along
shore; at night came to an Anchor.

Tupia complaind this evening of swelld Gums; he had it seems had his
mouth sore for near a fortnight, but not knowing what cause it proceeded
from did not complain. The Surgeon immediately put him upon taking
extract of Lemons in all his drink.


1770 June 2.

Sailing along shore with fine weather, the countrey hilly and ill wooded.
Some Islands were still in sight ahead of us; at noon the irregularity of the
soundings made it necessary to send the boat ahead again. In the evening
the countrey was moderately hilly and seemd green and pleasant; one
smoak was seen upon it. At night we anchord, several large Islands being
without us.


1770 June 3.

At day break the anchor was weighd and we stood along shore till we
found ourselves in a bay off the outermost point of which were the Islands
seen yesterday; by 8 it was resolvd to stand out again through a passage
which was seen between them and the main which was accordingly done.
The countrey within the bay, especialy on the innermost side, was well
wooded, lookd fertile and pleasant. After dinner standing among Islands
which were very barren, rising high and steep from the sea; on one of these
we saw with our glasses 2 men a woman and a small canoe fitted with an
outrigger, which made us hope that the people were something improvd as
their boat was far preferable to the bark Canoes of Stingrays bay.


1770 June 4.

Hills in the morn were high and steep but they soon fell into very low
land to all appearance barren. The water began now to be discolourd and
an appearance of Islands was seen ahead which made us look out for more
sholes. At noon one smoak was seen behind some hills inland. At night we
passd pretty near a head land which appeard miserably rocky and barren.
Much seaweed with very fine leaves passd by the ship all day.


1770 June 5.

Land near the sea very low and flat behind which the hills rose: in the
countrey very little appearance of fertility however either on one or the
other: at noon one large fire was seen. Several Cuttle bones and 2 Sea
Snakes swam past the ship. In the Even the Thermometer was at 74 and the
air felt to us hotter than we have felt it on the coast before. Many Clouds of
a thin scum lay floating upon the water the same as we have before seen
off Rio de Janiero; some few flying fish also.


1770 June 6.

Land made in Barren rocky capes; one in particular which we were
abreast of in the morn appeard much like Cape Roxent; at noon 3 fires
upon it. Many Cuttle bones, Some sea weed and 2 or 3 Sea snakes were
seen. In the evening it fell quite calm and I went out in the small Boat and
shot nectris nugax but saw nothing remarkable on the water; the weather
most sultry hot in an open boat.


1770 June 7.

Sailing between the main and Islands the main rose steep from the Water
rocky and barren. Just about sun rise a shoal of fish about the size of and
much like flounders but perfectly white went by the ship. At noon the
Islands had mended their appearance and people were seen upon them; the
Main as barren as ever with several fires upon it, one vastly large. After
dinner an appearance very much like Cocoa nut trees tempted us to hoist
out a boat and go ashore, where we found our supposd Cocoanut trees to be
no more than bad Cabbage trees. The Countrey about them was very
stoney and barren and it was almost dark when we got ashsore; we made a
shift however to gather 14 or 15 new plants after which we repaird to our
boats, but scarce were they put off from the shore when an Indian came
very near it and shouted to us very loud; it was so dark that we could not
see him, we however turnd towards the shore by way of seeing what he
wanted with us, but he I suppose ran away or hid himself immediately for
we could not get a sight of him.


1770 June 8.

Still sailing between the Main and Islands; the former rocky and high
lookd rather less barren than usual and by the number of fires seemd to be
better peopled. In the morn we passd within ¼ of a mile of a small Islet or
rock on which we saw with our glasses about 30 men women and children
standing all together and looking attentively at us, the first people we have
seen shew any signs of curiosity at the sight of the ship.


1770 June 9.

Countrey much the same as it was, hills near the sea high, lookd at a
distance not unlike Mores or heaths in England but when you came nearer
them were coverd with small trees; some few flatts and valleys lookd
tolerably fertile. At noon a fire and some people were seen. After dinner
came to an Anchor and went ashore, but saw no people. The countrey was
hilly and very stony affording nothing but fresh water, at least that we
found, except a few Plants that we had not before met with. At night our
people caught a few small fish with their hooks and lines.


1770 June 10.

Just without us as we lay at an anchor was a small sandy Island laying
upon a large Coral shoal, much resembling the low Islands to the eastward
of us but the first of the kind we had met with in this part of the South Sea.
Early in the morn we weighd and saild as usual with a fine breeze along
shore, the Countrey hilly and stoney. At night fall rocks and sholes were
seen ahead, on which the ship was put upon a wind off shore. While we
were at supper she went over a bank of 7 or 8 fathom water which she
came upon very suddenly; this we concluded to be the tail of the Sholes we
had seen at sunset and therefore went to bed in perfect security, but scarce
were we warm in our beds when we were calld up with the alarming news
of the ship being fast ashore upon a rock, which she in a few moments
convincd us of by beating very violently against the rocks. Our situation
became now greatly alarming: we had stood off shore 3 hours and a half
with a plesant breeze so knew we could not be very near it: we were little
less than certain that we were upon sunken coral rocks, the most dreadfull
of all others on account of their sharp points and grinding quality which cut
through a ships bottom almost immediately. The officers however behavd
with inimitable coolness void of all hurry and confusion; a boat was got out
in which the master went and after sounding round the ship found that she
had ran over a rock and consequently had Shole water all round her. All
this time she continued to beat very much so that we could hardly keep our
legs upon the Quarter deck; by the light of the moon we could see her
sheathing boards etc. floating thick round her; about 12 her false keel came
away.


1770 June 11.

In the mean time all kind of Preparations were making for carrying out
anchors, but by reason of the time it took to hoist out boats etc. the tide
ebbd so much that we found it impossible to attempt to get her off till next
high water, if she would hold together so long; and we now found to add to
our misfortune that we had got ashore nearly at the top of high water and as
night tides generaly rise higher than day ones we had little hopes of getting
off even then. For our Comfort however the ship as the tide ebbd settled to
the rocks and did not beat near so much as she had done; a rock however
under her starboard bow kept grating her bottom making a noise very
plainly to be heard in the fore store rooms; this we doubted not would
make a hole in her bottom, we only hopd that it might not let in more water
than we could clear with our pumps.

In this situation day broke upon us and showd us the land about 8
Leagues off as we judgd; nearer than that was no Island or place on which
we could set foot. It however brought with it a decrease of wind and soon
after that a flat calm, the most fortunate circumstance that could Possibly
attend people in our circumstances. The tide we found had falln 2 feet and
still continued to fall; Anchors were however got out and laid ready for
heaving as soon as the tide should rise but to our great surprize we could
not observe it to rise in the least.

Orders were now given for lightning the ship which was began by
starting our water and pumping it up; the ballast was then got up and
thrown over board, as well as 6 of our guns (all that we had upon deck).
All this time the Seamen workd with surprizing chearfullness and alacrity;
no grumbling or growling was to be heard throughout the ship, no not even
an oath (tho the ship in general was as well furnishd with them as most in
his majesties service). About one the water was faln so low that the
Pinnace touchd ground as he lay under the ships bows ready to take in an
anchor, after this the tide began to rise and as it rose the ship workd
violently upon the rocks so that by 2 she began to make water and increasd
very fast. At night the tide almost floated her but she made water so fast
that three pumps hard workd could but just keep her clear and the 4th
absolutely refusd do deliver a drop of water. Now in my own opinion I
intirely gave up the ship and packing up what I thought I might save
prepard myself for the worst.

The most critical part of our distress now aproachd: the ship was almost
afloat and every thing ready to get her into deep water but she leakd so fast
that with all our pumps we could just keep her free: if (as was probable)
she should make more water when hauld off she must sink and we well
knew that our boats were not capable of carrying us all ashore, so that
some, probably the most of us, must be drownd: a better fate maybe than
those would have who should get ashore without arms to defend
themselves from the Indians or provide themselves with food, on a
countrey where we had not the least reason to hope for subsistance had
they even every convenence to take it as netts etc., so barren had we always
found it; and had they even met with good usage from the natives and food
to support them, debarrd from a hope of ever again seing their native
countrey or conversing with any but the most uncivilizd savages perhaps in
the world.

The dreadfull time now aproachd and the anziety in every bodys
countenance was visible enough: the Capstan and Windlace were mannd
and they began to heave: fear of Death now stard us in the face; hopes we
had none but of being able to keep the ship afloat till we could run her
ashore on some part of the main where out of her materials we might build
a vessel large enough to carry us to the East Indies. At 10 O'Clock she
floated and was in a few minutes hawld into deep water where to our great
satisfaction she made no more water than she had done, which was indeed
full as much as we could manage tho no one there was in the ship but who
willingly exerted his utmost strength.


1770 June 12.

The people who had been 24 hours at exceeding hard work now began to
flag; myself unusd to labour was much fatigued and had laid down to take
a little rest, was awakd about 12 with the alarming news of the ships
having gaind so much upon the Pumps that she had four feet water in her
hold: add to this that the wind blew of the land a regular land breeze so that
all hopes of running her ashore were totaly cut off. This however acted
upon every body like a charm: rest was no more thought of but the pumps
went with unwearied vigour till the water was all out which was done in a
much shorter time than was expected, and upon examination it was found
that she never had half so much water in her as was thought, the Carpenter
having made a mistake in sounding the pumps.

We now began again to have some hopes and to talk of getting the ship
into some harbour as we could spare hands from the pumps to get up our
anchors; one Bower however we cut away but got the other and three small
anchors far more valuable to us than the Bowers, as we were obligd
immediately to warp her to windward that we might take advantage of the
sea breeze to run in shore.

One of our midshipmen now proposd an expedient which no one else in
the ship had seen practisd, tho all had heard of it by the name of fothering a
ship, by the means of which he said he had come home from America in a
ship which made more water than we did; nay so sure was the master of
that ship of his expedient that he took her out of harbour knowing how
much water she made and trusting intirely to it. He was immediately set to
work with 4 or 5 assistants to prepare his fother which he did thus. He took
a lower studding sail and having mixd together a large quantity of Oakum
chopd fine and wool he stickd it down upon the sail as loosely as possible
in small bundles each about as big as his fist, these were rangd in rows 3 or
4 inches from each other: this was to be sunk under the ship and the theory
of it was this, where ever the leak was must be a great suction which would
probably catch hold of one or other of these lumps of Oakum and wool and
drawing it in either partly or intirely stop up the hole. While this work was
going on the water rather gaind on those who were pumping which made
all hands impatient for the tryal. In the afternoon the ship was got under
way with a gentle breeze of wind and stood in for the land; soon after the
fother was finishd and applyd by fastning ropes to each Corner, then
sinking the sail under the ship and with these ropes drawing it as far
backwards as we could; in about ½ an hour to our great surprize the ship
was pumpd dry and upon letting the pumps stand she was found to make
very little water, so much beyond our most sanguine Expectations had this
singular expedient succeeded. At night came to an anchor, the fother still
keeping her almost clear so that we were in an instant raisd from almost
despondency to the greatest hopes: we were now almost too sanguine
talking of nothing but getting her into some harbour where we might lay
her ashore and repair her, or if we could not find such a place we little
doubted to the East indies.

During the whole time of this distress I must say for the credit of our
people that I beleive every man exerted his utmost for the preservation of
the ship, contrary to what I have universaly heard to be the behavior of sea
men who have commonly as soon as a ship is in a desperate situation
began to plunder and refuse all command. This was no doubt owing
intirely to the cool and steady conduct of the officers, who during the
whole time never gave an order which did not shew them to be perfectly
composd and unmovd by the circumstances howsoever dreadfull they
might appear.


1770 June 13.

One Pump and that not half workd kept the ship clear all night. In the
morn we weighd with a fine breeze of wind and steerd along ashore among
innumerable shoals, the boats keeping ahead and examining every
appearance of a harbour which presented itself; nothing however was met
with which could possibly suit our situation, bad as it was, so at night we
came to an anchor. The Pinnace however which had gone far ahead was
not returnd, nor did she till nine O'Clock, when she reported that she had
found just the place we wanted, in which the tide rose sufficiently and
there was every natural convenience that could be wishd for either laying
the ship ashore or heaving her down. This was too much to be beleivd by
our most sanguine wishes: we however hopd that the place might do for us
if not so much as we had been told yet something to better our situation, as
yet but precarious, having nothing but a lock of Wool between us and
destruction.


1770 June 14.

Very fresh Sea breeze. A boat was sent ahead to shew us the way into the
harbour, but by some mistake of signals we were obligd to come to an
anchor again of the mouth of it without going in, where it soon blew too
fresh for us to Weigh. We now began to consider our good fortune; had it
blown as fresh the day before yesterday or before that we could never have
got off but must inevitably have been dashd to peices on the rocks. The
Captn and myself went ashore to view the Harbour and found it indeed
beyond our most sanguine wishes: it was the mouth of a river the entrance
of which was to be sure narrow enough and shallow, but when once in the
ship might be moord afloat so near the shore that by a stage from her to it
all her Cargo might be got out and in again in a very short time; in this
same place she might be hove down with all ease, but the beach gave signs
of the tides rising in the springs 6 or 7 feet which was more than enough to
do our business without that trouble. The meeting with so many natural
advantages in a harbour so near us at the very time of our misfortune
appeard almost providential; we had not in the voyage before seen a place
so well suited for our purpose as this was, and certainly had no right to
expect the tides to rise so high here that did not rise half so much at the
place where we struck, only 8 Leagues from this place; we therefore
returnd on board in high spirits and raisd the spirits of our freinds on board
as much as our own by bringing them the welcome news of aproaching
security. It blew however too fresh to night for us to attempt to weigh the
anchor, I even think as fresh as it has ever done since we have been upon
the Coast.


1770 June 15.

Blew all day as fresh as it did yesterday. We thought much of our good
fortune in having fair weather upon the rocks when upon the Brink of such
a gale. Our people were now however pretty well recoverd from their
fatigues having had plenty of rest, as the ship since she was Fotherd has not
made more water than one pump half workd will keep clear. At night we
observd a fire ashore near where we were to lay, which made us hope that
the necessary lengh of our stay would give us an oportunity of being
acquainted with the Indians who made it.


1770 June 16.

In the morn it was a little more moderate and we attempted to weigh but
were soon obligd to vere away all that we had got, the wind freshning upon
us so much. Fires were made upon the hills and we saw 4 Indians through
our glasses who went away along shore, in going along which they made
two more fires for what purpose we could not guess. Tupia whose bad
gums were very soon followd by livid spots on his legs and every symptom
of inveterate scurvy, notwithstanding acid, bark and every medecine our
Surgeon could give him, became now extreemly ill; Mr Green the
astronomer was also in a very poor way, which made everybody in the
Cabbin very desirous of getting ashore and impatient at our tedious delays.


1770 June 17.

Weather a little less rough than it was. Weighd and brought the ship in
but in doing it ran her twice ashore by the narrowness of the channel; the
second time she remaind till the tide lifted her off. In the meantime Dr
Solander and myself began our Plant gathering. In the Evening the ship
was moord within 20 feet of the shore afloat and before night much lumber
was got out of her.


1770 June 18.

A stage was built from the ship which much facilitated our undertakings.
Myself walking in the countrey saw old Frames of Indian houses and
places where they had dressd shellfish in the same manner as the Islanders,
but no signs that they had been at the place for 6 months at least. The
countrey in general was sandy between the hills and barren made walking
very easy; Musquetos there were some and but few, a peice of good
fortune in a place where we were likely to remain some time. Tupia who
had employd himself since we were here in angling and had livd intirely on
what he caught was surprizingly recoverd. Poor Mr Green still very ill.
Weather blowing hard with showers; had we not got in yesterday we
certainly could not today.


1770 June 19.

Went over the Water today to spy the land which there was sand hills. On
them I saw some Indian houses which seem'd to have been inhabited since
those on this side, tho not very lately. There were vast flocks of Pigeons
and crows; of the former which were very beautifull we shot several; the
latter exactly like those in England were so shy that we could not come
near them by any means. The Inlet or river in which we lay ran very far
into the countrey, keeping its course over flat land overgrown with
Mangroves; the countrey inland was however sufficiently hilly. Evening
hard rain.


1770 June 20.

Weather cleard up so we began to gather and Dry plants of which we had
hopes of as many as we could muster during our stay. Observd that in
many parts of the inlet were large quantities of Pumice stones which lay a
good way above the high water mark, Probably carried there by freshes or
extrordinary high tides as they certainly came from the Sea. Before night
the ship was lightned and we observd with great pleasure that the springs
which were now beginning to lift rose as high as we could wish.


1770 June 21.

Fine clear weather: began today to lay Plants in sand. By night the ship
was quite clear and in the nights tide (which we had constantly observd to
be much higher than the days) we hauld her ashore.


1770 June 22.

In the morn I saw her leak which was very large: in the middle was a
hole large enough to have sunk a ship with twice our pumps but here
providence had most visibly workd in our favour, for it was in great
measure pluggd up by a stone which was as big as a mans fist: round the
Edges of this stone had all the water come in which had so near overcome
us, and here we found the wool and oakum or fothering which had releivd
us in so unexpected a manner. The effects of the Coral rock upon her
bottom is dificult to describe but more to beleive; it had cut through her
plank and deep into one of her timbers, smoothing the gashes still before it
so that the whole might easily be imagind to be cut with an axe. Myself
employd all day in laying in Plants. The People who were sent to the other
side of the water in order to shoot Pigeons saw an animal as large as a grey
hound, of a mouse coulour and very swift; they also saw many Indian
houses and a brook of fresh water.


1770 June 23.

The people who went over the River saw the animal again and describd
him much in the same manner as yesterday.


1770 June 24.

Gathering plants and hearing descriptions of the animal which is now
seen by every body. A seaman who had been out in the woods brought
home the description of an animal he had seen composd in so Seamanlike a
stile that I cannot help mentioning it: it was (says he) about as large and
much like a one gallon cagg, as black as the Devil and had 2 horns on its
head, it went but Slowly but I dard not touch it.


1770 June 25.

In gathering plants today I myself had the good fortune to see the beast
so much talkd of, tho but imperfectly; he was not only like a grey hound in
size and running but had a long tail, as long as any grey hounds; what to
liken him to I could not tell, nothing certainly that I have seen at all
resembles him.


1770 June 26.

Since the ship has been hauld ashore the water that has come into her has
of course all gone backwards and my plants which were for safety stowd in
the bread room were this day found under water; nobody had warnd me of
this danger which had never once enterd into my head; the mischeif was
however now done so I set to work to remedy it to the best of my power.
The day was scarce long enough to get them all shifted etc.: many were
savd but some intirely lost and spoild.


1770 June 27.

Some of the Gentlemen who had been out in the woods Yesterday
brought home the leaves of a plant which I took to be Arum Esculentum,
the same I beleive as is calld Coccos in the West Indies. In consequence of
this I went to the place and found plenty; on tryal however the roots were
found to be too acrid to be eat, the leaves however when boild were little
inferior to spinage. In the same place grew plenty of Cabbage trees a kind
of Wild Plantain whose fruit was so full of stones that it was scarce eatable,
another fruit about as large as a small golden pippin but flatter, of a deep
purple colour; these when gatherd off from the tree were very hard and
disagreable but after being kept a few days became soft and tasted much
like indiferent Damsons.


1770 June 28.

Tupia by Roasting his Coccos very much in his Oven made them lose
intirely their acridity; the Roots were so small that we did not think them at
all an object for the ship so resolvd to content ourselves with the greens
which are calld in the West Indies Indian Kale. I went with the seamen to
shew them the Place and they Gatherd a large quantity. Saw one tree and
only one notchd in the same manner as those at Botany bay. We have ever
since we have been here observd the nests of a kind of Ants much like the
White ants in the East indies but to us perfectly harmless; they were always
pyramidical, from a few inches to 6 feet in hight and very much resembled
stones which I have seen in English Druidical monuments. Today we met
with a large number of them of all sizes rangd in a small open place which
had a very pretty effect; Dr Solander compard them to the Rune Stones on
the Plains of Upsal in Sweden, myself to all the smaller Druidical
monuments I had seen.


1770 June 29.

One of our Midshipmen an American who was out a shooting today saw
a Wolf, perfectly he sayd like those he had seen in America; he shot at it
but did not kill it. The Seine was hauld today for the first time and 150 lb
of Fish caught in it.


1770 June 30.

The second lieutenant saw 2 animals like dogs but smaller, they ran like
hares and were of a straw colour. Sein caught 213 lb of Fish.


1770 July 1.

Being Sunday all hands were ashore on liberty, many animals were seen
by them. The Indians had a fire about a league off up the river. O[u]r
second Lieutenant found the husk of a Cocoa nut full of Barnacles cast up
on the Beach; probably it had come from some Island to windward, From
Terra del Espirito Santo possibly as we are now in its latitude.
The ship was now finishd and tomorrow being the highest spring tide it
was intended to haul her off, so we began to think how we should get out
of this place, where so lately to get only in was our utmost ambition. We
had observ'd in coming in innumerable shoals and sands all round us so we
went upon a high hill to see what passage to the sea might be open. When
we came there the Prospect was indeed melancholy: the sea every where
full of innumerable shoals, some above and some under water, and no
prospect of any streight passage out. To return as we came was impossible,
the trade wind blew directly in our teeth; most dangerous then our
navigation must be among unknown dangers. How soon might we again be
reducd to the misfortune we had so lately escapd! Escapd indeed we had
not till we were again in an open sea.


1770 July 2.

A great dew, which is the first we have had, and a Land breeze in the
morn the first likewise. The Wild Plantain trees, tho their fruit does not
serve for food, are to us a most material benefit; we made Baskets of their
stalks (a thing we learnd of the Islanders) in which our plants which would
not otherwise keep home remain fresh for 2 or 3 days; indeed in a hot
climate it is hardly Practicable to go on without such baskets which we call
by the Island name of Papa Mya. Our Plants dry better in Paper Books than
in Sand, with this precaution, that one person is intirely employd in
attending them who shifts them all once a day, exposes the Quires in which
they are to the greatest heat of the sun and at night covers them most
carefully up from any damps, always carefull not to bring them out too
soon in a morning or leave them out too late in the evening. Tide rose not
so high as was expected so the ship would not come off.


1770 July 3.

The Pinnace which had been sent out yesterday in search of a Passage
returnd today, having found a way by which she past most of the shoals
that we could see but not all. This Passage was also to windward of us so
that we could only hope to get there by the assistance of a land breeze, of
which we have had but one since we lay in the Place, so this discovery
added little comfort to our situation. He had in his return landed on a dry
reef where he found vast plenty of shell fish so that the Boat was
compleatly loaded, cheifly with a large kind of Cockles (Chama Gigas)
One of which was more than 2 men could eat. Many indeed were larger;
the Cockswain of the Boat a little man declard that he saw on the reef a
dead shell of one so large that he got into it and it fairly held him. At night
the ship floated and was hauld off; an Allegator was seen swimming along
side of her for some time. As I was crossing the harbour in my small boat
we saw many sholes of Gar fish leaping high out of the water, some of
which leap'd into the boat and were taken.


1770 July 4.

The ship has been a good deal straind by laying so long as she has done
with her head aground and her stern afloat; so much so that she has sprung
a plank between decks abreast the main chains. At night however she was
laid ashore again in order if possible to examine if she had got any damage
near that place.


1770 July 5.

Went to the other side of the harbour and walkd along a sandy beach
open to the trade wind. Here I found innumerable fruits, many of Plants I
had not seen in this countrey; among them were some Cocoa nuts that had
been open'd (as Tupia told us) by a kind of Crab, calld by the Dutch Beurs
Krabbe (Cancer Latro) that feeds upon them. All these fruits were
incrusted with sea productions and many of them Coverd with Barnacles, a
sure sign that they have come far by sea, and as the trade wind blows
almost right on shore they must have come from some other countrey--
probably that discoverd by Quiros and calld Terra del Esprito Santo as the
Latitudes according to his own account agree pretty well.

Tupia who parted from us and walkd away a shooting, on his return told
us that he had seen 2 people who were digging in the ground for some kind
of roots; on seeing him they ran away with great precipitation.


1770 July 6.

Set out today with the second lieutenant resolvd to Go a good way up the
river and see if the countrey inland differd from that near the shore. We
went for about 3 leagues among Mangroves, then we got into the countrey
which differd very little from what we had seen. From hence we proceeded
up the river which contracted itself much and lost most of its mangroves;
the Banks were steep and coverd with trees of a Beautifull verdure
particularly what is calld in the West Indies Mohoe or Bark tree (Hibiscus
tiliaceus); the land within was generaly low, coverd thick with long grass,
and seemd to promise great fertility were these people to plant and improve
it. In the course of the Day Tupia saw a Wolf, so at least I guess by his
description, and we saw 3 of the animals of the countrey but could not get
one; also a kind of Batts as large as a Partridge but these also we were not
lucky enough to get. At night we took up our lodgins close to the banks of
the river and made a fire, but the Musquetos, whose peacefull dominions it
seems we had invaded, spard no pains to molest [us] as much as was in
their Power: they followd us into the very smoak, nay almost into the fire,
which hot as the Climate was we could better bear the heat of than their
intolerable stings.

Between the hardness of our beds, the heat of the fire and the stings of
these indefatigable insects the night was not spent so agreably but that day
was earnestly wishd for by all of us; at last


1770 July 7.

it came and with its first dawn we set out in search of Game. We walkd
many miles over the flats and saw 4 of the animals, 2 of which my
greyhound fairly chas'd, but they beat him owing to the lengh and thickness
of the grass which prevented him from running while they at every bound
leapd over the tops of it. We observd much to our surprize that instead of
Going upon all fours this animal went only upon two legs, making vast
bounds just as the Jerbua (Mus Jaculus) does. We returnd about noon and
pursued our course up the river, which soon contracted itself into a fresh
water brook where however the tide rose pretty considerably; towards
evening it was so shallow being almost low water that we were obligd to
get out of the boat and drag her, so finding a convenient place for sleeping
in we resolvd to go no farther. Before our things were got up out of the
boat we observd a smoak about a furlong from us: we did not doubt at all
that the natives, who we had so long had a curiosity to see well, were there
so three of us went immediately towards it hoping that the smallness of our
numbers would induce them not to be afraid of us; when we came to the
place however they were gone, probably upon having discoverd us before
we saw them. The fire was in an old tree of touchwood; their houses were
there, and branches of trees broken down with which the Children had been
playing not yet wither'd; their footsteps also upon the sand below the high
tide mark provd that they had very lately been there; near their oven, in
which victuals had been dressd since morn, were shells of a kind of Clam
and roots of a wild Yam which had been cookd in it. Thus were we
disapointed of the only good chance we have had of seing the people since
we came here by their unacountable timidity, and Night soon coming on
we repaird to our quarters, which was upon a broad sand bank under the
shade of a Bush where we hopd the Musquetos would not trouble us. Our
beds of plantain leaves spread on the sand as soft as a mattrass, our Cloaks
for bedcloths and grass pillows, but above all the intire absence of
Musquetos made me and I beleive all of us sleep almost without
intermission; had the Indians came they would certainly have caught us all
Napping but that was the least in our thoughts.

The land about this place was not so fertile as lower down, the hills rose
almost immediately from the river and were barren, stony and sandey
much like those near the ship. The river near us abounded much in fish
who at sun set leapd about in the water much as trouts do in Europe but we
had no kind of tackle to take them with.


1770 July 8.

At day light in the Morn the tide serving we set out for the ship. In our
passage down met several flocks of Whistling Ducks of which we shot
some; we saw also an Allegator of about 7 feet long come out of the
Mangroves and crawl into the Water. By 4 O'Clock we arrivd at the ship
where we heard that the Indians had been near them but not come to them;
Yesterday they had made a fire about a mile and a half of and this morn 2
had appeard on the beach opposite to the ship. At night the Pinnace which
had been sent in search of a Passage to leward returnd, she had been
unsuccessfull in her main errand. Shoals innumerable she had met with,
upon one of them was lucky enough to see a turtle which was pursued and
many more were seen, so many that three were taken with only the Boat
hook. The promise of such plenty of good provisions made our situation
appear much less dreadfull; were we obligd to Wait here for another season
of the year when the winds might alter we could do it without fear of
wanting Provisions: this thought alone put every body in vast spirits.


1770 July 9.

Myself went turtling in hopes to have loaded our long boat, but by a most
unacountable conduct of the officer not one turtle was taken. I however
went ashore upon the reef, saw the large Cockles and gatherd many shells
and sea productions. At night returnd with my small boat leaving the large
one upon the reef who I was sure would catch no turtle.


1770 July 10.

Four Indians appeard on the opposite shore; they had with them a Canoe
made of wood with an outrigger in which two of them embarkd and came
towards the ship but stop'd at the distance of a long Musquet shot, talking
much and very loud to us. We hollowd to them and waving made them all
the signs we could to come nearer; by degrees they venturd almost
insensibly nearer and nearer till they were quite along side, often holding
up their Lances as if to shew us that if we usd them ill they had weapons
and would return our attack. Cloth, Nails, Paper, etc. etc. was given to them
all which they took and put into the canoe without shewing the least signs
of satisfaction: at last a small fish was by accident thrown to them on
which they expressd the greatest joy imaginable, and instantly putting off
from the ship made signs that they would bring over their comrades, which
they very soon did and all four landed near us, each carrying in his hand 2
Lances and his stick to throw them with. Tupia went towards [them]; they
stood all in a row in the attitude of throwing their Lances; he made signs
that they should lay them down and come forward without them; this they
immediately did and sat down with him upon the ground. We then came up
to them and made them presents of Beads, Cloth etc. which they took and
soon became very easy, only Jealous if any one attempted to go between
them and their arms. At dinner time we made signs to them to come with
us and eat but they refusd; we left them and they going into their Canoe
padled back to where they came from.


1770 July 11.

Indians came over again today, 2 that were with us yesterday and two
new ones who our old acquaintance introduc'd to us by their names, one of
which was Yaparico. Tho we did not yesterday Observe it they all had the
Septum or inner part of the nose bord through with a very large hole, in
which one of them had stuck the bone of a bird as thick as a mans finger
and 5 or 6 inches long, an ornament no doubt tho to us it appeard rather an
uncouth one. They brought with them a fish which they gave to us in return
I suppose for the fish we had given them yesterday. Their stay was but
short for some of our gentlemen being rather too curious in examining their
canoe they went directly to it and pushing it off went away without saying
a word. At night the boat which had been sent to the reef for turtle came
home and brought 3.


1770 July 12.

Indians came again today and venturd down to Tupias Tent, where they
were so well pleasd with their reception that three staid while the fourth
went with the Canoe to fetch two new ones; they introduc'd their strangers
(which they always made a point of doing) by name and had some fish
given them. They receivd it with indifference, signd to our people to cook
it for them, which was done, and they eat part and gave the rest to my
Bitch. They staid the most part of the morning but never venturd to go
above 20 yards from their canoe. The ribbands by which we had tied
medals round their necks the first day we saw them were coverd with
smoak; I suppose they lay much in the smoak to keep off the Musquetos.
They are a very small people or at least this tribe consisted of very small
people, in general about 5 feet 6 in hight and very slender; one we measurd
5 feet 2 and another 5 feet 9, but he was far taller than any of his fellows; I
do not know by what deception we were to a man of opinion, when we saw
them run on the sand about ¼ of a mile from us, that they were taller and
larger than we were. Their colour was nearest to that of chocolate, not that
their skins were so dark but the smoak and dirt with which they were all
casd over, which I suppose servd them instead of Cloths, made them of that
colour. Their hair was strait in some and curld in others; they always wore
it croppd close round their heads; it was of the same consistence with our
hair, by no means wooly or curld like that of Negroes. Their eyes were in
many lively and their teeth even and good; of them they had compleat
setts, by no means wanting two of their fore teeth as Dampiers New
Hollanders did. They were all of them clean limn'd, active and nimble.

Cloaths they had none, not the least rag, those parts which nature willingly
conceals being exposd to view compleatly uncoverd; yet when they stood
still they would often or almost allways with their hand or something they
held in it hide them in some measure at least, seemingly doing that as if by
instinct. They Painted themselves with white and red, the first in lines and
barrs on different Parts of their bodies, the other in large patches. Their
ornaments were few: necklaces prettyly enough made of shells, bracelets
wore round the upper part of their arms, consisting of strings lapd round
with other strings as what we Call gymp in England, a string no thicker
than a packthread tied round their bodies which was sometimes made of
human hair, a peice of Bark tied over their forehead, and the preposterous
bone in their noses which I have before mentiond were all that we observd.
One had indeed one of his Ears bord, the hole being big enough to put a
thumb through, but this was peculiar to that one man and him I never saw
wear in it any ornament. Their language was totaly different from that of
the Islanders; it sounded more like English in its degree of harshness tho it
could not be calld harsh neither. They almost continualy made use of the
Chircau, which we conceivd to be a term of Admiration as they still usd it
when ever they saw any thing new; also Cherr, tut tut tut tut tut, which
probably have the same signification. Their Canoe was not above 10 feet
long and very narrow built, with an outrigger fitted much like those at the
Islands only far inferior; they in shallow waters set her on with poles, in
deep paddled her with paddles about 4 feet long; she just carried 4 people
so that the 6 who visited us today were obligd to make 2 embarkations.
Their Lances were much like those we had seen in Botany bay, only they
were all of them single pointed, and some pointed with the stings of stingrays
and bearded with two or three beards of the same, which made them
indeed a terrible weapon; the board or stick with which they flung them
was also made in a neater manner.

After having staid with us the greatest part of the morning they went
away as they came. While they staid 2 more and a young woman made
their appearance upon the Beach; she was to the utmost that we could see
with our glasses as naked as the men.


1770 July 13.

Two Indians came in their Canoe to the ship, staid by her a very short
time and then went along shore striking fish. Our Boat returnd from the
reef with one turtle and one large Sting ray.


1770 July 14.

Our second lieutenant who was a shooting today had the good fortune to
kill the animal that had so long been the subject of our speculations. To
compare it to any European animal would be impossible as it has not the
least resemblance of any one I have seen. Its fore legs are extreemly short
and of no use to it in walking, its hind again as disproportionaly long; with
these it hops 7 or 8 feet at each hop in the same manner as the Gerbua, to
which animal indeed it bears much resemblance except in Size, this being
in weight 38 lb and the Gerbua no larger than a common rat.


1770 July 15.

The Beast which was killd yesterday was today Dressd for our dinners
and provd excellent meat. In the evening the Boat returnd from the reef
bringing 4 Turtles, so we may now be said to swim in Plenty. Our Turtles
are certainly far preferable to any I have eat in England, which must
proceed from their being eat fresh from the sea before they have either
wasted away their fat, or by unatural food which is given them in the tubs
where they are kept given themselves a fat of not so delicious a flavour as
it is in their wild state. Most of those we have caught have been green
turtle from 2 to 300 lb weight: these when killd were always found to be
full of Turtle Grass (a kind of Conferva I beleive); two only were
Loggerheads which were but indifferent meat; in their stomachs were
nothing but shells.


1770 July 16.

As the ship was now nearly ready for her departure Dr Solander and
myself employd ourselves in winding up our Botanical Bottoms,
examining what we wanted, and making up our complement of specimens
of as many species as possible. The Boat brought 3 Turtle again today, one
of which was a male which was easily to be distinguishd from the female
by the vast size of his tail, which was four times longer and thicker than
hers; in every other respect they were exactly alike. One of our people on
board the ship who has been a Turtler in the West Indies told me that they
never sent male Turtle home to England from thence because they wasted
in keeping much more than the females, which we found to be true.


1770 July 17.

Tupia who was over the water by himself saw 3 Indians, who gave him a
kind of longish roots about as thick as a mans finger and of a very good
taste. On his return the Captn Dr Solander and myself went over in hopes
to see them and renew our connections; we met with four in a canoe who
soon after came ashore and came to us without any signs of fear. After
receiving the beads etc. that we had given them they went away; we
attempted to follow them hoping that they would lead us to their fellows
where we might have an opportunity of seeing their Women; they however
by signs made us understand that they did not desire our company.


1770 July 18.

Indians were over with us today and seemd to have lost all fear of us and
became quite familiar; one of them at our desire threw his Lance which
was about 8 feet in Lengh--it flew with a degree of swiftness and
steadyness that realy surprizd me, never being above 4 feet from the
ground and stuck deep in at the distance of 50 paces. After this they
venturd on board the ship and soon became our very good freinds, so the
Captn and me left them to the care of those who staid on board and went to
a high hill about Six miles from the ship; here we overlookd a great deal of
sea to Leward, which afforded a melancholy prospect of the dificulties we
were to encounter when we came out of our present harbour: in which ever
direction we turnd our eyes shoals innumerable were to be seen and no
such thing as any passage to sea but through the winding channels between
them, dangerous to the last degree.


1770 July 19.

Ten Indians visited us today and brought with them a larger quantity of
Lances than they had ever done before, these they laid up in a tree leaving
a man and a boy to take care of them and came on board the ship. They
soon let us know their errand which was by some means or other to get one
of our Turtle of which we had 8 or 9 laying upon the decks. They first by
signs askd for One and on being refusd shewd great marks of Resentment;
one who had askd me on my refusal stamping with his foot pushd me from
him with a countenance full of disdain and applyd to some one else; as
however they met with no encouragement in this they laid hold of a turtle
and hauld him forwards towards the side of the ship where their canoe lay.
It however was soon taken from them and replacd. They nevertheless
repeated the expiriment 2 or 3 times and after meeting with so many
repulses all in an instant leapd into their Canoe and went ashore where I
had got before them Just ready to set out plant gathering; they seizd their
arms in an instant, and taking fire from under a pitch kettle which was
boiling they began to set fire to the grass to windward of the few things we
had left ashore with surprizing dexterity and quickness; the grass which
was 4 or 5 feet high and as dry as stubble burnt with vast fury. A Tent of
mine which had been put up for Tupia when he was sick was the only thing
of any consequence in the way of it so I leapd into a boat to fetch some
people from the ship in order to save it, and quickly returning hauld it
down to the beach Just time enough. The Captn in the meantime followd
the Indians to prevent their burning our Linnen and the Seine which lay on
the grass just where they were gone. He had no musquet with him so soon
returnd to fetch one for no threats or signs would make them desist. Mine
was ashore and another loaded with shot, so we ran as fast as possible
towards them and came just time enough to save the Seine by firing at an
Indian who had already fird the grass in two places just to windward of it;
on the shot striking him, tho he was full 40 yards from the Captn who fird,
he dropd his fire and ran nimbly to his comrades who all ran off pretty fast.
The Captn then loaded his musquet with a ball and fird it into the
Mangroves abreast of where they ran to shew them that they were not yet
out of our reach, they ran on quickning their pace on hearing the Ball and
we soon lost sight of them; we then returnd to the Seine where the people
who were ashore had got the fire under. We now thought we were free'd
from these troublesome people but we soon heard their voices returning on
which, anxious for some people who were washing that way, we ran
towards them; on seeing us come with our musquets they again retird
leasurely after an old man had venturd quite to us and said something
which we could not understand. We followd for near a mile, then meeting
with some rocks from whence we might observe their motions we sat down
and they did so too about 100 yards from us. The little old man now came
forward to us carrying in his hand a lance without a point. He halted
several times and as he stood employd himself in collecting the moisture
from under his arm pit with his finger which he every time drew through
his mouth. We beckond to him to come: he then spoke to the others who all
laid their lances against a tree and leaving them came forwards likewise
and soon came quite to us. They had with them it seems 3 strangers who
wanted to see the ship but the man who was shot at and the boy were gone,
so our troop now consisted of 11. The Strangers were presented to us by
name and we gave them such trinkets as we had about us; then we all
proceeded towards the ship, they making signs as they came along that
they would not set fire to the grass again and we distributing musquet balls
among them and by our signs explaining their effect. When they came
abreast of the ship they sat down but could not be prevaild upon to come
on board, so after a little time we left them to their contemplations; they
stayd about two hours and then departed.

We had great reason to thank our good Fortune that this accident
happned so late in our stay, not a week before this our powder which was
put ashore when first we came in had been taken on board, and that very
morning only the store tent and that in which the sick had livd were got on
board. I had little Idea of the fury with which the grass burnt in this hot
climate, nor of the dificulty of extinguishing it when once lighted: this
accident will however be a sufficient warning for us if ever we should
again pitch tents in such a climate to burn Every thing round us before we
begin.


1770 July 20.

Yesterday evening the ship was hauld off from the shore ready for her
departure. In the night by some unlucky accident she taild ashore during
the Ebb, and as the tide settled brought such a strain upon her rudder as
alarmd us all greatly; the Tiller which was in the most danger beat hard
under some strong sheep pens which had been built in a Platform over it;
as the tide settled still more it came to the Point whether the tiller or
Platform would Break, for one must, which the Platform fortunately did
and made us at once easy. No Indians came near us but all the hills about
us for many miles were on fire and at night made the most beautifull
appearance imaginable. The Pinnace returnd which had been sent to
Leeward in search of a Passage: the officer in her had met with nothing but
shoals and not the least likelihood of a Passage that way, no very
comfortable situation. Our ship it is true was now repaird: Leaky she was
from the strains she had got but the water she made was trifling. We were
ready to sail with the first fair wind but where to go?--to windward was
impossible, to leward was a Labyrinth of Shoals, so that how soon we
might have the ship to repair again or lose her quite no one could tell.
Encounter the dificulty however we must and since our Bargain was a bad
one make the Best of it. At night the Yawl returnd with one turtle in her: it
had blown so much since she had been out that she with dificulty took even
that, for as all our turtle had been taken by chasing moderate weather was
absolutely necessary.


1770 July 21.

No signs of the Indians to day nor indeed any thing else worthy note.


1770 July 22.

The Turtle which was killd this morn had an Indian turtle peg in it which
seemd to have laid there a long time. It was in the breast across the fore
finns, having enterd at the soft part near the finns but the wound it had
made in going in was intirely grown up; the peg itself was about 8 inches
in lengh and as thick as a mans little finger. One of our people who had
been sent out to gather Indian Kale straying from his party met with three
indians, two men and a boy, he came upon them as they sat down among
some long grass on a sudden and before he was aware of it. At first he was
much afraid and offerd them his knife, the only thing he had which he
thought might be acceptable to them; they took it and after handing it from
one to another return'd it to him. They kept him about half an hour
behaving most civily to him, only satisfying their curiosity in examining
his body, which done they made him signs that he might go away which he
did very well pleasd. They had hanging on a tree by them, he said, a
quarter of the wild animal and a cocatoo; but how they had been clever
enough to take these animals is almost beyond my conception, as both of
them are most shy especialy the Cocatoos.


1770 July 23.

In Botanizing today on the other side of the river we accidentaly found
the greatest part of the clothes which had been given to the Indians left all
in a heap together, doubtless as lumber not worth carriage. May be had we
lookd farther we should have found our other trinkets, for they seemd to set
no value upon any thing we had except our turtle, which of all things we
were the least able to spare them.


1770 July 24.

The blowing weather which had hinderd us from getting out several days
still lasted, not at all to our satisfaction who had no one wish to remain
longer in the place, which we had pretty well exhausted even of its natural
history. The Dr and me were obligd to go very far for any thing new; to
day we went several miles to a high hill where after sweating and broiling
among the woods till night we were obligd to return almost empty. But the
most vexatious accident imaginable befel us likewise: traveling in a deep
vally, the sides of which were steep almost as a wall but coverd with trees
and plenty of Brush wood, we found marking nuts (anacardium orientale)
laying on the ground, and desirous as we were to find the tree on which
they had grown, a thing that I beleive no European Botanist has seen, we
were not with all our pains able to find it; so after cutting down 4 or 5 trees
and spending much time were obligd to give over our hopes.


1770 July 25.

The Captn who was up the river today found the Canoe belonging to our
freinds the Indians, which it seems they had left tied to some mangroves
within a mile of the ship: themselves we could see by their fires were 5 or
6 miles off from us directly inland.


1770 July 26.

In botanizing to day I had the good fortune to take an animal of the
Opossum (Didelphis) tribe: it was a female and with it I took two young
ones. It was not unlike that remarkable one which De Bufon has decribd by
the name of Phalanger as an American animal; it was however not the
same for De Buffon is certainly wrong in asserting that this tribe is peculiar
to America; and in all probability, as Pallas has said in his Zoologia, the
Phalanger itself is a native of the East Indies, as my animal and that agree
in the extrordinary conformation of their feet in which particular they differ
from all the others.


1770 July 27.

This day was dedicated to hunting the wild animal. We saw several and
had the good fortune to kill a very large one which weighd 84 lb.


1770 July 28.

Botanizing with no kind of success. The Plants were now intirely
compleated and nothing new to be found, so that sailing is all we wish for
if the wind would but allow us. Dind today upon the animal, who eat but
ill, he was I suppose too old. His fault however was an uncommon one, the
total want of flavour, for he was certainly the most insipid meat I eat.


1770 July 29.

Went out again in search of the animals: our success today was not
however quite so good as the last time, we saw few and killd one very
small one which weighd no more than 8½ lb. My greyhound took him
with ease tho the old ones where much too nimble for him.


1770 July 30.

Ever since the ship was hawld off for sailing we have had Blowing
weather till today, when it changd to little wind and rain which gave us
some hopes; in the evening however the wind returnd to its old Byas.


1770 July 31.

Morning cloudy and Boisterous enough; even clear with less wind which
supplyd hopes at least for tomorrow.


1770 August 1.

During the Night it Blew as hard as ever; the Day was rainy with less
wind but still not moderate enough for our undertakings.


1770 August 2.

Moderate and very rainy; great hopes that the Rain is a presage of
approaching moderate weather.


1770 August 3.

In the morn our people were dubious about trying to get out and I beleive
delayd it rather too long. At last however they began and warpd ahead but
desisted from their attempts after having ran the ship twice ashore.


1770 August 4.

Fine calm morn. Began early and warp'd the ship out, after which we
saild right out till we came to the turtle reef where our turtlers took one
turtle. Myself got some few shells but saw many Beautifull sea insects etc.
At night our people who fishd caught abundance of sharks.


1770 August 5.

The Turtlers were again out upon the shoal and took one turtle. At 2 we
weighd, resolvd to stand out as well as we could among the shoals, but
before night were stoppd by another shoal which lay directly across our
way.


1770 August 6.

Blew so fresh that we could not move but lay still all day, not without
anxiety least the anchor should not hold.


1770 August 7.

During last night the gale had freshned much and in the morn we found
that we had Drove above a League. Fortunately no shoal had in that
distance taken us up but one was in sight astern and the ship drove fast
towards it, on this another anchor was let go and much cable verd out but
even this would not stop her. Our prospect was now more melancholy than
ever: the shoal was plainly to be seen and the ship still driving gently down
towards it, a sea running at the same time which would make it impossible
ever to get off if we should be unfortunate enough to get on. Yards and
Topmasts were therefore got down and every thing done which could be
thought of to make the ship snug, without any effect: she still drove and the
shoal we dreaded came nearer and nearer to us. The sheet anchor our last
resource was now thought of and prepard, but fortunately for us before we
were drove to the making use of that expedient the ship stoppd and held
fast, to our great joy. During the time of its blowing yesterday and today
we became certain that between us and the open sea was a ledge of rocks
or reef just the same as we had seen at the Islands, no very agreable
discovery, for should that at any time join in with the main land we must
wait for another season when different winds from the present ones
prevaild; in which case we must infallibly be short of provisions or, if the
turtle should fail us, Salt provisions without bread was all we had to
trust to.


1770 August 8.

The night Dark as pitch passd over not without much anxiety: whether
our anchors held or not we could not tell and maybe might when we least
thought of it be upon the very brink of destruction. Day light however
releivd us shewd us that the anchors had held and also brought us rather
more moderate weather, so that towards evening we venturd to get up
Yards and top masts.


1770 August 9.

Night and morning still more moderate so that one anchor was got up and
we had great hopes of sailing on the next morn.


1770 August 10.

Fine weather so the anchor was got up and we saild down to leward,
convincd that we could not get out the way we had tried before and hoping
there might be a passage that way: in these hopes we were much
encouraged by the sight of some high Islands where we hopd the shoals
would end. By 12 we were among these and fancied that the grand or outer
reef ended on one of them so were all in high spirits, but about dinner time
the people at the mast head saw as they thought Land all round us, on
which we immediatedly came to an anchor resolvd to go ashore and from
the hills examine whether it was so or not.

The point we went upon was sandy and very Barren so it affforded very
few plants or any thing else worth our observation. The Sand itself indeed
with which the whole countrey in a manner was coverd was infinitely fine
and white, but till a glass house was built here that would turn to no
account. We had the satisfaction however to see that what was taken for
land round us provd only a number of Islands: to one very high one about 5
leagues from the Land the Captain resolvd to go in the Boat tomorrow in
order to see whether the grand reef had realy left us or not.


1770 August 11.

As propos'd yesterday the Captn went today to the Island which provd 5
leagues off from the ship, I went with him. In going out we passd over 2
very large shoals on which we saw great plenty of Turtle but we had too
much wind to strike any. The Island itself was high; we ascended the hill
and when we were at the top saw plainly the Grand Reef still extending
itself Paralel with the shore at about the distance of 3 leagues from us or 8
from the main; through it were several channels exactly similar to those we
had seen in the Islands. Through one of these we determind to [go] which
seemd most easy: to ascertain however the Practicability of it We resolvd
to stay upon the Island all night and at day break in the morn send the boat
to sound one of them, which was accordingly done. We slept under the
shade of a Bush that grew on the Beach very comfortably.


1770 August 12.

Great Part of yesterday and all this morn till the boat returnd I employd
in searching the Island. On it I found some few plants which I had not
before seen; the Island itself was small and Barren; on it was however one
small tract of woodland which abounded very much with large Lizzards
some of which I took. Distant as this Isle was from the main, the Indians
had been here in their poor embarkations, sure sign that some part of the
year must have very setled fine weather; we saw 7 or 8 frames of their huts
and vast piles of shells the fish of which had I suppose been their food. All
the houses were built upon the tops of Eminences exposd intirely to the SE,
contrary to those of the main which are commonly placd under the shelter
of some bushes or hill side to break off the wind. The officer who went in
the Boat returnd with an account that the sea broke vastly high upon the
reef and the swell was so great in the opening that he could not go into it to
sound. This was sufficient to assure us of a safe passage out, so we got into
the boat to return to the ship in high spirits, thinking our danger now at an
end as we had a passage open for us to the main Sea. In our return we went
ashore upon a low Island where we shot many birds; on it was an Eagles
nest the young ones of which we killd, and another built on the ground by I
know not what bird, of a most enormous magnitude--it was in

circumference 26 feet and in hight 2 feet 8 built of sticks; the only Bird I
have seen in this countrey capable of building such a nest seems to be the
Pelecan. The Indians have been here likewise and livd upon turtle, as we
could plainly see by the heaps of Callipashes which were pild up in several
parts of the Island. Our Master who had been sent to leward to examine
that Passage went ashore upon a low Island where he slept. Here he saw
vast plenty of turtle shells, and so great plenty had the Indians had when
there that they had hung up the finns with the meat left on them in trees,
where the sun had dryd them so well that our seamen eat them heartily. He
saw also two spots clear of grass which had lately been dug up; they were
about 7 feet long and shaped like a grave, for which indeed he took them.


1770 August 13.

Ship stood out for the opening we had seen in the reef and about 2
O'Clock passd it. It was about ½ a mile wide. As soon as the ship was
well without it we had no ground with100 fathm of Line so became in an
instant quite easy, being once more in the main Ocean and consequently
freed from all our fears of shoals etc.


1770 August 14.

For the first time these three months we were this day out of sight of
Land to our no small satisfaction: that very Ocean which had formerly
been look'd upon with terror by (maybe) all of us was now the Assylum we
had long wishd for and at last found. Satisfaction was clearly painted in
every mans face: the day was fine and the trade wind brisk before which
we steerd to the Northward; the well grown waves which followd the ship,
sure sign of no land being in our neighbourhood, were contemplated with
the greatest satisfaction, notwithstanding we plainly felt the effect of the
blows they gave to our crazy ship, increasing her leaks considerably so that
she made now 9 inches water every hour. This however was lookd upon as
a light evil in comparison to those we had so lately made our escape from.


1770 August 15.

Fine weather and moderate trade. The Captn fearfull of going too far
from the Land, least he should miss an opportunity of examining whether
or not the passage which is layd down in some charts between New
Holland and New Guinea realy existed or not, steerd the ship west right in
for the land; about 12 O'Clock it was seen from the Mast head and about
one the Reef laying without it in just the same manner as when we left it.
He stood on however resolving to stand off at night after having taken a
nearer view, but just at night fall found himself in a manner embayd in the
reef so that it was a moot Point whether or not he could weather it on either
tack; we stood however to the Northward and at dark it was concluded that
she would go clear of every thing we could see. The night however was not
the most agreable: all the dangers we had escapd were little in comparison
of being thrown upon this reef if that should be our lot. A Reef such a one
as I now speak of is a thing scarcely known in Europe or indeed any where
but in these seas: it is a wall of Coral rock rising almost perpendicularly
out of the unfathomable ocean, always overflown at high water commonly
7 or 8 feet, and generaly bare at low water; the large waves of the vast
ocean meeting with so sudden a resistance make here a most terrible surf
Breaking mountain high, especialy when as in our case the general trade
wind blows directly upon it.


1770 August 16.

At three O'Clock this morn it dropd calm on a sudden which did not at all
better our situation: we judgd ourselves not more than 4 or 5 l'gs from the
reef, maybe much less, and the swell of the sea which drove right in upon it
carried the ship towards it fast. We tried the lead often in hopes to find
ground that we might anchor but in vain; before 5 the roaring of the Surf
was plainly heard and as day broke the vast foaming billows were plainly
enough to be seen scarce a mile from us and towards which we found the
ship carried by the waves surprizingly fast, so that by 6 o'clock we were
within a Cables lengh of them, driving on as fast as ever and still no
ground with 100 fathm of line. Every method had been taken since we first
saw our danger to get the boats out in hopes that they might tow us off but
it was not yet acomplishd; the Pinnace had had a Plank strippd off her for
repair and the longboat under the Booms was lashd and fastned so well
from our supposd security that she was not yet got out. Two large Oars or
sweeps were got out at the stern ports to pull the ships head round the other
way in hopes that might delay till the boats were out. All this while we
were approaching and came I beleive before this could be effected within
40 yards of the breaker; the same sea that washd the side of the ship rose in
a breaker enormously high the very next time is did rise, so between us and
it was only a dismal valley the breadth of one wave; even now the lead was
hove 3 or 4 lines fastned together but no ground could be felt with above
150 fathm. Now was our case truly desperate, no man I beleive but who
gave himself intirely over, a speedy death was all we had to hope for and
that from the vastness of the Breakers which must quickly dash the ship all
to peices was scarce to be doubted. Other hopes we had none: the boats
were in the ship and must be dashd in peices with her and the nearest dry
land was 8 or 10 Leagues distant. We did not however cease our
endeavours to get out the long boat which was by this time almost
accomplishd. At this critical juncture, at this I must say terrible moment,
when all asistance seemd too little to save even our miserable lives, a small
air of wind sprang up, so small that at any other time in a calm we should
not have observd it. We however plainly saw that it instantly checkd our
progress; every sail was therefore put in a proper direction to catch it and
we just obse[r]vd the ship to move in a slaunting direction off from the
breakers. This at least gave us time and redoubling our efforts we at last
got out the long boat and manning her sent her a head. The ship still movd
a little off but in less than 10 minutes our little Breeze died away into as
flat a calm as ever. Now was our anziety again renewd: innumerable small
peices of paper etc. were thrown over the ships side to find whither the
boats realy movd her ahead or not and so little did she move that it remaind
almost every other time a matter of dispute. Our little freindly Breeze now
visited us again and lasted about as long as before, thrusting us possibly
100 yards farther from the breakers: we were still however in the very jaws
of destruction. A small opening had been seen in the reef about a furlong
from us, its breadth was scarce the lengh of the ship, into this however it
was resolvd to push her if posible. Within was no surf, therefore we might
save our lives: the doubt was only whether we could get the ship so far: our
little breeze however a third time visited us and pushd us almost there. The
fear of Death is Bitter: the prospect we now had before us of saving our
lives tho at the expence of every thing we had made my heart set much
lighter on its throne, and I suppose there were none but what felt the same
sensations. At lengh we arrivd off the mouth of the wishd for opening and
found to our surprize what had with the little breeze been the real cause of
our Escape, a thing that we had not before dreamt of. The tide of flood it
was that had hurried us so unacountably fast towards the reef, in the near
neighbourhood of which we arrivd just at high water, consequently its
ceasing to drive us any farther gave us the opportunity we had of getting
off. Now however the tide of Ebb made strong and gushd out of our little
opening like a mill stream, so that it was impossible to get in; of this
stream however we took the advantage as much as possible and it Carried
us out near a quarter of a mile from the reef. We well knew that we were to
take all the advantage possible of the Ebb so continued towing with all our
might and with all our boats, the Pinnance being now repaird, till we had
gott an offing of 1½ or 2 miles. By this time the tide began to turn and
our suspence began again: as we had gaind so little while the ebb was in
our favour we had some reason to imagine that the flood would hurry us
back upon the reef in spite of our utmost endeavours. It was still as calm as
ever so no likely hood of any wind today; indeed had wind sprung up we
could only have searchd for another opening, for we were so embayd by
the reef that with the general trade wind it was impossible to get out.
Another opning was however seen ahead and the 1st Lieutenant went away
in the small boat to examine it. In the mean time we strugled hard with the
flood, sometimes gaining a little then holding only our own and at others
loosing a little, so that our situation was almost as bad as ever, as the flood
had not yet come to its strengh. At 2 however the Lieutentant arrivd with
news that the opening was very narrow: in it was good anchorage and a
passage quite in free from shoals. The ships head was immediately put
towards it and with the tide she towd fast so that by three we enterd and
were hurried in by a stream almost like a mill race, which kept us from
even a fear of the sides tho it was not above ¼ of mile in breadth. By 4 we
came to an anchor happy once more to encounter those shoals which but
two days before we thought ourselves supreamly happy to have escap'd
from. How little do men know what is for their real advantage: two days
[ago?] our utmost wishes were crownd by getting without the reef and
today we were made again happy by getting within it.


1770 August 17.

As we were now safe at an anchor it was resolvd to send the boats upon
the nearest shoal to search for shell fish, turtle or whatever else they could
get. They accordingly went and Dr Solander and myself accompanied them
in my small boat. In our way we met with two water snakes, one 5 the
other 6 feet long; we took them both; they much resembled Land snakes
only their tails were flatted sideways, I suppose for the convenience of
swimming, and were not venomous. The shoal we went upon was the very
reef we had so near been lost upon yesterday, now no longer terrible to us;
it afforded little provision for the ship, no turtle, only 300lb of Great
cockles, some were however of an immense size. We had in the way of
curiosity much better success, meeting with many curious fish and
mollusca besides Corals of many species, all alive, among which was the
Tubipora musica. I have often lamented that we had not time to make
proper observations upon this curious tribe of animals but we were so
intirely taken up with the more conspicuous links of the chain of creation
as fish, Plants, Birds etc. etc. that it was impossible.


1770 August 18.

Weighd and stood along shore with a gentle breeze, the main still 7 or 8
Leagues from us. In the even many shoals were ahead; we were however
fortunate enough to find our way through them and at night anchord under
an Island. The tide here ran immensely strong which we lookd upon as a
good omen: so strong a stream must in all probability have an outlet by
which we could get out either on the South or North side of New Guinea.
The smoothness of the water however plainly indicated that the reef
continued between us and the Ocean.


1770 August 19.

Weighd anchor and steerd as yesterday with a fresh trade wind. All morn
were much entangled with Shoals, but so much do great dangers swallow
up lesser ones that these once so much dreaded shoals were now look[ed]
at with much less concern than formerly. At noon we passd along a large
shoal on which the boats which were ahead saw many turtle but it blew to
[o] fresh to catch them. We were now tolerably near the main, which
appeard low and barren and often interspersd with large patches of the very
white sand spoke of before. On a small Island which we passd very near to
were 5 natives, 2 of whoom carried their Lances in their hands; they came
down upon a point and lookd at the ship for a little while and then retird.


1770 August 20.

Steering along shore as usual among many shoals, Luffing up for some
and bearing away for others. We are now pretty well experiencd in their
appearances so as seldom to be deceivd and easily to know asunder a
bottom colourd by white sand from a coral rock, the former of which, tho
generaly in 12 or 14 fathom water, some time ago gave us much trouble.
The reef was still supposd to be without us from the smoothness of our
water. The mainland appeard very low and sandy and had many fires upon
it, more than we had usualy observd. We passd during the day many low
sandy Islands every one of which stood upon a large shoal; we have
constantly found the best passage to lie near the main, and the farther from
that you go near the reef the more numerous are the shoals. In the evening
we observd the shoals to decrease in number but we still were in smooth
water.


1770 August 21.

Running along shore with charming moderate weather, as indeed we
have had ever since our second entering the reef. We observd both last
night and this morn that the main lookd very narrow, so we began to look
out for the Passage we expected to find between new Holland and New
Guinea. At noon one was seen very narrow but appearing to widen: we
resolv'd to try it so stood in. In passing through, for it was not more than a
mile in lengh before it widned very much, we saw 10 Indians standing on a
hill; 9 were armed with lances as we had been usd to see them, the tenth
had a bow and arrows; 2 had also large ornaments of mother of Pearl shell
hung round their necks. After the ship had passd by 3 followd her, one of
whoom was the bow man. We soon came abreast, from whence we
concluded we might have a much better view than from our mast head, so
the anchor was dropd and we prepard ourselves to go ashore to examine
whether the place we stood into was a bay or a passage; for as we saild
right before the trade wind we might find dificulty in getting out should it
prove to be the former. The 3 Indians plac'd themselves upon the beach
opposite to us as if resolvd either to oppose or assist our landing; when
however we came about Musquet shot from them they all walkd leisurely
away. The hill we were upon was by much the most barren we had been
upon; it however gave us the satisfaction of seeing a streight, at least as far
as we could see, without any obstruction. In the Even a strong tide made us
almost certain.


1770 August 22.

In the morn 3 or 4 women appeard upon the beach gathering shellfish:
we lookd with our glasses and to us they appeard as they always did more
naked than our mother Eve. The Ebb ran out so strong that we could not
weigh till near noon. We had the Wind variable from N to W, the first time
since we got the trade. Before we had proceeded far we met with a shoal
which made us come to an anchor.


1770 August 23.

In the morn calm: at nine however a small breeze sprang up on which we
weighd and saild through a channel which had been found during the calm.
At noon we were abreast of an Island which was white with the Dung of
Birds; as we had little wind the ship was brought too we went ashore upon
it and shot bobies till our ammunition was quite expended. I myself
Botanizd and found some plants which I had not before seen. After we
came on board the winds were variable and soon after calm and very hot.
Water still continued very Shoal but the swell, which ran larger than any
we had met with within the reef, gave us great hope.


1770 August 24.

Swell continued and in the morn the Best bower cable was broke in
weighing by it. The whole day was spent in fruitless attempts to recover
the anchor tho there was no more than 8 fathm water.


1770 August 25.

This morn by the first sweep the anchor was recoverd and we soon got
under sail and lost sight of land with only 9 fathm water. At dinner met
shoals which made us anchor again; in the eve however found a passage
out and saild clear enough of them.


1770 August 26.

Fine weather and clear fresh trade. Stood to the W and deepned our water
from 13 to 27. At night many Egg birds coming from the W.


1770 August 27.

Lay too all last night. In the morn fresh trade and fine clear weather made
us hope that our dificulties were drawing to a period: it was now resolvd to
hawl up to the Northward in order to make the coast of New Guinea in
order to assure ourselves that we had realy got clear of the South Sea
which was accordingly done. At dinner time we were alarmd afresh by the
usual report of a shoal just ahead: it provd however to be no more than a
bank or regular layer of a Brownish colour extending itself upon the sea,
which indeed had very much the appearance of a shoal while at a distance.
It was formd by innumerable small atoms each scarce ½ a line in lengh
yet when lookd at in a microscope consisting of 30 or 40 tubes, each
hollow and divided throughout the whole lengh into many cells by small
partitions like the tubes of Confervas; to which of the three kingdoms of
Nature they belong I am totaly Ignorant, I only guess that they are of a
vegetable nature because on burning them I could perceive no animal
smell. We have before this during this voyage seen them several times on
the coast of Brazil and that of New Holland but never that I recollect at any
considerable distance from the Land. In the Evening a small bird of the
Noddy (sterna) kind hoverd much about the ship and at night settled on the
rigging where he was taken, and provd exactly the same bird as Dampier
has describd and given a rude figure of under the Name of a Noddy From
New Holland; See his voyages Vol 111, p. 98, tab. of Birds fig. 5.


1770 August 28.

Still Standing to the Northward the water shoaling regularly. Vast
quantities of the little substances mentiond yesterday floating upon the
water in large lines a mile or more long and 50 or 100 yards wide, all
swimming either immediately upon the surface of the water or not many
inches under it. The seamen who are now convinc'd that it was not as they
had thought the spawn of fish began to call it Sea sawdust, a name
certainly not ill adapted to its appearance. One of them, a Portugese who
came on board the ship at Rio de Janerio, told me that at St Salvador on the
Coast of Brasil where the Portugese have a whale fishery he had often seen
vast quantities of it taken out of the stomachs of whales or Grampus's there
taken. In the afternoon the Soundings became most irregular starting
sometimes at once from 18 to 7 fathoms. At 4 the Land was seen from the
Mast head but at Sun set was not seen from the deck. During the night we
stood off and on far from satisfied with our soundings.


1770 August 29.

During the whole night our soundings were as irregular as they had been
in the even, but never less than 7 and never so shoal for any time. In the
morn the land was seen from the Deck which was uncommonly low but
coverd very thick with wood. At 8 it was not more than two Lgs from us
but the water had gradualy [shoald] since morn to 5 fathm and was at this
time as muddy as the River Thames, so it was thought not Prudent to go
any nearer at present and accordingly we stood along shore, seeing fires
and here and there large Groves of Cocoa nut trees in the neighbourhood of
which we supposd the Indian villages to be situated. In the Eve tho we kept
the same distance from the Land we got into less than 4 fathm and we got
upon a wind, we were very long before we could deepen it; the Bank
however which was soft mud provd inimitably regular.


1770 August 30.

In the morn tho the ship was in less than 7 fathom water the land was but
just seen from the Deck; we saild along shore however in and about that
depth, the Bank as regular as usual. In the Even a large Fire was seen
ashore. At Night of a sudden went away to the Northward; we now judgd
ourselves to be about the place calld in the Draughts Valche Caep and
supposd this to be it. Both yesterday and today vast quantities of the sea
Sawdust was seen; some of our people observd that on passing through a
bed of it much larger than common they smelt an uncommon stink which
they supposd to proceed from it.


1770 August 31.

5½ fathm and the Land not seen even from the mast head: the
regularity of the bank which was soft mud made us very little regard the
shoalness of the water which was still as muddy as the Thames at
Gravesend. At night we anchord in 4½ fathm the Land being then but
just seen from the deck.


* * * * *


SOME ACCOUNT OF THAT PART OF NEW HOLLAND NOW CALLED NEW SOUTH WALES

[This section follows directly on from diary entry for 26th August 1770]
[The Journal continues again on September 1, 1770-- see after this section]

Having now I beleive fairly Passd through between New Holland and
New Guinea and having an open sea to the Westward, so that we tomorrow
intend to steer more to the Northward in order to make the South Coast of
New Guinea, it seems high time to take leave of New Holland, which I
shall do by summing up together the few observations I have been able to
make on the countrey and people. I much wishd indeed to have had better
opportunities of seeing and observing the people, as they differ so much
from the account that Dampier (the only man I know of who has seen them
besides us) has given of them. He indeed saw them on a part of the coast
very distant from where we were and consequently the people might be
different; but I should rather conclude them to be the same, chiefly from
having observd an universal conformity in such of their customs as came
under my observation in the several places we landed upon during the run
of 00 leagues along the coast. Dampier in general seems to be a faithfull
relater, but in the voyage in which he touchd on the coast of New Holland
he was in a ship of Pyrates, possibly himself not a little tainted by their idle
examples: he might have kept no written Journal of any thing more than
the navigation of the ship and when upon coming home he was sollicited to
publish an account of his voyage have referrd to his memory for many
particulars relating to people etc. These Indians when coverd with their
filth which I beleive they never wash of are, if not coal black, very near it:
as negroes then he might well esteem them and add the wooly hair and
want of two fore teeth in consequence of the similitude in complexion
between these and the natives of Africa; but from whatever cause it might
arise, certain it is that Dampier either was mistaken very much in his
account or else that he saw a very different race of people from those we
have seen.

For the whole lengh of coast which we saild along there was a sameness
to be observd in the face of the countrey very uncommon; Barren it may
justly be calld and in a very high degree, that at least that we saw. The Soil
in general is sandy and very light: on it grows grass tall enough but thin
sett, and trees of a tolerable size, never however near together, in general
40, 50, or 60 feet assunder. This and spots sometimes very large of loose
sand constitutes the general face of the countrey as you sail along it, and
indeed of the greatest part even after you have penetrated inland as far as
our situation would allow us to do. The Banks of Bays indeed are generaly
clothd with thick mangroves sometimes for a mile or more in breadth; the
soil under these is rank mud always overflowd every spring tide. Inland
you sometimes meet with a bog upon which the grass grows rank and thick
so that no doubt the soil is sufficiently fertile. The Valleys also between the
hills where runs of water come down are thick clothd with underwood, but
they are generaly very steep and narrow, so that upon the Whole the fertile
soil Bears no kind of Proportion to that which seems by nature doomed to
everlasting Barrenness.

Water is here a scarce article or at least was so while we were there,
which I beleive to have been in the very hight of the Dry season; some
places we were in where we saw not a drop, and at the two places where
we filld for the ships use it was done from pools not brooks. This drought
is probably owing to the dryness of a soil almost intirely composd of sand
in which high hills are scarce. That there is plenty however in the rainy
season is sufficiently evincd by the channels we saw cut even in rocks
down the sides of inconsiderable hills; these were in general dry, or if any
of them containd water it was such as ran in the woody valleys, and these
seldom carried water above half way down the hill. Some indeed we saw
that formd brooks and ran quite down to the sea but these were scarce and
in general brackish a good way up from the beach.

A Soil so barren and at the same time intirely void of the helps derivd
from cultivation could not be supposd to yeild much towards the support of
man. We had been so long at sea with but a scanty supply of fresh
provisions that we had long usd to eat every thing we could lay our hands
upon, fish, flesh or vegetable which only was not poisonous; yet we could
but now and then procure a dish of bad greens for our own table and never
but in the place where the ship was careend met with a sufficient quantity
to supply the ship. There indeed Palm cabbage and what is calld in the
West Indies Indian Kale were in tolerable plenty, as was also a sort of
Purslane. The other plants we eat were a kind of Beans, very bad, a kind of
Parsley and a plant something resembling spinage, which two last grew
only to the Southward. I shall give their botanical names as I beleive some
of them were never eat by Europeans before: first Indian Kale (Arum
Esculentum), Red flowerd purslane (Sesuvium Portulacastrum), Beans
(Glycine speciosa) Parsley (Apium ), Spinage (Tetragonia cornuta). Fruits
we had still fewer; to the South was one something resembling a heart
cherry only the stone was soft (Eugenia ) which had nothing but a light
acid to recommend it; to the Northward again a kind of Figs growing from
the stalk of a tree, very indifferent (Ficus caudiciflora), a fruit we calld
Plumbs like them in Colour but flat like a little cheese ( [] ), and another
much like a damson both in appearance and taste; both these last however
were so full of a large stone that eating them was but an unprofitable
business. Wild Plantanes we had also but so full of seeds that they had little
or no pulp.

For the article of timber, there is certainly no want of trees of more than
midling size and some in the valleys very large, but all of a very hard
nature; our carpenters who cut them down for fire wood complaind much
that their tools were damagd by them. Some trees there were also to the
Northward whose soft bark,which easily peels off, is in the East Indies
applyd to the use of calking ships in Lieu of Oakum.

Palms here were of three different sorts. The first which grew plentifully
to the Southward had leaves pleated like a fan; the Cabbage of these was
small but exquisitely sweet and the nuts which it bore in great abundance a
very good food for hogs. The second was very much like the real cabbage
tree of the West Indies, bearing large pinnated leaves like those of a Cocoa
nut; these too yeilded cabbage if not so sweet as the other sort yet the
quantity made ample amends. The third which as well as the second was
found only in the Northern parts was low, seldom ten feet in hight, with
small pennated leaves resembling those of some kinds of fern; Cabbage it
had none but generaly bore a plentifull Crop of nutts about the size of a
large chestnut and rounder. By the hulls of these which we found
plentifully near the Indian fires we were assurd that these people eat them,
and some of our gentlemen tried to do the same, but were deterrd from a
second experiment by a hearty fit of vomiting and purging which was the
consequence of the first. The hogs however who were still shorter of
provision than we were eat them heartily and we concluded their
constitutions stronger than ours, till after about a week they were all taken
extreemly ill of indigestions; two died and the rest were savd with
dificulty.

Other usefull plants we saw none, except perhaps two might be
found so which yeild resin in abundance: the one a tree tolerably large with
narrow leaves not unlike a willow which was very plentyfull in every place
into which we went; this yeilded a blood red resin or rather gum-resin very
nearly resembling Sanguis draconis, indeed as Sanguis draconis is the
produce of several different plants this may perhaps be one of the sorts.
This I should suppose to be the gum mentioned by Dampier in his voyage
round the world p. and by him compard with sanguis draconis, as possibly
also that which Tasman saw upon Diemens Land, where he says he saw
gum of the trees and gum Lac of the ground; See his voyage in a collection
publishd at London in 1694 p.133. The other was a small plant with long
narrow grassy leaves and a spike of flowers resembling much that kind of
Bulrush which is calld in England Cats tail; this yeilded a resin of a bright
yellow colour perfectly resembling Gambouge only that it did not stain; it
had a sweet smell but what its properties are the chymists may be able to
determine.

Of Plants in general the countrey afforded a far larger variety than its
barren appearance seemd to promise. Many of these have no doubt
properties which might be usefull, but for Physical and oeconomical
purposes which we were not able to investigate, could we have understood
the Indians or made them by any means our freinds we might perchance
have learnt some of these; for tho their manner of life, but one degree
removd from Brutes, does not seem to promise much yet they had a
knowledge of plants as we plainly could percieve by their having names
for them.

Thus much for plants: I have been rather particular in mentioning those
which we eat hoping that such a remembrance might be of use to some or
other into whose hands these papers may fall. For quadrupedes, Birds, fish
etc. I shall say no more than that we had some time ago learnd to eat every
identical species which came in our way: a hawk or a crow was to us as
delicate and perhaps a better relished meal than a partridge or Pheasant to
those who have plenty of dainties: we wanted nothing to reccomend any
food but its not being salt, that alone was sufficient to make it a delicacy.
Shaggs, Sea gulls and all that tribe of sea fowl which are reccond bad from
their trainy or fishy taste were to us an agreable food, we did not at all taste
the rankness, which no doubt has been and possibly will again be highly
nauseous to us whenever we have plenty of Beef and mutton etc.

Quadrupeds we saw but few and were able to catch few of them that we
did see. The largest was calld by the natives Kangooroo. It is different from
any European and indeed any animal I have heard or read of except the
Gerbua of Egypt, which is not larger than a rat when this is as large as a
midling Lamb; the largest we shot weighd 84 lb. It may however be easily
known from all other animals by the singular property of running or rather
hopping upon only its hinder legs carrying its fore bent close to its breast;
in this manner however it hops so fast that in the rocky bad ground where it
is commonly found it easily beat my grey hound, who tho he was fairly
started at several killd only one and that quite a young one. Another was
calld by the natives Je-Quoll: it is about the size and something like a
polecat, of a light brown spotted with white on the back and white under
the belly. The third was of the Opossum kind and much resembling that
calld by De Buffon Phalanger. Of these two last I took only one individual
of each. Batts here were many. One small we took which was much like if
not identicaly the same as that describd by de Buffon under the name of
Fer de cheval; Another sort was as large or larger than a partrige but of this
Species we were not fortunate enough to take one; we supposd it however
to be either the Roupette or Rougette of the same author. Besides these
Wolves were I beleive seen by several of our people and some other
animals describd, but from the unintelligible stile of the describers I could
not even determine whether they were such as I myself had seen or of
different kinds. Of these describtions I shall insert one as it is not
unentertaining. A Seaman who had been out on duty on his return declard
that he had seen an animal about the size of and much like a one gallon
cagg; it was, says he, as black as the Devil and had wings, indeed I took it
for the Devil or I might easily have catchd it for it crauld very slowly
through the grass. After taking some pains I found out that the animal he
had seen was no other than the Large Bat.

Birds there were Several Species of--sea fowl, Gulls, Shaggs, Soland
geese or Gannets of 2 sorts, Bobies, etc. and Pelicans of an enormous size,
but these last tho we saw many thousands of them were so shy tht we never
got one of them; as were the Cranes also of which we saw several very
Large and some beautifull species. In the Rivers were ducks who flew in
large flocks but were very hard to come at, and on the Beach were curlews
of several sorts, some very like our English ones, and Many small Beach
Birds. The Land Birds were crows, very like if not quite the same as our
English ones, Parrots and Paraquets most Beautifull, White and black
Cocatoes, Pidgeons, beautifull Doves, Bustards, and many others which
did not at all resemble those of Europe. Most of these were extremely shy
so that it was with dificulty that we shot any of them; a Crow in England
tho in general sufficiently wary is I must say a fool to a New Holland crow
and the same may be said of almost if not all the Birds in the countrey. The
only ones we ever got in any plenty was Pidgeons of which we met Large
flocks, of which the men who were sent out on purpose would sometimes
kill 10 or 12 a day; they were a Beautifull Bird crested differently from any
other Pidgeon I have seen. What can be the reason of this extrordinary
shyness in the Birds is dificult to say, unless perhaps the Indians are very
clever in deceiving them which we have very little reason to suppose, as
we never saw any instrument with them but their Lances with which a Bird
could be killd or taken, and these must be very improper tools for the
Purpose; yet one of our people saw a white Cocatoe in their Possession
which very bird we lookd upon to be one of the waryest of them all.

Of insects here were but few sorts and among them only the Ants were
troublesome to us. Musquetos indeed were in some places tolerably
plentyfull but it was our good fortune never to stay any time in such places,
and where we did to meet with very few. The ants however made ample
amends for the want of them, 2 sorts in particular: one green as a leaf and
living upon trees where he built his nest, in size between that of a mans
head and his fist, by bending the leaves together and glueing them with a
whiteish papery substance which held them firmly together. In doing this
their man[a]gement was most curious: they bend down leaves broader than
a mans hand and place them in such a direction as they chose, in doing of
which a much larger force is necessary than these animals seem caple of.
Many thousands indeed are employd in the joint work; I have seen them
holding down such a leaf, as many as could stand by one another each
drawing down with all his might while others within were employd to
fasten the glue. How they had bent it down I had not an opportunity of
seeing, but that it was held down by main strengh I easily provd by
disturbing a part of them, on which the leaf bursting from the rest returnd
to its natural situation and I had an opportunity to try with my finger the
strengh that these little animals must have usd to get it down. But
industrious as they are their courage if possible excells their industry; if we
accidentaly shook the branches on which such nest[s] were hung thousands
would immediately throw themselves down, many of which falling upon us
made us sensible of their stings and revengefull dispositions, especialy if as
was often the case they got posession of our necks and hair. Their stings
were by some esteemd not much less painfull than those of a bee, the pain
however lasted only a few seconds. Another sort there were quite black
whose manner of living was most extrordinary. They inhabited the inside
of the Branches of one sort of tree, [] the pith of which they hollowd out
almost quite to the ends of the Branches; nevertheless the tree flourishd as
well to all appearance as if no such accident had happned to it. When first
we found the tree we of course gatherd the branches and were surprizd to
find our hands instantly coverd with legions of these small animals who
stung most intolerably; experience however taught us to be more carefull
for the future. Rumphius mentions a similar instance to this in his
Herbarium Amboinense Vol. II. p. 257; his tree however does not at all
resemble ours. A third sort nested in the inside of the root of a Plant []
which grew on the Bark of trees in the same manner as Miseltoe; the root
was as large as a large turnip and often much larger; when cut the inside
shewd innumerable winding passages in which these animals livd; the
plant itself throve to all appearance not a bit the worse for its numerous
inhabitants. Several hundreds have I seen and never one but what was
inhabited, tho some were so young as not to be much larger than a hasel
nut. The ants themselves were very small, not above half as large as our
red ants in England. They stung indeed but so little that it was scarce to be
felt: the cheif inconvenience in handling the roots came from the infinite
number, myriads would come in an instant out of many holes and running
over the hand tickle so as to be scarce endurable. Rumphius has an account
of this very bulb and its ants in the 6th Vol. p. 120, where he describes also
another sort the ants of which are black. The fourth sort were perfectly
harmless, at least they provd so to us tho they resembled almost minutely
the white ants of the East Indies, the most mischevous Insect I beleive
known in the world. Their architecture was however far superior to that of
any other species . They had two kinds of Houses, one suspended on the
Branches of trees, the other standing upright on the ground. The first sort
were generaly 3 or 4 times as large as a mans head; they were built of a
brittle substance seemingly made of small parts of vegetables kneaded
together with some glutinous matter, probably afforded by themselves; on
breaking this outer crust innumerable cells appeard full of inhabitants in
winding directions, communicating with each other as well as with divers
doors which led from the nest. From each of these went a passage archd
over leading to different parts of the tree and generaly one large one to the
ground; this I am inclind to beleive communicated with the other kind of
house, for as the animals inhabiting both were precisely the same I see no
reason why they should be supposd, contrary to Every instance that I know
in nature, to build two different kinds of houses unless according to the
conveniences of season, prey etc., they inhabited both equaly. This other
kind of house which I now speak of was very often built near the foot of a
tree, the Bark of which tree always had upon it their coverd ways tho but
seldom the first kind of house; it was formd like an irregularly sided Cone
and sometimes was more than 6 feet high and near as much in diameter;
the smaller ones were generaly flat sided and resembled very much the old
stones which are seen in many parts of England and supposd to be remains
of Druidical worship. The outside Coat of these was 2 inches thick at least,
of hard well temperd clay, under which were their cells; to these no doors
were to be seen. All their passages were underground, where probably they
were carried on till the root of some tree presented itself, up which they
ascended and so up the trunk and branches by the coverd way before
mentiond. These I should suppose to be the houses to which they retire in
the winter season as they are undoubtedly ble to defend them from any rain
that can fall, while the others, tho generaly built under the shelter of some
overhanging branch, must be but ill proof to a heavy rain from the thinness
of their covering. Thus much for the ants, an industrious race who in all
countries have for that reason been admird by man, tho probably in no
countrey more admirable than in this. The few observations I have wrote
down of them are cheifly from conjecture and therefore are not at all to be
depended upon; was any man however to be setled here who had time and
inclination to observe their oeconomy I am convincd it would far exceed
that of any insects we know, not excepting out much admird bees.

The sea however made some amends for the Barreness of the Land. Fish
tho not so plentyfull as they generaly are in higher latitudes were far from
scarce; where we had an opportunity of haling the Seine we generaly
caught from 50 to 200 lb of fish in a tide. There sorts were various, none I
think but Mullets known in Europe; in general however they were
sufficiently palatable and some very delicate food; the Sting rays indeed
which were caught on the Southern part of the coast were very coarse, but
there little else was caught so we were obligd to comfort ourselves with the
comforts of Plenty and enjoy more pleasure in Satiety than in eating. To
the Northward again when we came to be entangled within the great Reef
(within which we saild to our knowledge 0 Leages and we knew not how
many more, perplexd every moment with shoals) was a plenty of Turtle
hardly to be credited, every shoal swarmd with them. The weather indeed
was generaly so boisterous that our boats could not row after them so fast
as they could swim, so that we got but few, but they were excellent and so
large that a single Turtle always servd the ship. Had we been there either at
the time of Laying or the more moderate season we doubtless might have
taken any quantity. Besides this all the shoals that were dry at half Ebb
afforded plenty of fish that were left dry in small hollows of the rocks, and
a profusion of Large shell fish (Chama Gigas) such as Dampier describes
Vol III, p. 191. The large ones of this kind had 10 or 15 lb of meat in them;
it was indeed rather strong but I beleive a very wholesome food and well
relishd by the people in general. On different parts of the Coast were also
found oysters which were said to be very well tasted; the shells also of well
sizd Lobsters and crabs were seen but these it was never our fortune to
catch.

Upon the whole New Holland, tho in every respect the most barren
countrey I have seen, is not so bad but that between the productions of sea
and Land a company of People who should have the misfortune of being
shipwreckd upon it might support themselves, even by the resources that
we have seen. Undoubtedly a longer stay and visiting different parts would
discover many more.

This immense tract of Land, the largest known which does not bear the
name of a continent, as it is considerably larger than all Europe, is thinly
inhabited even to admiration, at least that part of it that we saw: we never
but once saw so many as thirty Indians together and that was a family, Men
women and children, assembled upon a rock to see the ship pass by. At
Sting-Rays bay where they evidently came down to fight us several times
they never could muster above 14 or 15 fighting men, indeed in other
places they generaly ran away from us, from whence it might be concluded
that there were greater numbers than we saw, but their houses and sheds in
the woods which we never faild to find convincd us of the smallness of
their parties. We saw indeed only the sea coast: what the immense tract of
inland countrey may produce is to us totaly unknown: we may have liberty
to conjecture however that they are totaly uninhabited. The Sea has I
beleive been universaly found to be the cheif source of supplys to Indians
ignorant of the arts of cultivation: the wild produce of the Land alone
seems scarce able to support them at all seasons, at least I do not remember
to have read of any inland nation who did not cultivate the ground more or
less, even the North Americans who were so well versd in hunting sowd
their Maize. But should a people live inland who supported themselves by
cultivation these inhabitants of the sea coast must certainly have learn'd to
imitate them in some degree at least, otherwise their reason must be
supposd to hold a rank little superior to that of monkies.

Whatever may be the reason of this want of People is dificult to guess,
unless perhaps the Barreness of the Soil and scarcity of fresh water; but
why mankind should not increase here as fast as in other places unless their
small tribes have frequent wars in which many are destroyd; they were
generaly furnishd with plenty of weapons whose points of the stings of
Sting-Rays seemd intended against nothing but their own species, from
whence such an inference might easily be drawn.

That their customs were nearly the same throughout the whole lengh of
the coast along which we saild I should think very probable. Tho we had
Connections with them only at one place yet we saw them either with our
eyes or glasses many times, and at Sting Rays bay, had some experience of
their manners; their Colour, arms, method of using them, were the same as
we afterwards had a nearer view of; they likewise in the same manner went
naked, and painted themselves, their houses were the same, they notchd
large trees in the same manner and even the bags they carried their
furniture in were of exactly the same manufacture, something between
netting and Knitting which I have no where else seen in the intermediate
places. Our glasses might deceive us in many things but their colour and
want of cloths we certainly did see and wherever we came ashore the
houses and sheds, places where they had dressd victuals with heated
stones, and trees notched for the convenience of climbing them sufficiently
evincd them to be the same people.

The tribe with which we had connections consisted of 21 people, 12 men
7 women a boy and a girl, so many at least we saw and there might be
more, especialy women, who we did not see. The men were remarkably
short and slender built in proportion; the tallest we measurd was 5 feet 9,
the shortest 5-2; their medium hight seemd to be about five feet six, as the
tall man appeard more disproportioned in size from his fellows than the
short one. What their absolute colour is is difficult to say, they were so
compleatly coverd with dirt, which seemd to have stuck to their hides from
the day of their birth without their once having attemptd to remove it; I
tryd indeed by spitting upon my finger and rubbing but alterd the colour
very little, which as nearly as might be resembled that of Chocolate. The
beards of several were bushy and thick; their hair which as well as their
beards was black they wore cropped close round their ears; in some it was
lank as a Europeans, in others a little crispd as is common in the South sea
Islands but in none of them at all resembling the wool of Negroes. They
had also all their fore teeth; in which two things they differ cheifly from
those seen by Dampier; supposing him not to be mistaken. As for colour
they would undoubtedly be calld blacks by any one not usd to consider
attentively the colours of different Nations; myself should never have
thought of such distinctions had I not seen the effect of Sun and wind upon
the natives of the South sea Islands, where many of the Better sort of
people who keep themselves close at home are nearly as white as
Europeans, while the poorer sort, obligd in their business of fishing etc. to
expose their naked bodies to all the inclemencies of the Climate, have
some among them but little lighter than the New Hollanders. They were all
to a man lean and clean limnd and seemd to be very light and active; their
countenances were not without some expression tho I cannot charge them
with much, their voices in general shrill and effeminate.

Of Cloths they had not the least part but naked as ever our general father
was before his fall, they seemd no more conscious of their nakedness than
if they had not been the children of Parents who eat the fruit of the tree of
knowledge. Whether this want of what most nations look upon as
absolutely necessary proceeds from idleness or want of invention is
difficult to say; in the article of ornaments however, useless as they are,
neither has the one hinderd them from contriving nor the other from
making them. Of these the cheif and that on which they seem to set the
greatest value is a bone about 5 or 6 inches in lengh and as thick as a mans
finger, which they thrust into a hole bord through that part which divides
the nostrils so that it sticks across their face making in the eyes of
Europeans a most ludicrous appearance, tho no doubt they esteem even this
as an addition to their beauty which they purchasd with hourly
inconvenience; for when this bone was in its place, or as our seamen termd
it their spritsail yard was riggd across, it compleatly stop'd up both nostrils
so that they spoke in the nose in a manner one should think scarce
intelligible. Besides these extrodinary bones they had necklaces made of
shells neatly enough cut and strung together, bracelets also if one may call
by that name 4 or 5 ring[s] of small cord wore round the upper part of the
arm, also a belt or string tied round the waist about as thick as worsted
yarn, which last was frequently made of either human hair or that of the
Beast calld by them Kangooroo. Besides these they paint themselves with
the colours of red and white: the red they commonly lay on in broad
patches on their shoulders or breasts; the white in stripes some of which
were narrow and confind to small parts of their body, others were broad
and carried with some degree of taste across their bodies, round their legs
and arms etc.; they also lay it on in circles round their eyes and in patches
in different parts of their faces. The red they usd seemd to be red ocre but
what the white was we could not find out; it was heavy and close graind
almost as white lead and and had a saponaceos feel, possibly it might be a
kind of Steatites. We lamented not being able to procure a bit to examine.
These people seemd to have no Idea of traffick nor could we teach them;
indeed it seemd that we had no one thing on which they set a value equal to
induce them to part with the smallest trifle; except one fish which weighd
about ½ a pound that they brought as a kind of token of peace no one in
the ship I beleive procurd from them the smallest article. They readily
receivd the things we gave them but never would understand our signs
when we askd for returns. This however must not be forgot, that whatever
opportunities they had they never once attempted to take any thing in a
clandestine manner; whatever they wanted they openly askd for and in
almost all cases bore the refusal if they met with one with much
indifference, except Turtles.

Dirty as these people are they seem to be intirely free from Lice, a
circumstance rarely observd among the most cleanly Indians, and which
here is the more remarkable as their hair was generaly Matted and filthy
enough. In all of them indeed it was very thin and seemd as if seldom
disturbd with the Combing even of their fingers, much less to have any oil
or grease put into it; nor did the custom of oiling their bodies, so common
among most uncivilizd nations, seem to have the least footing here.

On their bodies we observd very few marks of cutaneous disorders as
scurf, scars of sores etc. Their spare thin bodies indicate a temperance in
eating, the consequence either of necessity or inclination, equaly
productive of health particularly in this respect. On the fleshy parts of their
arms and thighs and some of their sides were large scars in regular lines,
which by their breadth and the convexity with which they had heald shewd
plainly that they had been made by deep cuts of some blunt instrument, a
shell perhaps or the edge of a broken stone. These as far as we could
understand by the Signs they made use of were the marks of their
Lamentations for the deceasd, in honour to whose memory or to shew the
excess of their greif they had in this manner wept for in blood.

For food they seem to depend very much tho not intirely upon the Sea.
Fish of all kinds, Turtle and even crabs they strike with their Lances very
dextrously. These are generaly bearded with broad beards and their points
smeard over with a kind of hard resin which makes them peirce a hard
body far easier than they would do without it. In the sourthern parts these
fish spears had 4 prongs and besides the resin were pointed with the sharp
bone of a fish; to the Northward again their spears had only one point; yet
both I beleive struck fish with equal dexterity. For the Northern ones I can
witness who several times saw them through a glass throw their Spear from
10 to 20 yards and generaly succeed; to the Southward again the plenty of
Fish bones we saw near their fires provd them to be no indifferent artists.

For striking of Turtle they use a peg of wood well bearded and about a
foot long: this fastens into a socket of a staff of light wood as thick as a
mans wrist and 8 or 9 feet long, besides which they are tied together by a
loose line of 3 or 4 fathoms in lengh. The use of this must undoubtedly be
that when the Turtle is struck the staff flies off from the peg and serves for
a float to shew them where the Turtle is, as well as assists to tire him till
they can with their canoes overtake and haul him in. That they throw this
Dart with great force we had occasion to observe while we lay in
Endeavours river, where a turtle which we killd had one of them intirely
buried in its body just across its breast; it seemd to have enterd at the soft
place where the fore fins work but not the least outward mark of the wound
remaind.

Besides these things we saw near their fire places plentifull remains of
lobsters, shell fish of all kinds, and to the Southward the skins of those Sea
animals which from their property of spouting out water when touched are
commonly calld sea squirts. These last, howsoever disgustfull they may
seem to an European palate, we found to contain under a coat as tough as
leather a substance like the guts of a shell fish, in taste tho not equal to an
oyster yet by no means to be despisd by a man who is hungrey.

Of Land animals they probably eat every kind that they can kill which
probably does not amount to any large number, every species being here
shy and cautious in a high degree. The only vegetables we saw them use
were Yams of 2 sorts, the one long and like a finger the other round and
coverd with stringy roots, both sorts very small but sweet; they were so
scarce where we were that we never could find the plants that producd
them, tho we often saw the places where they had been dug up by the
Indians very newly. It is very probable that the Dry season which was at its
hight when we were there had destroyd the leaves of the plants so that we
had no guides, while the Indians knowing well the stalks might find them
easily. Whether they knew or ever made use of the Coccos I cannot tell; the
immence sharpness of every part of this vegetable before it is dressd makes
it probable that any people who have not learnd the uses of it from others
may remain for ever ignorant of them. Near their fires were great
abundance of the shells of a kind of fruit resembling a Pine apple very
much in appearance, tho in taste disagreable enough; it is common to all
the East Indies and calld by the Dutch there Pyn appel Boomen
(Pandanus); as also those of the fruits of a low Palm calld by the Dutch
Moeskruidige Calappus (Cycas circinalis) which they certainly eat, tho
they are so unwholesome that some of our people who tho forewarnd
depending upon their example eat one or 2 of were violently affected by
them both upwards and downwards, and our hogs whose constitutions we
thought might be as strong as those of the Indians literaly dyed after having
eat them. It is probable however that these people have some method of
Preparing them by which their poisonous quality is destroyd, as the
inhabitants of the East Indian Isles are said to do by boiling them and
steeping them 24 hours in water, then drying them and using them to
thicken broth; from whence it should seem that the poisonous quality lays
intirely in the Juices, as it does in the roots of the Mandihocca or Cassada
of the West Indies and that when thouroughly cleard of them the pulp
remain[in]g may be a wholesome and nutritious food.

Their victuals they generaly dress by broiling or toasting them upon the
coals, so we judg'd by the remains we saw; they knew however the method
of baking or stewing with hot stones and sometimes practis'd it, as we now
and then saw the pits and burnd stones which had been made use of for that
purpose.

We observd that some tho but few held constantly in their mouths the
leaves of an herb which they chewd as a European does tobacca or an East
Indian Betele. What sort of plant it was we had not an opportunity of
learning as we never saw any thing but the chaws which they took from
their mouths to shew us; it might be of the Betele kind and so far as we
could judge from the fragments was so, but whatever it was it was usd
without any addition and seemd to have no kind of effect upon either the
teeth or lips of those who usd it.

Naked as these people are when abroad they are scarce at all better
defended from the injuries of the weather when at home, if that name can
with propriety be given to their houses--as I beleive they never make any
stay in them but wandering like the Arabs from place to place set them up
whenever they meet with one where sufficient supplys of food are to be
met with, and as soon as these are exhausted remove to another leaving the
houses behind, which are framd with less art or rather less industry than
any habitations of human beings probably that the world can shew.

At Sting-Rays Bay, where they were the best, each was capable of
containing within it 4 or 5 people but not one of all these could in any
direction extend himself his whole lengh; for hight he might just set
upright, but if inclind to sleep must coil himself in some crooked position
as the dimensions were in no direction long enough to hold him otherwise.
They were built in the form of an oven of pliable rods about as thick as a
mans finger, the Ends of which were stuck into the ground and the whole
coverd with Palm leaves and broad peices of Bark; the door was a pretty
large hole at one end, opposite to which by the ashes there seemd to be a
fire kept pretty constantly to the Northward. Again where the warmth of
the climate made houses less necessary they were in proportion still more
slight; a house there was nothing but a hollow shelter about 3 or 4 feet deep
built like the former and like them coverd with bark; one side of this was
intirely open which was always that which was shelterd from the course of
the prevailing wind, and opposite to this door was always a heap of ashes,
the remains of a fire probably more necessary to defend them from
Mosquetos than cold. In these it is probable that they only sought to defend
their heads and the upper part of their bodies from the Draught of air,
trusting their feet to the care of the fire, and so small they were that even in
this manner not above 3 or 4 people could possibly croud into one of them.
But small as the trouble of erecting such houses must be they did not
always do it; we saw many places in the woods where they had slept with
no other shelter than a few bushes and grass a foot or two high to shade
them from the wind; this probably is their custom while they travel from
place to place and sleep upon the road in situations where they do not mean
to make any stay.

The only Furniture belonging to these houses, that we saw at least, was
oblong vessels of Bark made by the simple contrivance of tying up the two
ends of a longish peice with a withe which not being cut off serves for a
handle, these we imagind serv'd for the purpose of Water Buckets to fetch
water from the springs which may sometimes be distant. We have reason to
suppose that when they travel these are carried by the women from place to
place; indeed the few opportunities we had of seeing the women they were
generaly employd in some laborious occupation as fetching wood,
gathering shell fish etc.

The men again maybe constantly carry their arms in their hands, 3 or 4
lances in one and the machine with which they throw them in the other;
these serve them in the double capacity of defending them from their
enemies and striking any animal or fish that they may meet with. Besides
these each has a small bag about the size of a moderate Cabbage net which
hangs loose upon his back fas[t]ned to a small string which passes over the
crown of his head; this seems to contain all their worldly treasures, each
man hardly more than might be containd in the crown of a hat-a lump or
two of Paint, some fish hooks and lines, shells to make them of, Points of
Darts and resin and their usual ornaments were the general contents.

Thus live these I had almost said happy people, content with little nay
almost nothing, Far enough removd from the anxieties attending upon
riches, or even the possession of what we Europeans call common
necessaries: anxieties intended maybe by Providence to counterbalance the
pleasure arising from the Posession of wishd for attainments, consequently
increasing with increasing wealth, and in some measure keeping up the
balance of hapiness between the rich and the poor. From them appear how
small are the real wants of human nature, which we Europeans have
increasd to an excess which would certainly appear incredible to these
people could they be told it. Nor shall we cease to increase them as long as
Luxuries can be invented and riches found for the purchase of them; and
how soon these Luxuries degenerate into necessaries may be sufficiently
evincd by the universal use of strong liquors, Tobacco, spices, Tea etc. etc.
In this instance again providence seems to act the part of a leveler, doing
much towards putting all ranks into an equal state of wants and
consequently of real poverty: the Great and Magnificent want as much and
may be more than the midling: they again in proportion more than the
inferior: each rank still looking higher than his station but confining itself
to a certain point above which it knows not how to wish, not knowing at
least perfectly what is there enjoyd.

Tools among them we saw almost none, indeed having no arts which
require any it is not to be expected that they should have many. A stone
made sharp at the edge and a wooden mallet were the only ones we saw
that had been formd by art; the use of these we supposd to be in making the
notches in the bark of high trees by which they climb them for purposes
unknown to us, and for cutting and perhaps driving wedges to take of the
bark which they must have in large peices for making Canoes, Sheilds and
water buckets and also for covering their houses. Besides these they use
shells and corals to scrape the points of their darts, and polish them with
the leaves of a kind of wild Fig tree (Ficus Radulo) which bites upon wood
almost as keenly as our European shave grass usd by the Joiners. Their fish
hooks are made of shell very neatly and some exceedingly small; their
lines are also well twisted and they have them from the size of a half inch
rope to almost the fineness of a hair made of some vegetable. Of Netting
they seem to be quite ignorant but make their bags, the only thing of the
kind we saw among them, by laying the threads loop within loop
something in the way of knitting only very coarse and open, in the very
same manner as I have seen ladies make purses in England. That they had
no sharp instruments among them we venturd to guess from the
circumstance of an old man who came to us one day with a beard rather
larger than his fellows: the next day he came again, his beard was then
almost croppd close to his chin and upon examination we found the ends of
the hairs all burnd so that he had certainly singd it off. Their manner of
Hunting and taking wild animals we had no opportunity of seeing: we only
guessd that the notches which they had every where cut in the Bark of
large trees, which certainly servd to make climbing more easy to them,
might be intended for the ascending these trees in order either to watch for
any animal who unwarily passing under them they might peirce with their
darts, or for the taking birds who at night might Roost in them. We guessd
also that the fires which we saw so frequently as we passd along shore,
extending over a large tract of countrey and by which we could constantly
trace the passage of the Indians who went from us in Endeavours river up
into the countrey, were intended in some way or other for the taking of the
animal calld by them Kanguru, which we found to be so much afraid of fire
that we could hardly force it with our dogs to go over places newly burnt.
They get fire very expeditiously with two peices of stick very readily and
nimbly: the one must be round and 8 or nine inches long and both it and
the other should be dry and soft; the round one they sharpen a little at one
end and pressing it upon the other turn it round with the palms of their
hands just as Europeans do a chocolate mill, often shifting their hands up
and running them down quick to make the pressure as hard as possible; in
this manner they will get fire in less than 2 minutes and when once posessd
of the smallest spark increase [it] in a manner truely wonderfull. We often
admird to see a man run along shore who seemd to carry no one thing in
his hand and yet as he ran along, just stooping down every 50 or 100 yards,
smoak and fire were seen among the drift wood and dirt at that place
almost the instant he had left it. This we afterwards found was done cheifly
by the infinite readyness with which every kind of rubbish, sticks, witherd
leaves or dry grass already almost dryd to tinder by the heat of the sun and
dryness of the season would take fire: he took for instance when he set off
a small bit of fire and wrapping it up in dry grass ran on, this soon blazd,
he then layd it down on the most convenient place for his purpose that he
could find and taking up a small part of it wrappd that in part of the dry
rubbish in which he had layd it, in this manner proceeding as long as he
thought proper.

Their Weapons, offensive at least, were precisely the same where ever
we saw them except that at the very last view we had of the countrey we
saw through our glasses a man who carried a Bow and arrows; in this we
might but I beleive we were not mistaken. They consisted of one only
species, a Pike or Lance from 8 to 14 feet in lengh: this they threw short
distances with their hands and for longer, 40 or more yards, with an
instrument made for the purpose. The upper part of these Lances were
made either of Cane or the stalk of a plant something resembling a
Bullrush ( ) which was very streight and light: the point again was made of
very heavy and hard wood, the whole arfully balancd for throwing tho very
clumsily made in two, three or four joints, at each of which the parts were
let into each other and besides being tied round the Joint was smeard over
very thick with their Resin which made it larger and more clumsey than
any other part. The points were of several sorts: those which we concluded
to be intended against men were indeed most cruel weapons: they were all
single pointed either with the stings of sting-rays, a large one of which
servd for the point, and three or 4 smaller tied the contrary way made
barbs: or simply of wood made very sharp and smeard thick over with resin
into which was stuck many broken bits of sharp shells, so that if such a
weapon pierced a man it was many to one that it could not be drawn out
without leaving several of those unwelcome guests in his flesh, certain to
make the wound ten times more dificult to cure than it otherwise would be.
The others which we supposd to be usd merely for striking fish, birds etc.
had generaly simple points of wood or if they were barbd it was with only
one splinter of wood. The instrument with which they threw them was a
plain stick or peice of wood 2 and ½ or 3 feet in lengh, at one end of
which was a small knob or hook and near the other a kind of cross peice to
hinder it from slipping out of their hands. With this contrivance,
simple as it is and ill fitted for the purpose, they threw the lances 40 or
more yards with a swiftness and steadyness truley surprizing; the knob
being hookd into a small dent made in the top of the lance they held it over
their shoulder and shaking it an instant as balancing threw it with the
greatest ease imaginable. The neatest of these throwing sticks that we saw
were made of a hard reddish wood polish[d] and shining; their sides were
flat and about 2 inches in breadth and the handle or part to keep it from
dropping out of the hand coverd with thin layers of polished bone very
white; these I beleive to be the things which many of our people were
deceivd by imagining them to be wooden swords, Clubs etc. according to
the direction in which they happned to see them. Defensive weapons we
saw only in Sting-Rays bay and there only a single instance--a man who
attempted to oppose our Landing came down to the Beach with a sheild of
an oblong shape about 3 feet long and 1½ broad made of the bark of a
tree; this he left behind when he ran away and we found upon taking it up
that it plainly had been piercd through with a single pointed lance near the
center. That such sheilds were frequently usd in that neighbourhood we
had however sufficient proof, often seeing upon trees the places from
whence they had been cut and sometimes the sheilds themselves cut out
but not yet taken off from the tree; the edges of the bark only being a little
raisd with wedges; which shews that these people certainly know how
much thicker and stronger bark becomes by being sufferd to remain upon
the tree some time after it is cut round.

That they are a very pusilanimous people we had reason to suppose from
every part of their conduct in every place where we were except Sting Rays
bay, and there only the instance of the two people who opposd the Landing
of our two boats full of men for near a quarter of an hour and were not to
be drove away till serveral times wounded with small shot, which we were
obligd to do as at that time we suspected their Lances to be poisned from
the quantity of gum which was about their points; but upon every other
occasion both there and every where else they behavd alike, shunning us
and giving up any part of the countrey which we landed upon at once: and
that they use stratagems in war we learnt by the instance in Sting-rays bay
where our Surgeon with another man walking in the woods met 8 Indians;
they stood still but directed another who was up in a tree how and when he
should throw a Lance at them, which he did and on its not taking effect
they all ran away as fast as possible.

Their Canoes were the only things in which we saw a manifest difference
between the Southern and Northern people. Those in the Southward were
little better contrivd or executed than their Houses: a peice of Bark tied
together in Pleats at the ends and kept extended in the middle by small
bows of wood was the whole embarkation, which carried one or two, nay
we once saw three people, who movd it along in shallow water by setting
with long poles; and in deeper by padling with padles about 18 inches long,
one of which they held in each hand. In the middle of these Canoes was
generaly a small fire upon a heap of sea weed, for what purpose intended
we did not learn except perhaps to give the fisherman an opportunity of
Eating fish in perfection by broiling it the moment it is taken.

To the Northward again their canoes tho exceeding bad were far superior
to these. They were small but regularly hollowd out of the trunk of a tree
and fitted with an outrigger to prevent them from oversetting; in these they
had paddles large enough to require both hands to work them. Of this sort
we saw only [] [] and had an opportunity of examining only one of them
which might be about 10 or 11 feet long but was immensely narrow; the
sides of the tree were left in their natural state untouch'd by tools but at
each [end?] they had cut off from the under part and left part of the upper
side overhanging; the inside also was not ill hollowd and the sides
tolerably thin. What burthen it was capable of carrying we had many times
an opportunity to see: 3 people or at most 4 were as many as dare venture
in it and if any more wanted to come over the river, which in that place was
about a half a mile broad, one of these would carry back the Canoe and
fetch them.

This was the only peice of workmanship which I saw among the New
Hollanders that seemd to require tools. How they had hollowd her out or
cut the ends I cannot guess but upon the whole the work was not ill done;
Indian patience might do a great deal with shells etc. without the use of
stone axes, which if they had had they would propably have used to form
her outside as well as inside. That such a canoe takes them up much time
and trouble in the making may be concluded from our seeing so few, and
still more from the moral certainty which we have that the Tribe which
visited [us] and consisted to our knowledge of 21 people and may be of
several more had only one such belonging to them. How tedious must it be
for these people to be ferried over a river a mile or two wide by threes and
fours at a time: how well therefore worth the pains for them to stock
themselves better with boats if they could do it!

I am inclind to beleive that besides these Canoes the Northern People
know and make use of the Bark one of the South, and that from having
seen one of the small paddles left by them upon a small Island where they
had been fishing for Turtle; it lay upon a heap of Turtle shells and bones,
Trophies of the good living they had had when there, and with it lay a
broken staff of a Turtle pegg and a rotten line, tools which had been worn
out I suppose in the service of Catching them. We had great reason to
beleive that at some season of the year the weather is much more moderate
than we found it, otherwise the Indians never could have venturd in any
canoes that we saw half so far from the main Land as Islands were on
which we saw evident marks of their having been, such as decayd houses,
fires, the before mentiond Turtle bones etc. May be at this more moderate
time they may make and use such Canoes, and when the Blustering season
comes on may convert the bark of which they were made to the purposes
of covering houses, making Water buckets etc. etc. well knowing that
when the next season returns they will not want a supply of bark to rebuild
their vessels. Another reason we have to imagine that such a moderate
season exists, and that the Winds are then upon the Eastern board as we
found them, is that whatever Indian houses or sleeping places we saw on
these Islands were built upon the summits of small hills if there were any,
or if not, in places where no bushes or wood could intercept the course of
the wind, and their shelter was always turnd to the Eastward. On the main
again, their houses were universaly built in valleys, or under the shelter of
trees which might defend them from the very winds which in the Islands
they exposd themselves to.

Of their Language I can say very little. Our acquaintance with them was
of so short a duration that none of us attempted to use a single word of it to
them, consequently the list of words I have given could be got no other
manner than by signs enquiring of them what in their Language signified
such a thing, a method obnoxious to many mistakes: for instance a man
holds in his hand a stone and asks the name of [it]: the Indian may return
him for answer either the real name of a stone, one of the properties of it as
hardness, roughness, smoothness etc., one of its uses or the name peculiar
to some particular species of stone, which name the enquirer immediately
sets down as that of a stone. To avoid however as much as Possible this
inconvenience Myself and 2 or 3 more got from them as many words as we
could, and having noted down those which we though[t] from
circumstances we were not mistaken in we compard our lists; those in
which all the lists agreed, or rather were contradicted by none, we thought
our selves moraly certain not to be mistaken in. Of these my list cheefly
consists, some only being added that were in only one list such as from the
ease with which signs might be contrivd to ask them were thought little
less certain than the others.

Wageegee     the head      Meanang    Fire
Morye        the hair      Walba      a stone
Melcea       the ears      Yowall     Sand
Yembe        the Lips      Gurka      a Rope
Bonjoo       the Nose      Bama       a Man
Unjar        the tongue    Poinja     a male Turtle
Wallar       the Beard     Mameingo   a female
Doomboo      the Neck      Maragan    a Canoe
Cayo         the Nipples   Pelenyo    to Paddle
Toolpoor     the Navel     Takai      Set down
Mangal       the Hands     Mierbarrar smooth
Coman        the thighs    Garmbe     Blood
Pongo        the Knees     Yocou      Wood
Edamal       the Feet      Tapool     bone in nose
Kniorror     the Heel      Charngala  a Bag
Chumal       the sole      Kulke      the Nails
Chongarn     the ancle     Gallan     the Sun

Cherr/Cherco/Yarcaw/Tut tut tut tut) expressions maybe of admiration which they
                                   ) continualy usd while in company with us

They very often use the article Ge which seems to answer to our English
'a' as Ge Gurka a rope.


* * * * *


[SEPTEMBER 1770: INCL. ACCOUNTS OF SAVU AND ISLANDS NEAR SAVU (20TH)]


1770 September 1.

Distant as the land was a very Fragrant smell came of from it realy in the
morn with the little breeze which blew right off shore, it resembled much
the smell of gum Benjamin; as the sun gatherd power it dyed away and was
no longer smelt. All the latter part of the day we had calms or light winds
all round the compass, the weather at the same time being most intolerably
hot.


1770 September 2.

Fresh breeze again at E. In the morn the sweet smell of yesterday was
observd tho in a much smaller degree. In the even it was almost calm and
again intensely hot.


1770 September 3.

After having saild all night along shore with a brisk breeze we found
ourselves in the morn not far from it: It appeard as it had done whenever
we had seen it before, uncommonly flat and low, not having so much as a
slope in any part, the whole one grove of trees very thick and pleasant to
all appearance. This was the sixth day we had now coasted along still upon
the same bank of mud, which by its shoalness prevented our approaches
near enough to make going ashore convenient. This delay and the loss of
so many days fair wind when we well knew the SE Monsoon was nearly at
an end was irksome to us all: it was therefore resolvd to run the ship in as
near the shore as possible and then send off the pinnace, which might go
ashore while the ship ply'd off and on and learn whether the produce of the
countrey or the usage she might meet with from the inhabitants would be
such as might induce us to search farther. We accordingly stood right in
shore and at ½ past 8 had less than 3 fathm water 5 or 6 miles from the
shore. The Captn Dr Solander and myself with the Boats crew and my
servants, consisting in all of 12 men well armd, went in her and rowd
directly towards the shore but could not get nearer than about 200 yards on
account of the shallowness of the water; we quickly however got out of the
boat and waded ashore leaving two in her to take care of her. We had no
sooner landed than we saw the prints of naked feet upon the mud below
High watermark, which convincd us that the Indians were not far off tho
we had seen yet no signs of any. The nature of the countrey made it
necessary for us to be very much upon our guard: the close thick wood
came down to within less than 100 yards of the water, and therefore so near
might the Indians come without our seeing them, and should they by
numbers overpower us a retreat to the boat was impossible as she was so
far from the shore. We proceeded therefore with much caution, looking
carefully about us, myself and the Dr looking for plants at the edge of the
wood and the rest walking along the Beach. In about 200 yards from our
landing we came to a grove of Cocoa nut trees of a very small growth but
well hung with fruit standing upon the banks of a small brook of brackish
water. Near them was a small shed hardly half coverd with cocoa nut
leaves, in and about which were infinite Cocoa nut shells, some quite fresh.
We stayd under these trees some time admiring and wishing for the fruit,
but as none of us could climb it was impossible to get even one so we even
left them and proceeded in search of any thing else which might occur. We
soon found Plantains and a single Bread fruit tree but neither of these had
any fruit on them, so we proceeded and had got about a quarter of a mile
from the boat when on a sudden 3 Indians rushd out of the woods with a
hideous shout, about 100 yards beyond us and running towards us. The
formost threw something out of his hand which flew on one side of him
and burnd exactly like gunpowder, the other two immediately threw two
darts at us on which we fird. The most of our guns were loaded with small
shot which at the distance they were from us I suppose they hardly felt, for
they movd not at all but immediately threw a third dart on which we loaded
and fird again. Our Balls I suppose this time fell near them but none of
them were materialy hurt as they ran away with great alacrity. From this
specimen of the people we immediately concluded that nothing was to be
got here but by force, which would of course be attended with destruction
of many of these poor people, whose territories we had certainly no right to
invade either as discoverers or people in real want of provisions; we
therefore resolvd to go into our boat and leave intirely this coast to some
aftercomer who might have either more time or better opportunities to gain
the freindship of its inhabitants. Before we had got abreast of her however
we saw the two people in her make signals to us that more Indians were
coming along shore, and before we had got into the water we saw them
come round a point about 500 yards from us. They had met probably the
three who first attackd us for on seeing us they halted and seemd to wait till
the main body should come up, nor did they come nearer us all the while
we waded to her; they continued however with their fire to defy us and
shouted very loud. When we were embarked and afloat we rowd towards
them and fird some musquets over their heads into the trees, on which they
walkd gradualy off continuing to throw abundance of their fires (whatever
they migh[t] be designed for). We guessd their numbers to be about 100.

After we had lookd at them and their behaviour as long as we chose we
returnd to the ship, where our freinds had sufferd much anziety for our
sakes imagining that the fires thrown by the Indians were real musquets, so
much did they resemble the fire and smoak made by the firing of one.
The place where we landed we judgd to be near Cabo de la Colta de
Santa Bonaventura, as it is calld in the French charts, about 9 or 10 lgs to
the Southward of Keer Weer. We were not ashore upon the whole more
than two hours so can not be expected to have made many observations.
The Soil had all the appearance of the highest fertil[it]y but was coverd
with a prodigious quantity of trees which seemd to thrive luxuriantly.
Notwithstanding this the cocoa nut trees bore very small Fruit and the
Plantains did not seem very thriving; the only breadfruit tree that we saw
however was very large and healthy. There was very little variety of plants:
we saw only 23 species every one of which was known to us, except
perhaps the 1st and 2nd may prove upon comparison to be different from
any of the many Species of Cyperus we have still undetermind from New
Holland. Had we had axes to cut down the trees or could we have venturd
into the woods we should doubtless have found more, but we had only an
opportunity of examining the beach and edge of the wood. I am of opinion
however that the countrey does not abound in variety of species, as I have
been in no one before where I could not on a good soil have gatherd more
by far with the same time and opportunity. Here follows the list:

Cyperus....
Eugenia Butonica Mscr.
Commerlina communis Linn.
Vitex trifolia Linn.
Convolvulus Brasiliensis Linn.
Hibiscus tiliaceus Linn.
Solanum nigrum Linn.
Glycine speciosa Mscr.
Morinda citrifolia Linn.
Dolichos giganteus Mscr.
Chaitea Tacca Mscr.
Abrus precatorius Linn.
Lobelia Plumierii Linn.
Hedysarum umbellatum Linn.
Arum macroizum Linn.
Sitodium altile Mscr.
Coix Lacryma Jobi Linn.
Casuarina equisetifolia Mscr.
Guilandina Bonduccela Linn.
Musa Paradisaica Linn.
Cocos nucifera Linn.

The people as well as we could judge were nearly of the same colour as
the New Hollanders, some thought rather lighter, they were certainly stark
naked. Their arms that they made use of against us were very light ill made
darts of Bamboo cane pinted with hard wood in which were many barbs;
they may be shot them with bows but I am of opinion that they threw them
with a stick something in the manner of the New Hollanders; they came
beyond us about 60 yards, but not in a point blanc direction. Besides these
many among them, may be a fifth part of the whole, had in their hands a
short peice of stick may be hollow cane, which they swung sideways from
them and immediately fire flew from it perfectly resembling the flash and
smoak of a musquet and of no longer duration; for what purpose this was
done is far above my guessing. They had with them several dogs who ran
after them in the same manner as ours do in Europe.

The house or shed that we saw was very mean and poor. It consisted of 4
stakes drove into the ground, 2 being longer than the other two: over these
were layd cocoa nut leaves loose and not half enough to cover it. By the
cutting of these stakes as well as of the arrows or darts which they threw at
us we concluded that they had no Iron among them.

As soon as ever the boat was hoisted in we made sail and steerd away
from this land to the No small satisfaction of I beleive thre[e] fourths of
our company the sick became well and the melancholy lookd gay. The
greatest part of them were now pretty far gone with the longing for home
which the Physicians have gone so far as to esteem a disease under the
name of Nostalgia; indeed I can find hardly any body in the ship clear of its
effects but the Captn Dr Solander and myself, indeed we three have pretty
constant employment for our minds which I beleive to be the best if not the
only remedy for it.


1770 September 4.

Brisk trade and fine weather. The alterd Countenances of our common
people were still more perceivable than they were yesterday. Two thirds
allowance had I beleive made the cheif difference with them, for our
provisions were now so much wasted by keeping that that allowance was
little more than was necessary to keep life and soul together.


1770 September 5.

During last night a low Island was seen and in the morn another, of a flat
appearance but tolerably high. We supposd that these might be the Arow
Isles as the latitude agreed very well, but if they were these Isles must be
far nearer the Coast of New Guinea than any of our draughts place them.
Many very large Blubbers (medusas) were seen, also Egg Birds, Bonitos
and one Turtle. In the Eve we deepned our water to 50 fathm and saw then
some small Mother Careys chickens (Proc. Fregata) about us which we
always have lookd upon as a mark of being at a good distance from the
Land. We saw also a man of war Bird, many Nectris's and Gannets;
towards night a Booby (Pel ) settled on our rigging and was caught, the
first we have met with in the voyage.


1770 September 6.

Pleasant trade: our water deepned to 180 fathm. A tropick bird and 2
black and white Gannets seen about the ship. At Noon a large high Island
was in sight, possibly Timor Land, tho if so the charts have laid it down
much too far to the Southward. The supposition of its being so made us
think of Timor, which had been visited by our countrey man Dampier; this
thought made home recur to my mind stronger than it had done throughout
the whole voyage: the distance I now conceivd to be nothing very great.


1770 September 7.

Trade as brisk and pleasant as ever. Infinite flying fish about the ship,
some nectris's and Man of War Birds, many Gannets also seen; at Night 2
Bobies were caught.


1770 September 8.

Much less wind today; many Gannets and Bobies were seen. At Night 2
of the latter were taken.


1770 September 9.

Light breezes and almost calm. Myself in my small boat a shooting killd
3 dozn. of Bobies and gannets; the last provd to be the Pelicanus Piscator
of Linnaeus. At night a strong appearance of very high Land was observd
to the Westward which causd many different opinions; the Seamen
however in general insisted on its being clouds, an opinion which its
unusual hight above the horizon considerd with respect to the faintness
with which it appeard seemd much to favour.


1770 September 10.

Quite calm. The appearance of Land to the West was again seen and
most of the seamen by it Convincd that it realy was such; some however
still held to their former opinion. Many Dolphins were about the ship and
one shark was caught at Sunset. The Land appeard again in exactly the
same place which at last convinc'd our most sturdy unbeleivers.


1770 September 11.

By day Break in the morn another shark was caught: the two together
weighing 126 lb were servd to the ships company and every man in her, I
may venture to affirm, from the Captn to the Swabber dind heartily upon it.
Many smoaks ashore.


1770 September 12.

As soon as the light was pretty clear the Land again appeard 5 or 6 Lgs
off; by 7 the Wind came to west so we stood in for it. It was very high
rising in gradual slopes from the hills which were in great measure coverd
with thick woods; among them however we could distinguish bare spots of
a large extent which at least look'd as if cleard by art; many fires were also
seen on all parts of the hills, some very high up. At night fall we were
within 1 and ½ miles of the Beach just abreast of a little inlet. The
countrey seemd to answer very well the description which Dampier has
given of Timor, the land close to the beach being coverd with high spiring
trees which he likens to Pines (Casuarina) behind which was great
appearance of Salt water creeks and many mangroves; in Parts however
were many Cocoa nut trees close down to the Beach. The flat land seemd
to reach in some places 2 or 3 miles before the rise of the first hill. We saw
no appearance of Plantations or houses near the sea but the land looked
most fertile, and from the many fires we had seen in different parts we
could not help having a good opinion of its population.


1770 September 13.

With the wind as foul as ever we continued to ply along shore, not
gaining much and being too far off to see any thing but large fires of which
were several ashore. Our Croakers began now to talk of the westerly
monsoon, and say that they had sometime thought that the unusual
Briskness of the Trade wind for some days before we fell in with this
Island was a sure prognostick of it.


1770 September 14.

Our Westerly wind still continued and we plyd with our usual success.
Infinite albecores and bonetos were about the ship attended (as they always
are when near land) by some species of Sterna; these were Dampiers New
Holland Noddies which flew in large flocks hovering over the shoals of
fish. Many Man of War birds also attended and Entertaind us by very
frequently stooping at albecores so large that 20 times their strengh could
not have lifted them, had they been dextrous enough to seize them which
they never once effected.


1770 September 15.

Wind came fair today and left our melancholy ones to search for some
new occasion of sorrow. There was much less of it than we could have
wishd and yet enough to alter the appearance of the countrey very sensibly.
The Island was now Hilly tho not near so high as it had been; the Hills in
general came quite down to the sea and where they did not, instead of flats
and mangrovy land, were immense groves of Cocoa nut trees; about a mile
up from the Beach began the plantations and houses almost innumerable
standing under the shade of large groves of Palms appearing like Fan Palm
(Borassus); the Plantations which were in general enclosd with some kind
of Fence reach'd almost to the tops of the Hills, but near the Beach were no
certain marks of habitations seen. But what surpr[i]zd us most was that
notwithstanding all these indisputable marks of Populous countrey we saw
neither people nor any kind of cattle stirring all the day, tho our glasses
were almost continualy employ'd.


1770 September 16.

Trade rather fresher than yesterday. Soon after breakfast the small Island
of Rotte was in sight and soon after the opening appeard plain which at last
convincd our old unbeleivers that the Island we has so [long?] been off was
realy Timor. Soon after dinner we passd the Streights. The Island of Rotte
was not mountanous or high like Timor but consisted of Hills and vales: on
the East End of it some of our people saw Houses but I did not: the North
side had frequent sandy beaches near which grew some few of the Fan
Palm, but the greatest part was coverd with a kind of brushy trees which
had few or no leaves upon them. The opening between Timor and the
Island calld by Dampeir Anabao we plainly saw which appeard narrow.
Anabao itself lookd much like Timor, only was rather less high: we saw on
it no signs of cultivation, but as it was misty and we were well on the other
side of the streights, which we judgd to be 5 Lgs over, we saw it but very
indifferently. Off the Western end of it was a small low sandy Island
coverd with trees; before night however we had left all behind us.

About 10 O'Clock a Phaenomenon appeard in the heavens in many things
resembling the Aurora Borealis but differing materialy in others: it
consisted of a dull reddish light reaching in hight about 20 degrees above
the Horizon: its extent was very different at different times but never less
than 8 or 10 points of the compass. Through and out of this passd rays of a
brighter colourd light tending directly upwards; these appeard and vanishd
nearly in the same time as those of the Aurora Borealis, but were entirely
without that trembling or vibratory motion observd in that Phaenomenon.
The body of it bore from the ship SSE: it lasted as bright as ever till near
12 when I went down to sleep but how much longer I cannot tell.


1770 September 17.

In the morn an Island in sight very imperfectly if at all laid down in the
Charts. By 10 we were very near the East end of it; it was not high, but
composd of gently sloping hills and vales almost intirely cleard and coverd
with innumerable Palm trees; near the Beach were many Houses, but no
people were seen stirring. Soon after we passd the NE point, and saw on
the beach a large flock of sheep, but still no people: the North side of the
Isle appeard scarce at all cultivated, but like that of Rotte coverd with thick
brush wood almost or quite destitute of Leaves: among these as we pass'd
along we saw numerous flocks of sheep, but no houses or plantations. At
last however one was discoverd in a grove of Cocoa nut trees, and it was
resolvd to send a boat in order to attempt a commerce with people who
seemd so well able to supply our many Necessities. The ship ply'd off and
on and a Lieutenant went: before he returnd we saw on the Hills 2 men on
horseback, who seemd to ride as for their amusement, looking often at the
ship--a circumstance which made us at once conclude that their were
Europeans among the Islanders by whoom we should be receivd at least
more politely than we were us'd to be by uncivilizd Indians.

After a very short stay he returnd bringing word that he had seen Indians
in all respects as colour, dress etc. much resembling the Malays; that they
very civily invited him ashore and conversd with him by signs but neither
party could understand the other; they were totaly unarmd except the
knives which they wore in their girdles and had with them a Jackass, a sure
sign that Europeans had been among them.

In Plying off and on we had had no ground tho very near a Coral shoal
which ran off from the Island, so had no hopes of anchorage here; it was
therefore resolvd that we should go to the lee side of the Isle in hopes there
to find a Bank; in the mean time however the boat with some truck should
go ashore at the Cocoa nut grove in hopes to purchase some trifling
refreshments for the sick in case we should be disapointed. It accordingly
put off and Dr Solander went in it; before it reachd the shore we saw two
new Horsemen, one of whoom had on a compleat European dress, Blue
Coat, white waiscoat and lac'd hat: these as the Boat lay ashore seemd to
take little notice of her but only Saunterd about looking much at the ship.
Many more horse-men however and still more footmen gatherd round our
people who were ashore, and we had the satisfaction of seeing several
cocoa nuts brought into the boat, a sure sign that peace and plenty reignd
ashore.

After a stay of about an hour and a half the boat made a signal of having
had intelligence of a harbour to Leeward and we in consequence bore away
for it. The boat following soon came on board and told us that the people
had behavd in an uncommaly civil manner; that they had seen some of
their principal people who were dressd in fine linnen and had chains of
gold round their necks; that they had not been able to trade, the owner of
the Cocoa nut trees not being there, but had got about 2 dozn of Cocoa nuts
given as a present by these principal people, who accepted of Linnen in
return and made them plainly understand by drawing a map upon the sand
that on the Lee side of the Island was a bay in which we might anchor near
a town and buy Sheep, hogs, fruits, fowls etc.; they talked much of the
Portugese and of Larntuca on the Island of Ende, from which circumstance
it was probable that the Portugese were somewhere on the Island tho none
of the natives could speak more than a word or two of the Language, and
the more so as one of the Indians in speaking of the Town made a sign of
something we should see there which would shew us that we were right, by
crossing his fingers, which a Portugese who was in the boat immediately
interpreted into a cross, a supposition that appeard very probable; that just
before they put off the man in a European dress Came towards them, but
the officer in the boat not having his commission about him thoug[h]t
proper to put off immediately without staying to speak to him or know
what countrey man he was.

We saild along shore and after having passd a point of Land found a bay
shelterd from the trade wind in which we soon discoverd a large Indian
town or village, on which we stood in hoisting a Jack on the foretopmast
head. Soon after to our no small surprize Duch Colours were hoisted in the
town and 3 guns fird. We however proceeded and just at dark got
soundings and anchord about 1½ miles from the shore.


1770 September 18.

In the morn the Boat with the 2nd Lieutenant went ashore and was
receivd by a guard of 20 or 30 Indians armd with musquets, who conducted
him to the town about a mile in the countrey, marching without any order
or regularity and carrying away with them Duch Colours which had been
hoisted upon the beach opposite to where the ship lay. Here he was
introduc'd to the Radja or Indian King who he told by a Portugese
interpreter that we were an English man of war who had been long at sea
and had many sick on board, for whoom we wanted to purchase such
refreshments as the Island afforded. He answerd that he was willing to
supply us with every thing we should want, but being in alliance with the
Duch East Indian Company he was not allowd to trade with any other
people without their consent, which however he would immediately apply
for to a Duchman belonging to that Company who was the only white man
residing upon the Island. A letter was accordingly dispatchd immediately
and after some hours waiting answerd by the man in Person, who assurd
him with many Civilities that we were at liberty to buy of the natives
whatever we pleasd. He express'd a desire of coming on board, as well as
the King and several of his attendants, provided however that some of our
people might stay on shore, on which two were left and about 2 they
arrivd. Our dinners were ready and they readily agreed to dine with us. At
setting down however the King excusd himself, saying that he did not
imagine that we who were white men would suffer him who was black to
set down in our company. A complement however removd his scruples and
he and his prime minister sat down and eat sparingly. During all dinner
time we receivd many professions of freindship from both the King and the
European who was a native of Saxony by name Johan Christopr Lange.
Mutton was our fare: the King expressd a desire of having an English
sheep; we had one left which was presented to him. An English dog was
then askd for and my greyhound presented to him. Mynheer Lange then
hinted that a spying glass would be acceptable and was immediately
presented with one. We were told that the Island abounded in Buffaloes,
sheep, hogs, and fowls, all which should the next day be drove down to the
Beach and we might buy any quantity of them. This agreable intelligence
put us all into high spirits and the liquor went about full as much as either
Mynheer Lange or the Indians could bear, who however expressed a desire
of going away before they were quite drunk. They were receivd upon deck
as they had been when they came on board, by the marines under arms: the
King expresssd a desire of Seeing them excersise, which accordingly they
did and fird 3 rounds, much to his majesties satisfaction, who expressd
great surprize particularly at their so speedily cocking their guns, which he
expressd by striking a stick upon the side of the ship saying that all the
locks made but one click. Dr Solander and myself went ashore in the Boat
with them; as soon as we put off they saluted the ship with three chears
which the ship answerd with five guns.

We landed and walkd up to the town which consisted of a good many
houses, some tolerably large, each being a roof of thach covering a boarded
floor supported by Pillars 3 or 4 feet from the ground. Before we had been
long there it began to grow dark and we returnd on board, having only just
tasted their Palm wine which had a very sweet taste and suited all our
palates very well, giving us at the same time hopes that it might be
servicable to our sick, as being the fresh and unfermented juice of the tree
it promisd ante-scorbutick virtues.


1770 September 19.

In the morn we went ashore and proceeded immediately to the house of
assembly, a large house which we had yesterday mistaken for the Kings
Palace. This as well as 2 or 3 more in the Town or Negree as the Indians
call it have been built by the Duch East Indian Company; they are
distinguishd from the rest by 2 peices of wood, one at each end of the ridge
of the house, resembling cows horns--undoubtedly the thing designd by
the Indian who on the 17th made a sign of the mark by which we were to
know the town by crossing his fingers, which our Catholick Portugese
interpreted into a cross, from whence cheifly we were assur'd that the
settlement was originaly Portugese. In this house of Assembly we met My
[n]heer Lange and the Radja A Madocho Lomi Djara attended by many of
the Principal people: we told them that we had in the boat an assortment of
what few goods we had to truck with and desird leave to bring them ashore
which was immediately granted and orders given accordingly. We then
attempted to settle the Price of Buffaloes, sheep, hogs, etc. which were to
be payd in money, but here Mynheer Lange left us and told us that we must
settle that with the natives who would bring down large quantities to the
Beach. By this time the morning was pretty far advanc'd and we, resolving
not to go on board and eat salt meat when such a profusion of fresh was
continualy talkd of, petitiond his majesty that we might have liberty to
purchase a small Hog, some rice etc. and employ his subjects to cook them
for our dinner. He answerd that if we could eat victuals dressed by his
subjects, which he could hardly suppose, he would do himself the honour
of entertaining us; we expressd our gratitude and sent immediately on
board for liquors. About 5 O'Clock dinner was ready, consisting of 36
dishes or rather baskets containing alternately Rice and Boild Pork, and 3
earthen ware bowls of Soup or rather the Broth in which the Pork had been
boild; these were rangd on the floor and matts laid round them for us to set
upon. We were now conducted by turns to a hole in the floor near which
stood a man with a basket of water in his hand; here we wash'd our hands
and then rang'd ourselves in order round the victuals waiting for the King
to set down. We were told however that the custom of the countrey was
that the entertainer never sets down to meat with his guests, however if we
suspected the victuals to be poisoned he would willingly do it; we
suspected nothing and therefore desire'd that all things might go as usual;
all then sitting down we eat with good appetites, the Prime Minister and
My[n]heer Lange partaking with us. Our wine passd briskly about, the
Radja alone refusing to drink with us saying that it was wrong for the
master of the feast to be in liquor. The pork was excellent, the Rice as
good, the broth not bad, the spoons only which were made of leaves were
so small that few of us had patience to eat it: every one however made a
hearty dinner and as soon as we had done removd, as the custom it seems
was to let the Servants and seamen take our Places. These could not
dispach all, but when the women came to take away they forcd them to
take away with them all the Pork that was left.

Before dinner Mynheer Lange had mentiond to us a letter which he had
in the morn receivd from the Governor of Timor: the particulars of it were
now discussd. It acquainted him that a ship had been seen off that Island
and had Steerd from thence towards that which we were now upon: in case
such ship was to touch there in any distress she was to be supplied with
what she wanted but was not to be allowd to make any stay more than was
necessary, and was particularly requird not to make any large presents to
the inferior People, or to leave any with the Principal ones to be distributed
among them after he was gone. This we were told did not at all extend to
the Beads or small peices of cloth which we gave the Natives in return for
their small civilities, as bringing us palm wine etc. Some of our Gentlemen
were of opinion that the whole of this Letter was an imposition but whether
it was or not I shall not take upon myself to determine.

In the Evening we had intelligence from our trading place that No
Buffelloes or hogs had been brought down, a few sheep only, which were
taken away before our people who had sent for money could procure it;
some few fouls however were bought and a large quantity of a kind of
Syrup made from the Juice of the palm tree, which tho infinitely superior
to melasses or treacle sold at a very small price. We complaind to Mynheer
Lange. He said that as we had not ourselves been down upon the Beach the
Natives were afraid to take money of any one else least it should be false.
On this the Captn went immediately down but could see no cattle. While
he was gone Mr Lange complaind that our people had yet offerd no gold
for any thing; this he said the Islanders were displeasd at who had expected
to have gold for their stock.


1770 September 20.

Incl. Some Account of Savu, and Some Account of the Isles near Savu

In the morning early the Captn went ashore himself to purchase
Buffeloes. He was shewn two, one of which they valued at five guineas the
other a musquet; he offerd 3 guineas for the one and sent for a musquet to
give for the other. The money was flatly refus'd and before the Musquet
could be brought off Dr Solander, who had been up at the town in order to
speak to Mr Lange, returnd followd by 86 Spearmen and 20 musqueteers
sent by the King to tell us that this day and no more would be allowd us to
trade, after which we must be gone. This was the message that Dr Solander
had from the Radja by Mr Lange's interpretation, but a Portugese Indian
who came from Timor, probably Next in command to Mr Lange, carried it
much farther, telling us that we might stay ashore till night if we pleasd but
none of the natives would any more be allowd to trade with us; after which
he began to drive away those who had brought hens, syrup etc. To remedy
this an old sword which lay in the Boat was given to the Prime minister as
I have calld him, Mannudjame, who in an instant restord order and
severely chid the officer of the guard, an old Portugese Indian, for haveing
gone beyond their orders. Trade now was a brisk as ever, fowls and syrup
were bought cheap and in vast plenty, but now we will see what treatment
Dr Solander met with in the Town.

In the morn when he arriv'd there it was a long time before he could find
the Radja; at last however he did and receivd many civilities from him. Mr
Lange was however not to be found so no conversation could pass for want
of an interpreter. After some time a number of men came and taking their
arms rangd themselves in the yard; the Radja then appeard cross but shewd
nothing but civility to the Dr.

One of our servants who was trading now came into the yard, having a
garter tied over his shoulder for which he askd a cock: the Radja went to
him and askd him for it: he, ignorant of his quality, refusd unless he had a
Cock on which he was orderd to be turnd out of the yard, as were all our
people but the Dr who still was in the assembly house totaly ignorant of
what was going on. The Radja however now told him that Mr Lange was at
such a house, a hint to be gone but which was not taken as such, for the Dr
wanted nothing so much as to see Mr Lange and consequently went
directly to him. Mr Lange returnd to the Radjas with him and told him that
the People were almost in rebellion on account of the Radjas permitting us
to trade with goods instead of money, and that this day was positively the
last on which we could be allowd to do so, that he was much offended also
at the servant who had refus'd the garter. These storys were too ridiculous
to be taken much notice of therefore he still stayd in hopes of learning
something more. The guards were orderd to exercise which they did
clumsily enough with their spears: the Dr pleasd with the sight desird he
might see the excersise of their Sabres also. You had better not desire it,
said the duch man, the People are very much enrag'd. Now the Dr found
Mr Lange's intention which was to frighten him and us: it however had no
part of the design'd effect, we were too well convinc'd that both King and
people desird nothing so much as to trade with us to regard these political
menaces.

The Dr However set out for the Beach in order to tell us who were there
the state of the Case and with him came this formidable troop who behavd
as before mentiond. The state of the case appeard now Plain: Mr Lange
was to have a share of what the Buffeloes were sold for and that share was
to be paid in money; the Captn therefore, tho sore against his will, resolvd
to pay 5 guineas apeice for one or 2 Buffeloes and try to buy the rest for
musquets. Accordingly no sooner had he hinted his mind to the Portugese
Indian than a Buffeloe was brought down but a very small one, and five
guineas given for it; 2 more larger followd immediately for one of which a
musquet and for the other 5 guineas was given. There was now no more
occasion for money, 2 large herds of Buffeloes were brought down and we
pickd them just as we chose for a musquet apeice. We bought nine, as
many we thought as would last us to Batavia, especialy as we had little or
no victuals, but so ill were we provided with cords that 3 of the nine broke
from us; 2 of these the Indians recoverd but the third got quite off tho our
people assisted by the Indians followd him 3 hours.

In the Evening Mr Lange came down to the Beach softned by the money
which no doubt he had receivd: he who was in the morn as sour as verjuice
was now all sweetness and softness. The Dr who spoke German but little
was loth to mention to him any of the transactions of the morning, he
however took frequent occasions of letting us know that if we pleasd we
might come ashore the next day. Our business was However quite done, so
to fullfill a promise we had made he was presented with a small cagg of
Beer and we took our leave as good freinds as possible.

The refreshments we got consisted of 8 Buffeloes, 30 Dzn of fowls, 6
sheep, 3 hogs, some few but very few limes and cocoa nuts, a little garlick,
a good many eggs above half of which were rotten, an immense quantity of
Syrup which was bought for trifles, several hundred gallons at least--upon
the whole more than live stock enough to carry us to Batavia and syrop for
futurity.

I have been very diffuse and particular in mentioning every trifling
circumstance which occurd in this transaction, as this may perhaps be the
only opportunity I shall ever have of visiting an Island of great
consequence to the Duch and scarce known to any other Europaeans even
by name. I can find it in only one of the Draughts and that an old one
printed by Mount and Page the Lord knows when, which has it by the
name of Sou but confounds it with Sandel Bosch which is layd down very
wrong. Rumphius mentions an Island by the name of Saow and say[s] it is
that which is calld by the Duch Sandel Bosch, but no chart that I have seen
lays either that, Timor or Rotte, or indeed any Island that we have seen
hereabouts in any thing near its right place.

While we were here an accident hapned by the imprudence of Mr
Parkinson my Draughtsman which might alone have alterd our intended
and first promisd reception very much, indeed I am of opinion that it did.
He desirous of knowing whether or not this Island producd spices carried
ashore with him nutmeg, cloves etc. and questiond the inhabitants about
them without the least precaution, so that it immediately came to Mr
Lange's ears. He complaind to the Dr that our people were too inquisitive,
particularly says he in regard to spices, concerning which they can have no
reason to wish for any information unless you are come for very different
purposes than those you pretend. The Dr not well vers'd in the German
language in which they convers'd immediately conceivd that Mr L. meant
only the questions which he himself had askd concerning the cinnamon,
nor did we ever know the contrary till the day after we had left the place,
when Mr Parkinson boasted of the knowledge he had got of these people
certainly having a knowledge of the spices as they had in language names
for them.

I shall proceed now to give such an account of the Island as I could get
together during our short stay, which short as it was was so taken up with
procuring refreshments, in which occupation every one was obligd to exert
himself, that very little I confess is from my own observation; almost every
thing is gatherd from the Conversation of Mr Lange who at first and last
was very free and open and I am inclind to beleive did not deceive us in
what he told us, how much soever he migh[t] conceal, except perhaps in
the strengh and warlike disposition of the Islanders, which account seems
to contradict itself, as one can hardly imagine those people to be of a
warlike disposition who have continued in peace time out of mind. As for
the other Islands in this neighbourhood his information alone was all we
had to go upon; I would not however neglect to set it down, tho in general
it was of little more consequence than to confirm the policy of the duch in
confining their spices to particular Isles, which being full of them cannot
furnish themselves with provisions.

The little Island of Savu, which trifling as it is appears to me to be of no
small consequence to the Duch East India Company, is situate in Lat. and
Long from the meridian of Greenwich; its lengh and breadth are nearly the
same viz. about 6 German or 24 English miles. The whole is divided into 5
principalities, Nigries as they are calld by the Indians, Laai, Seba,
Regeeuwa, Timo, and Massârâ, each governd by its respective Radja or
King. It has 3 harbours, all good: the best is Timo, situate somewhere
round the SE point of the Isle; the next Seba where we anchord, situate
round the NW point; the third we learnt neither the name or situation of,
only guess it to be somewhere on the South side. Off the West end of the
Island is another calld Pulo with some additional name which in the hurry
of business was forgot and never again askd for.

The appearance of the Island especialy on the windward side where we
first made it was allowd by us all to equal in beauty if not excell any thing
we had seen, even parchd up as it was by a drought which Mr Lange
informd us had continued for seven months without a drop of Rain
interveening, the last rainy season having intirely faild them. Verdure
indeed there was at this time no signs of, but the gentle sloping of the hills
which were cleard quite to the top and planted in every part with thick
groves of the fan Palm, besides woods almost of Cocoa nut trees and
Arecas which grew near the sea side, filld the eye so compleatly that it
hardly lookd for or missd the verdure of the earth, a circumstance seldom
seen in any perfection so near the line. How beautifull it must appear when
coverd with its springing crop of Maize, Millet, Indigo etc. which covers
almost every foot of ground in the cultivated parts of the Island
imagination can hardly conceive: the verdure of Europe set of by the
stately pillars of India--Palms I mean, especialy the Fan palm which for
streightness and proportion both of the stem to itself and the head to the
stem far excells all the Palms that I have seen--requires a poetical
imagination to describe and mind not unaquainted with such sights to
conceive.

The productions of this Island are Buffaloes, sheep, hogs, fowls, Horses,
Asses, Maize, Guinea corn, Rice, Calevanses, Limes, oranges, Mangoes,
Plantains, Water melons, Tamarinds, Sweet sops (annona squamosa),
Blimbi (Averhoa Bilimbi), besides Cocoa nuts and Fan palm which last is
in sufficient quantities should all other crops fail to support the whole
Island, people, stock and all, who have been at times oblig'd to live upon its
sugar Syrup and wine for some Months. We saw also a small quantity of
European garden herbs as Cellery, Marjoram, Fennel and garlick and one
single sugar cane. Besides these necessaries it has for the supply of luxury
Betel and Areca, Tobacco, Cotton, Indigo, and a little Cinnamon--only
planted for curiosity said Mr Lange; indeed I almost doubt whether or not
it was genuine cinnamon as the Duch have been always so carefull not to
trust any spices out of their proper Islands. Besides these were possibly
many other things which we had not an opportunity of seeing and Mr
Lange forgot or did not chuse to inform us of.

All their Produce is in amazing abundance, so we judgd at least from the
Plantations we saw, tho this year every crop had faild for want of Rain.
Most of them are well known to Europeans. I shall however spend a little
Ink in describing such only as are not, or as differ at all in appearance from
those commonly known. To begin then with Buffaloes of which they have
good store, these beasts differ from our Cattle in Europe in their ears which
are considerably larger, their skins which are almost without hair, and their
horns which instead of bending forwards as ours do bend directly
backwards, and also in their total want of Dewlaps. We saw of these some
as big as well sizd European oxen and some there must be much larger, so
at least I was led to beleive by a pair of horns which I was led to beleive by
a pair of horns which I measurd; they were from tip to tip 3 feet 9½;
across their widest diameter 4 ft 1½; the whole sweep of their semicircle
in front 7ft 6½. One caution is however exceedingly necessary in buying
these beasts, which is that one of them of any given size does not weigh
above half as much as an ox of the same size in England; by this we who
were ignorant of the fact were very much deceivd, those which we guessd
400 lb, the larger sort that were bought, not weighing above 250, and the
smaller which we guessd at 250 not above 160. This vast difference
proceeded first from total want of fat, of which there was not the least sign,
but more especialy from the thinness of the flanks and thin peices which
were literaly nothing but skin and bone. Their flesh notwi[th]standing this
was not bad, it was well tasted and full of gravy, not that I can put it upon a
footing with the leanest beef in England yet I should suppose it better than
a lean ox would be in this burnt up climate.

Mr Lange told us that when the Portugese first came to this Island there
were horses upon it, an opinion from which I confess I rather apostatize,
but to wave the dispute Horses are now very plentifull. They are small,
generaly 11 or 12 hands high, but very brisk and nimble especialy in
Pacing which is their common step. The inhabitants seem to be tolerable
Horsemen riding always without a saddle and generaly with only a Halter
instead of a bridle. This is not however the only Benefit that these Islanders
receive from them, for they use them as food and preferr their flesh to that
of Buffaloes and every other sort but swines flesh, which holds the highest
rank in their opinion.

Their sheep are of that kind which I have seen in England under the name
of Bengall sheep; they differ from ours in having hair instead of wool, in
their ears being very large and flapp down under their horns almost
streight, and in their noses which are much more arch'd than those of our
European sheep. these sheep are I beleive very frequently calld Cabritos
from their resemblance to goats, which tho I cannot say appeard to me at
all striking yet had such an effect upon the whole ships company, officers
and seamen, that not one would beleive them to be sheep till they heard
their voices, which are precisely the same as those of European ones. Their
flesh was like the Buffaloes, lean, and void of flavour, to me the worst
mutton I have ever eat. Their fowls are cheifly of the game breed and large
but the eggs the smallest I have ever seen.

Besides these animals here are vast plenty of dogs, some cats and rats
and a few Pidgeons--I saw 3 or 4 pair--nor are any of these animals
exempted from furnishing their part towards the support of Polyphagous
man except the Rats which alone they do not eat.

Fish appeard to us to be scarce, indeed it was but little valued by these
Islanders, none but the very inferior people ever eating it and these only at
the times when their duty or business requird them to be down upon the sea
beach. In this case every man was furnishd with a light Casting net which
was girt round him and servd for a part of his dress; with this he took any
small fish that might happen to come into his way. Turtles are scarce; they
are esteemd a good food but are taken only seldom. Of the vegetables most
are well known. The sweet Sop is a pleasant fruit well known to the West
Indians. Blimbi alone is not mentioned by any voyage writer I have met
with. It is a small oval fruit thickest in the middle and tapering a little to
each end, 3 or 4 inches in Lengh and scarcely so large as a mans finger; the
outside is coverd with a very thin skin of a light green colour and in the
inside are a few seeds disposd in the form of a star; it[s] flavour is a light
but very clean and pleasant acid. It cannot be eat raw but is said to be
excellent in Pickles; we stewd it and made sower sauce to our Stews and
bouilli which was very gratefull to the taste and no doubt possest no small
share of antescorbutick virtues. But what seems to be the genuine natural
production of the Island and which they have in the greatest abundance and
take the most care of is the Fan Palm or Toddy tree (Borassus flabellifer).
Large groves of these trees are to be seen in all parts of the Island, under
which other crops as Maize, indigo etc. are planted, so that in reality they
take up no room tho the[y] yeild the treble advantage of fruit, Liquor and
sugar, all but especialy the two last in great profusion; besides which the
leaves serve to thatch their houses and to make baskets, umbrellas or rather
conical bonnets, Cups, Tobacca-pipes etc. etc. The Fruit, which is least
esteemd, is also in the least plenty. It is a nut about as big as a childs head
coverd like a cocoa nut with a fibrous coat, under which are 3 kernels
which must be eat before they are ripe, otherwise they become to[o] hard
to chew; in their proper state they resemble a good deal in taste the kernel
of an unripe Cocoa nut and like them probably afford but a washy
nutriment. The excellence of the Palm wine or Toddy which is drawn from
this tree makes however ample amends for the poorness of the fruit: this is
got by cutting the buds which are to produce flowers soon after their
appearance and tying under them a small basket made of the leaves of the
same tree, into which the liquor drips and must be collected by people who
climb the trees for that purpose every morning and evening.This is the
common drink of every one upon the Island and a very pleasant one. It was
so to us even at first only rather too sweet; its antescorbutick virtues as the
fresh unfermented juice of a tree cannot be doubted.

Notwi[th]standing that this Liquor is the Common drink of both Rich and
poor, who in the morning and evening drink nothing else, a much larger
quantity is drawn off daily than is sufficient for that use; of this they make
a Syrop and a coarse sugar both which are far more agreable to the taste
than they appear to the sight. The Liquor is calld in the Language of the
Island Dua orDuac, the syrup and sugar by one and the same name, Gula. It
is exactly the same as the Jagara Sugar on the Continent of India and
prepard by only boiling down the liquor in earthenware pots till it is
sufficiently thick. In appearance it exactly resembles Mollasses or Treacle
only it is considerably thicker; in taste however it much excels it having
instead of the abominable twang which treacle leaves in the mouth only a
little burnt taste which was very agreable to our palates. The Sugar is of a
reddish brown but more clear tasted than any Cane sugar I have tasted
which was not refind, resembling mostly brown sugar candy. The syrup
seemd to be very wholesome for tho many of our people eat enormous
quantities of it it hurt nobody, only gently opning the body and not as we
feard bringing on fluxes. Fire wood is very scarce here. To remedy
therefore that inconvenience as much as possible they make use of a
contrivance which is not unknown in Europe tho seldom practisd but in
camps. It is a burrow or pipe dug in the ground as long as convenient,
generaly about 2 yards, and open at each end: the one opening of this into
which they put the fire is large, the other which serves only to cause a
draught is much smaller. Immediately over this pipe circular holes are dug
which reach quite down into it: in these the earthen pots are set, about 3 to
such a fire, which are large in the middle and taper towards the bottom by
which means the fire acts upon a large part of their surface. It is realy
marvelous to see with how small a quantity of fire they will keep these pots
boiling, each of which Contains 8 or 10 gallons, a palm leaf or a dry stalk
now and then is sufficient; indeed it seemd in the part of the Island at least
where we were that the palms alone supplyd sufficient fuel not only for
boiling this sugar but for dressing all their victuals beside, all which are
cookd by this contrivance. How many parts of England are there where this
contrivance would be of material assistance to not only the poor but the
better sort of people who daily complain of the dearness of fuel, a charge
which this contrivance alone would doubtless diminish at least one third:
but it is well known how averse the good people of England, especialy of
those degrees that may be supposd to be not above want, are to adopt any
new custom which savours of Parsimony. I have been told that this very
method was proposd in the Gentlemens Magazine Vol. p. many years ago
but have not the book on board. Frezier in his Voyage to the South Sea
describes a contrivance of the Peruvian Indians upon much the same
principles, planch[e] 31. p. 273; but his drawing and plan are difficult to
understand if not actualy very faulty and his description is nothing; the
drawing may serve however to give an idea to a man who has never seen a
thing of the kind.

The Syrup or Gula which they make in this manner is so nourishing that
Mr Lange told us it alone fed and fatned their hogs, dogs and fouls, and
that even the men themselves could and had sometimes livd upon it alone
for a long time when by bad seasons or their destructive feasts which I
shall mention by and by they have been deprivd of all other nourishment.
We saw some of the swine upon this Island whose uncommon fatness
surprizd us much, which very beasts we saw one evening serv'd with their
suppers consisting of nothing but the outside husks of Rice and this syrup
disolvd in water, and this they told us was their constant and only food.
How far it may be found consonant to truth that sugar alone should have
such nourishing qualities I shall leave to others to determine; I have only
accounts not experience to favour that opinion.

The people of this Island are rather under than over the midling size, the
women especialy most of whoom are remarkably short and generaly squat
built. Their colour is well ting'd with brown, in all Ranks and conditions
nearly the same, in which particular they differ much from the inhabitants
of the South sea Isles where the better sort of people are universaly almost
whiter than their inferiors. The men are rather well made and seem to be
active and nimble; among them we observd a greater variety of features
than usual; the women on the other hand are as I said before generaly low
and clumsey, are far from hansome and have a kind of sameness of
features among them which might well account for the chasity of the men
for which virtue this Island is said to be remarkable. The Hair of Both
sexes is universaly Black and lank; the men wear it long and fastned upon
the tops of their heads with a comb, the women have theirs also long and
tied behind into a kind of club, not very becomeing.

Both men and women dress in a kind of Blew and white clouded cotton
cloth which they manufacture themselves: of this two peices about 2 yards
long each serve for a dress. One of these is worn round the middle: this the
men wear pretty tight, it covering no lower than their backsides but above
making a kind of loose belt in which they carry their knives etc. and often
many other things so that it serves intirely the purpose of Pockets; the other
peice is tuckd into this girdle and reaching over the shoulders passes down
to the girdle on the other side, so that by opening or folding it they can
cover more or less of their bodies as they please. The arms, legs and feet of
both sexes are constantly bare, as are the heads of the women which is their
cheif distinction by which at once they are known from the men, who
always wear something wrap'd round theirs which tho small is generaly of
the finest material they can procure. Many we saw had them of silk
handkercheifs which seemd to be much in fashion.

The distinction of the womens dress except only the head consists merely
in the manner of wearing their cloths, which are of the same materials and
in the same quantity as the mens: their waist cloths reach down below their
knees and their body cloths are tied under their arms and over their breasts
Keeping up the strictest decency. Both sexes eradicate the Hair from under
their armpits, a custom in these hot climates almost essential to cleanliness;
the men also pluck out their beards, for which purpose the better sort carry
always a pair of silver pincers hanging round their necks. Some however
wear a little hair on their upper lips but that they never suffer to grow long.
Ornaments they had many: some of the better sort wore gold chains
round their necks but these were cheifly made of Platted wire of little
value, others had rings which by their appearance seemd to have been worn
out some generations ago. One had a silver headed Cane on the top of
which was engraved so that it had probably been a present from the east
Indian Company. Besides these they wore beads: the men cheifly of
distinction round their necks in the form of a solitaire, others had them
round their wrists etc., but the women had the largest quantity which they
wore round their waists in the form of a girdle serving to keep up their
waistcloths. Both sexes had their ears bord universaly but we never saw
any ornaments in them; indeed we never saw any one man dressd the
whole time we were there in [any] thing more than his ordinary cloths.
Some boys of 12 or 14 years of age wore also circles of thick brass wire
which pass'd screw fashion 3 or 4 times round their arms above the elbow,
and some men wore rings of ivory, convex, 2 inches in breadth and above
an inch in thickness, in the same manner above the joint of the elbow: these
we were told were the sons of Radjas who alone had the priviledge of
wearing these cumbersome badges of high birth.

Almost all the men had their names tracd upon their arms in indelible
characters of Black; the women had a square ornament of flourishd lines
on the inner part of each arm just under the bend of the elbow. On
enquiring into the antiquity of this custom, so consonant with that of
Tattowing in the South Sea Islands, Mr Lange told us that it was among
these people long before the Europeans came here but was less us'd in this
than in most Islands in the neighbourhood, in some of which the people
usd to mark circles round their necks, breasts etc.

Both Sexes are continualy employd in chewing Betle and Arec, the
consequence of which is that their teeth as long as they have any are dyed
of that filthy black colour which constantly attends the rotteness of a tooth;
for it appears to me that from their first use of this custom which they
begin very young their teeth are affected and continue by gradual degrees
to waste away till they are quite worn to the stumps which seems to happen
before old age. I have seen men in appearance between 20 and 30 whose
fore teeth were almost intirely gone, no two being of the same lengh or the
same thickness but every one eat into unevenesses as iron is by rust. This
loss of the teeth is attributed by all whose writings upon the subject I have
read to the tough and stringy coat of the Areca nut but in my opinion is
much easier accounted for by the well known corrosive quality of the lime,
which is a necessary ingredient in every mouthfull and that too in no very
insignificant quantity. This opinion seems to me to be almost put out of
dispute by the manner in which their teeth are destroyd: they are not
loosned or drawn out as they should be by the too frequent labour of
chewing tough substances but melt away and decay as metals in strong
acids, the stumps always remaining firmly adhering to the jaws just level
with the gums. Possibly the ill effects which sugar is beleivd by us
Europeans to have upon the teeth may proceed from the same cause as it is
well known that refin'd or loaf sugar contains in it a large quantity of lime.
To add flavour I suppose to the Betel and Arec some use with it a small
quantity of tobacco, adding the nauseous smell of that herb to the not less
disagreable look of the other as if they were resolvd to make their mouths
disgustfull to the sence of smelling as well as that of sight. They also
smoak, rolling up a small quantity of tobacco in one end of a tube made of
a palm leaf about as thick as a quil and 6 inches long; of this not above one
inch is filld with tobacco so that the quantity is very small, to make amends
for which the women especially often swallow the smoak which no doubt
increases its effects in no small degree.

Their houses are all built upon one and the same plan differing only in
size according to the rank and riches of the proprietors, some being 3 or
400 feet in lengh and others not 20. They consist of a well boarded floor
raisd upon posts 3 or 4 feet from the ground; over this is raisd a roof
shelving like ours in Europe and supported by pillars of its own
independent of the floor; the Eaves of this reach within 2 feet of the floor
but overhang it as much; this open serves to let in air and light and makes
them very cool and agreable. The space within is generaly divided into two
by a partition which takes off one third. From this partition forward reaches
a loft shut up close on all sides and raisd about 6 feet from the ground,
which occupies the center third of the house; besides this are sometimes
one or two small rooms taken off of the sides of the house. The uses of
these different appartments we did not learn only were told that the loft
was appropriated to the women.

The shortness of our stay and few opportunities we had of going among
these people gave us no opportunities of seing what arts or manufactures
they might have among them. That they spin, weave and dye their cloth we
however made a shift to learn for tho we never saw them practise any of
these arts yet the instruments of them accidentaly fell in our way: first a
machine for clearing cotton of its seeds which was made in miniature much
upon the same principles as ours in Europe, it consisting of 2 cylinders
about as thick as a mans thumb the one of which was turnd round by a
plain wynch handle, and that turnd the other round by an endless worm at
their extremities. The whole was not above 7 inches high and about twice
as long; how it answerd I know not but know that it had been much workd
and that there were many peices of cotton hanging on different parts of it,
which alone inducd me to beleive it a real machine, otherwise from its
slightness I should have taken it for no more than a Duch toy of the best
sort. Their spinning geer I also once saw: it consisted of a bobbin on which
a small quantity of thread was wound and a kind of distaff filld with cotton
from whence I conjecture that they spin by hand, as our women in Europe
did before wheels were introducd and I am told still do in some parts of
Europe where that improvement is not receiv'd. Their Loom I also saw: it
had this merit in preference to ours that the web was not stretchd on a
frame but only extended by a peice of wood at each end, round one of
which the cloth was rolld as the threads were round the other. I had not an
opportunity of seing it usd so cannot at all describe it, only can say that it
appeard very simple, much more so than ours and that the shuttle was as
long as the breadth of the web which was about ½ a yard; in all
probability from this circumstance and the unsteadiness of a web fixd to
nothing the work must go on very slow. That they dyed their own cloth we
first guessd by the indigo which we saw in their plantations, which guess
was afterwards confirmd by Mr Lange; we likewise saw them dye womens
girdles of a dirty reddish colour. Their Cloth itself was universaly dyed in
the yarn with blue, which being unevenly and irregularly done gave the
cloth a Clouding or waving of colour not unelegant even in our eyes.
One Chirurgical operation of theirs Mr Lange mentiond to us with great
praises which indeed appears sensible: it is a method of curing wounds
which they do by first washing the wound in water in which Tamarinds
have been steepd, then pluging it up with a pledget made of fat of fresh
pork; in this manner the wound is thouroughly cleans'd and the pledget
renewd every day: he told us that by this means they had a very little while
ago curd a man in three weeks of a wound of a lance which had peircd his
arm and half through his body. This is the only part of either their
medicinal or chirurgical art which came to our knowledge, indeed they did
not seem to outward appearance to have much occasion for either, but on
the contrary appeard healthfull and did not shew by scarrs of old sores or
any scurvyness upon their bodies a tendency to disease. Some indeed were
pitted with the small pox which Mr Lange told us had been now and then
among them; in which case all who were seizd by the distemper were
carried to lonely places far from habitations where they were left to the
influence of their distemper, meat only being daily reachd to them by the
assistance of a long pole.

How the police of their villages is carried on I cannot say I saw, but must
allow that they excelld in the article of cleanliness both in their houses and
without. In one thing particularly, which is their ordure, they are certainly
very clever, for during our stay of 3 days not one among us that I could
find out saw the least signs of it notwithstanding the populousness of the
countrey, a circumstance which I beleive few of the most polishd cities in
Europe can boast of.

Their religion according to the account of Mr Lange is a most absurd
kind of Paganism, every man chusing his own god and also his mode of
worshiping him, in which hardly any two agree. Notwithstanding this their
morals are most excellent, Mr Lange declaring to us that he did not beleive
that during his residence of ten years upon the Island a theft had been
committd. Polygamy is by no means permitted, each man being allowd no
more than one wife to whoom [he] is to adhere during life; even the Radja
himself has no more. In favour of their chastity he also said that he did not
beleive that a Duch man had ever receivd a favour from a woman of this
Island.

The Duch boast that they make many converts to Christianity, 600 sayd
Mr L. in the township of Seba where we were: what sort of christians they
are I cannot say as they have neither clergyman nor church among them.
The Company have however certainly been at the expence of Printing
versions of the New Testament, cathechism etc. etc. in this and several
other Languages, and actualy keep a Duch Indian or half bred Duchman
whose name is Fredrick Craay in their Service who is paid by them for
instructing the youth of this Island in reading, writing and the principles of
the Christian religion. Dr Solander was at his house and saw not only the
Testaments and Catechisms before mentiond but also the copy books of
scolars, about 50 in number, many of whoom wrote a very fair and good
hand.

The Island is divided into 5 Principalities each of which has its respective
Radja or King. What his power may be we had not an opportunity of
Learning: in outward appearance he had little respect shewd him yet every
kind of Business which was done seemd to center in him and his cheif
councelor, so that in reality he seemd to be more regarded in essentials
than shewy useless ceremonies. The Reigning Radja while were there was
calld Madocho Lomi Djara; he was about the age of 35, the fattest man we
saw upon the whole Island and the only one also upon whose body grew
any quantity of hair, a circumstance very unusual among Indians. He
appeard to be of a dull heavy disposition and I beleive was governd almost
intirely by a very sensible old man Calld Mannu djame who was belovd by
the whole principality. Both these were distinguished from the rest of the
natives by their dress which was always a nightgown generaly of coarse
Chintz; once indeed the Radja receivd us in form in one of Black Princes
stuff which I suppose may be lookd upon as more grave and proper to
inspire respect. If any differences arise between the people they are setled
by the Radja and his councelors without the least delay or appeal,and sayd
Mr L. always with the strictest justice. So excellent is the dispostion of
these people that if any dispute arises between any two of them they never,
if it is of consequence, more than barely mention it to each other, never
allowing themselves to reason upon it least heat should beget ill blood but
referr it immediately to this court.

After the Radja we could hear of no ranks of People but Landowners,
respectable according to their quantity of land more or less, and slaves the
property of the former, over whoom however they have no other power
than that of selling them for what they will fetch when convenient, no man
being able to punish his slave without the concurrence and approbation of
the Radja. Of these slaves some men have 500, others only 2 or 3; what
was their price in general we did not learn, only heard by accident that a
very fat hog was of the value of a slave and often sold and bought at that
price. When any great man stirs out he is constantly attended by 2 or more
of these slaves, one of whoom carries a sword or hanger whose hilt is
comm[o]nly of Silver and ornamented with large tassels of horse hair; the
other carries a bag which contains Beetle, Areca, Lime, Tobacco etc. In
these attendants all their Idea of Shew and grandeur seems to be centerd for
the Radja himself had on no occasion which we saw any more.

The pride of descent, particularly of being sprung from a family which
has for many generations been respected is by no means unknown here.
Even the living in a house which has been for generations well attended is
no small honour: in consequence of this it is that few articles either of use
or luxury bear so high a price as those stones which by having been very
much set upon by men have contracted a bright polish on their uneven
surfaces; those who can purchase such stones or who have them by
inheritance from their ancestors place them round their houses where they
serve as benches for their dependants, I suppose to polish still higher and
higher.

Every Radja during his life time sets up in his capital town or Nigrie a
large stone which serves futurity as a testimony of his reign--in the Nigrie
Seba where we lay were 13 such stones, besides many fragments the
seeming remains of those which had been devourd by time. Many of these
were very large, even so much so that it would be dificult to conceive how
the strengh of man alone unassisted by engines had been able to transport
them to the top of a hill where they now stand, were there not in Europe so
many far grander instances of Perserverance as well as strengh of our own
forefathers. These Stones serve for a very peculiar use. Upon the Death of
a Radja a general feast is proclaimd throughout his dominions and in
consequence all his subjects meet about these stones. Every living Creature
that can be caught is now killd and the feast lasts a longer or shorter
number of weeks or months according to the stock of Provisions the
kingdom happens to be furnished with at the time, the stones serving for
tables on which the whole, Buffaloes etc., are servd up, After this madness
is over the whole kingdom is obligd to fast and live upon syrup and water
till the next crop, nor are they able to eat any flesh meat till some years
after when the few animals that escapd the general slaughter, were
preserv'd by policy, or acquird from the Neighbouring kingdoms have
sufficiently Encreasd their species.

The five Kingdoms say'd Mr Lange of which this Island consists have
been for time immemorial not only at peace but in strict alliance with each
other, notwithstanding which they are of a warlike disposition, Constant
freinds but implacable Enemies and have always courageously defended
themselves against foreign invaders. They are able to raise on a very short
notice 7300 men armd with musquets, Lances, spears and Targets: of these
the different kingdoms bear their different proportions: Laai 2600, Seba
2000, Reg'euä 1500, timo 800, and Massara 400. Besides the arms before
mentiond every man is furnishd with a large chopping knife like a streigh
[t]ned wood Bill but much heavier, which must be a terrible weapon if
these people should have spirit enough to come to close quarters. Mr L
upon another occasion took an opportunity of telling us that they heave
their Lances with surprizeing dexterity, being able at the distance of 60 feet
to strike a mans heart and peirce him through.

How far these dreadfull accounts of their martial prowess might be true I
dare not take upon myself to determine: all I shall say is that during our
stay we saw no signs either of a warlike disposition or such formidable
arms. Spears and Targets indeed there were in the Duch house about 100,
the greatest part of which Spears servd to arm the people who came down
to intimidate us; but so little did these doubty heroes think of fighting or
indeed keeping up apearances that instead of a Target each was furnished
with a cock, some tobacco or something of that kind which he took this
opportunity of bringing down to sell. Their spears seemd all to have been
brought to them by Europeans, the refuse of old armories, no two being of
any thing near the same lengh, the whole verying in that particular from 6
feet to 16; as for their Lances not one of us saw one of them; their
musquets tho clean on the outside were honeycombd with rust on the
inside; few or none of their Cartridge boxes had either powder or ball in
them and to compleat, all the swivels and patereroes at the Duch house
were all laying out of their carriages, and the one great gun which lay
before it on a heap of stones was not only more honeycomb'd with rust
than any peice of artillery I have ever seen but had the touchhole turnd
downwards, probably to conceal its size which might not be in all
probability much less than the bore of the gun itself.

The Duch however use these Islanders as auxliaries in their wars against
the inhabitants of Timor where they do good service, their lives at all
events not being near so valuable as those of Duchmen.

This Island had been setled by the Portugese almost from their first
coming into these seas. When the Duch first came here they were however
very soon wormd out by the machinations of these artfull new comers, who
content with that did not attempt to settle themselves in the Island but only
sent Sloops occasionaly to trade with the Natives, by whoom they were
often cut off, as often I suppose as they cheated them in too great a
proportion. This However and the probably increasing value of the Island
at last temptd them to try some other way of securing it and running less
risques, which took place about ten years ago when a treaty of Alliance
was signd between the five Radjas and the Duch Company; in consequence
of which the Company is yearly to furnish each of these kings with a
certain quantity of fine linnen and silk, Cutlery ware etc., in short all
species of goods which he wants, all which is deliverd in the form of a
present accompanied with a certain Cask of Rack which the Radja and his
principal people never cease to drink as long as a drop of it remains.
In return for this each Radja agrees that neither he nor his subjects shall
trade with any person except the company unless they had the permission
of their resident; that they should yearly supply a certain quantity of Rice,
Maize and Calevanses, so many sloop loads. The Maize and Calevances
are sent off to Timor in sloops which are kept on the Island for that
purpose, each navigated by ten Indians; the Rice is taken away by a ship
which at the time of that harvest comes to the Island annualy bringing the
companies presents and anchoring by turns in each of the three bays.
In consequence of this treaty Mr Lange, a Portugese Indian who seem to
be his second, and a Duch Indian who serves for schoolmaster, are
permitted to live among them. Mr Lange himself is attended by 50 Slaves
on horseback, attended by whoom he once every two months makes the
tour of the Island visiting all the Radjas, exhorting those to plant who seem
Idle, and observing where the Crops are got in which he immediately sends
Sloops for, Navigated by these same slaves, so that the crop proceeds
immediately from the ground to the Duch storehouses at Timor. In these
excursions he always carries certain bottles of Rack which he finds of great
use in opening the hearts of the Radjas with whoom he is to deal; but
notwithstanding the boasted honesty of these people it requires his utmost
diligence to keep it from his slaves who notwithstanding all his care often
ease him of a great part of it. During the ten years that he has resided on
this Island no European but himself has ever been here, except at the time
of the arrival of the Duch ship which had saild about 2 months before we
came here. He is indeed distinguishable from the Indians only by his
colour--like them he sets upon the ground and chews his Beetle etc. He
has been for some years married to an Indian woman of the Island has been
for some years married to an Indian woman of the Island of Timor who
keeps his house in the Indian fashion, and he excusd himself to us for not
asking us to his house, telling us that he was not able to entertain us any
other way than the rest of the Indians whoom we saw; he speaks neither
german his native Language nor dutch without frequent hesitations and
mistakes, on the contrary the Indian language seems to flow from him with
the utmost facility. As I forgot to mention their language in its proper place
I shall take this opportunity to write down the few observations I had an
opportunity of making during our short stay. The genius of it seems much
to resemble that of the South Sea Isles: in several instances words are
exactly the same and the numbers are undoubtedly derivd from the same
source. I give here a list of words:

Momonne       a man            Tooga            the thighs
Mobunnee      a woman          Rootoo           the knees
Catoo         the Head         Baibo            the legs
Row Catoo     the Hair         Dunceala         the feet
Matta         the eyes         Kissooei yilla   the toes
Row na Matta  the eyelashes    Camacoo          the arms
Sivanga       the nose         Wulaba           the Hand
Cavaranga     the cheeks       Cabaon           A Buffaloe
Wo deeloo     the ears         Djara            a horse
Vaio          the Tongue       Vavee            a hog
Lacoco        the neck         Doomba           a sheep
Loosoo        the breasts      Kesavoo          a goat
Caboo Soosoo  the nipples      Gnaca            a dog
Dulloo        the belly        Maio             a cat
Assoo         the navel        Mannu            a fowl
Rangoretoo    the beak         Carow            the tail
Ica           a fish           1.               Usse
Unjoo         a turtle         2.               Lhua
Nieu          Cocoa nut        3.               Tullu
Boacoree      Fan palm         4.               Uppah
Calella       areca            5.               Lumme
Canana        Beetle           6.               Unna
Aou           Lime             7.               Pedu
Ma&auml;nadoo      a fish hook      8.               Arru
Tata          Tattow           9.               Saou
Lodo          the Sun          10.              Singooroo
Wurroo        the moon         11.              Singooring Usse etc.
Aidassee      the Sea          20.              Lhuangooroo etc.
Ailei         water            100.             Sing Assu etc.
Aee           Fine             1000.            Setuppah etc.
Maate         to dye           10000.           Selacussa etc.
Tabudje       to sleep         100000.          Serata etc.
Ta teetoo     to rise          1000000.         Sereboo etc.

In the course of conversation Mr Lange gave us little accounts of the
neighbouring Islands: these I shall set down just as they came to me merely
upon his authority. First then beginning with the small Island to the
westward of Savu calld Pulo ..., this said he produces Nothing of
consequence except Areca nuts of which the Duch annualy receive two
sloop loads in return for their presents to the Islanders.
Timor is the cheif Island in these parts belonging to the Duch, all the
others in the neighbourhood being subject to it so far as that the residents
on them go there once a year to pass their accounts. It is now in nearly the
same state as it was in Dampiers time. The Duch have their fort of
Concordia where are storehouses which according to Mr L's account would
have supplyd our ship with every article we could have got at Batavia,
even salt Provisions and Arrack. The Duch are however very frequently at
war with the natives even of Copang their next neighbours in which case
themselves are obligd to send to the neighbouring Isles for provisions. The
Portugese still possess their towns of Laphao and Sesial on the North side
of the Island.

About two years ago a French ship was wreckd upon the East coast of
Timor; she lay some days upon the shoal when a sudden gale of wind
coming on broke her up at once and drown'd most of the Crew among
whoom was the Captn. Those who got ashore among whoom was one of
the lieutenants made the best of their way towards Concordia, where they
arrivd in four days having left several of their party upon the road. Their
number was then above 80 who were supplyd with every necessary and
had assistance given them in order to go back to the wreck and fish up
what they could; this they did and recoverd all their Bullion which was in
chests and several of their guns which were large. Their companions which
they left upon the road were all missing; the Indians it was supposd had
either by force or persuasion kept them among them, they being very
desirous of having Europeans among them to instruct them in the art of
war. After a stay of two months at Concordia their company was dimini[s]
hd more than half by sickness's, cheifly in consequence of the great
fatigues they had endurd on those days when they got ashore and traveld to
that place; these were then furnishd with a small ship in which they saild
for Europe.

We enquird much for the Island of Anabao or Anamabao mentiond by
Dampier. He assurd us that he knew of no Island of that name any where in
these seas. I since have observd that it is laid down in several charts by the
name of Selam which is probably the real name of it. Rotte is upon much
the same footing as Savu--a Duchman resides upon it to manage the
natives; its produce is also much like that of Savu; it has also some sugar
which was formerly made by only bruising the canes and boiling the juice
to a syrup as they do the Palm wine, lately however they have made great
improvements in that manufactory. Their are three Islands of the name of
Solor laying to the eastward of Ende or Flores: these Islands are flat and
low abounding with vast plenty of provisions and stock; they are also
managd in the same manner as Savu; on the middlemost of them is a good
harbour, the other two are without Shelter. Ende is still in the hands of the
Portugese who have a town and good harbour calld Larntuca on the NE
corner of it; the old harbour of Ende situate on the South side of it is not
near so good and therefore now intirely neglected.

The inhabitants of each of these different Islands speak different
languages and the cheif Policy of the Duch is to prevent them from
learning each others language, as by this means they keep each to their
respective Island, preventing them from entering into trafick with each
other or learning from mutual intercourse to plant such things as would be
of greater value to themselves than their present produce tho at the same
time less beneficial to the Duch East Indian Company; and at the same
time secure to themselves alone the benefit of supplying all their
necessities at their own rates, no dout not very moderate. This may
possibly sufficiently account for the expence they must have been at in
printing Prayer books, catechises etc. at their expence and teaching them to
each Island in its own language rather than in Duch, which in all
probability they might have as easily done, but at the risque of Dutch
becoming the common language of these Islands and consequently the
natives by its means gaining an intercourse with each other.


1770 September 21.

Notwithstanding our Freind Mr Lange invited us very kindly last night to
come ashore again in the morn and we saw divers Jarrs of Syrup and sheep
etc. waiting for us upon the Beach, a sure sign that the Radjas prohibition
was not intended to prejudice trade in the least, We who had now got
plenty of all the refreshments which the Isle afforded thought it most
prudent to weigh and sail directly for Batavia; all our fears of Westerly
winds being dissipated By Mr Lange's assuring us that the Easterly
Monsoon would prevail for two Months longer. Accordingly we did so and
soon passd by the small Island laying to the W about a leag[u]e from
Savoo--its name has been unluckily forgot, Pulo Samiri, or some thing
like it may be. In the Evening a small Island was in sight to the Southward;
trade rather slack. One of the Buffaloes who was killd weig'd only 166 lb,
which was a great draw back on our expectations, who thought that even
that tho much the least of our stock would not weigh less than 300 lb.


1770 September 22.

Still but little wind. Many very large Albecores were leaping about the
ship at night; some bobies but none were fools enough to settle on the
Rigging.


1770 September 23.

Weather, Bobies and Albecores much as Yesterday. These light winds
which would have been almost intolerable to empty stomachs sat pretty
easily on our full ones.


1770 September 24.

Breeze freshning by very gradual degrees together with a long swell
heaving in from the Southward, sure sign that there was now no more land
to interrupt us in that direction, was an agreable subject of conversation.
Infinite flying fish and bobies; some Gannets seen.


1770 September 25.

Trade, fish, Gannets, bobies and Conversation much as yesterday.


1770 September 26.

Trade rather slacker than it had been. Eat today a buttock of Buffaloe
which had been 3 days in salt: it eat so well and had so thouroughly taken
salt that it was resolvd to Salt meat for the ships company when our biggest
Buffaloes who would weigh above 300 lb were killd.


1770 September 27.

Trade fresher and more to the S. Men of War birds, Gannets and Black
Shearwaters in abundance.


1770 September 28.

Squally in the night with rain and fine fresh trade shov'd us on Merrily.
Our beef experiment was this day tried and succeeded but scurvily. The
meat which had been killd on the 26th was not salted till Cold: it hardly
stunk: the outside which had been in absolute contact with the salt was
quite good but under that which formd a crust of various thickness the meat
was in a wonderfull manner corrupted; it lookd well but every fibre was
destroyd and disolv'd so that the whole was a paste of the consistence of
soft putty yet this hard[l]y stunk. Some Gannets and Man of War birds
were about the Ship.


1770 September 29.

Fresh trade. More Gannets and Man of War birds than usual were seen,
and one tropick bird which seemd to be of a brownish or buff colour but
stayd a very short time about the ship.


1770 September 30.

Two more Buff colourd Tropick birds were about the ship in the morn in
company with a white one which was one third at least larger than they
were; From thence I am inclind to think that they may be the Paille-en-cul
fauve of Brisson, Vol. VI, p. 489 and realy a distinct species. Besides these
many Birds were about the ship, Man of War, Bobies, Gannets etc., who all
flew nearer the ship and shewd less fear of her than usual; in the Eve many
very small whiteish birds were seen which flew in flocks. We had all this
day stood in directly for the Land, yet night came and tho many had seen
Capes and Headlands in the air yet no real land was seen which made us
rather uneasy, as we had great reason to suppose that we had overshot the
Mouth of the Streights, no very agreable Idea. We had made 15' 30" of
Longitude from the South end of Timor and thought our selves quite safe
as La Neptune Oriental makes the difference to be 18' 40", yet when we
recollected that our Countrey man Dampier makes only 14' we had reason
to be uneasy; so at sun set we clap'd close upon a wind in order to make the
best of our bargain howsoever it might turn out.


1770 October 1.

Thunder and lightning with heavy rain all night; about 12 Land was seen
by the flashes which in Morn provd to be Java Head and Princes Island. At
noon we had a good Observation and found that Princes Island was laid
down in La Neptune Oriental 7 or 8 miles too far to the Northward and in
the English East India Pilot or Quarter Waggoner 21 or 22; which
extrordinary difference in the latter seems owing to some mistake in his
particular Draught of the Streights, all parts of which are laid down 14" at
least different from the rest of his draughts as well as his own sailing
directions. The breeze was fresh and tolerably favourable so that at night
we had Passd Crocata and stood on by very clear Moonlight, tho the clouds
about the Horizon threatned and it lightned a good deal.


1770 October 2.

Several lights were seen abreast of the ship the greatest part of the night
which in the morn provd to be made by fishermen in small canoes. At day
light we were abreast of the 4th point and stood forward with but little
wind having sent a boat ashore for grass for the Buffaloes, who during
their stay on board had not had more victuals than any one of them could
have eat in a day and that the remainder of some bad hay which the goat
had dungd upon time immemorial almost. Before noon she returnd
bringing some with her which the Indians had not only given to our people
but even assisted them to cut; she brought also a few Plantains and Cocoa
nuts, but they were bough[t] excessive dear. The Countrey lookd from the
ship hilly and very pleasant tho almost one continued wood; Bantam hill
seemd very high land. As we proceeded on we opned 2 large ships laying
at anchor behind Anger Point. soon after this it Dropd calm and we came to
an anchor and sent a boat on board the ships for news. They were Duch
East India men, one bound for Cochin on the Coast of Coromandel the
other for Ceylon; their Captains receivd our officer very politely and told
him some European news, as that the goverment in England were in the
utmost disorder, the people crying up and down the streets Down with
King George, King Wilkes for ever; that the Americans had refus'd to pay
taxes of any kind in consequence of which was a large force being sent
there both of sea and land forces; that the party of Polanders who had been
forc'd into the late election by the Russians interfereing had askd assistance
of the Grand Signior, who had granted it, in consequence of which the
Russians had sent 20 Sail of the line and a large army by land to beseige
Constantinople etc. etc. etc. In relation to our present circumstances they
told us that our passage to Batavia was likely to be very tedious, as we
should have a strong current constantly against us and at this time of the
year Calms and light breezes were the only weather we had to expect. They
said also that near where they lay was a Duch pacquet boat whose business
was to go on board all ships coming through the Streights to enquire of
them their news and carry or send it with their letters etc. to Batavia with
the utmost dispach, which business they said her skipper was oblig'd to do
even for foreigners if they requird it. This skipper he said if we wanted
refreshments would furnish us with fowls, Turtle etc. at a very cheap rate.
At 7 a light breeze springing up we weighd and came to sail. At night some
lightning was seen.


1770 October 3.

Saild all night, in the morn were past the Cap; at 8 it fell calm and we
were obligd to come to an anchor by reason of the strong current which ran
to the Westward. The Duch Packet which we had been told of yesterday
and provd to be a Sloop of no inconsiderable size had been standing after
us all the morn and still continued, gaining however but little, till a foul
wind sprung up on which she bore away. Our Buffaloes had so intirely lost
their stomachs by their long fast that they eat scarce any thing; however
least they should take to eating again a boat was sent ashore for grass,
which returnd with some and a few plantains and unripe Papaws which
when boild eat nearly as well as turnips only sweeter. At night an Indian
Proa came on board bringing the Master of the Sloop before mentiond: he
brought with him two books in one of which he desird that any of our
officers would write down the name of the ship, Commanders name, where
we came from and where bound, with any particulars we chose relating to
our selves that might be for the information of any of our freinds who
might Come after us: which we saw that some ships especialy Portugese
had done. This book he told us was kept merely for the information of
those who might come through these Streights; in the other which was a
fair book he enterd the names of the Ships and Commanders which only
were returnd to the Governor and council of the Indies. On our writing
down Europe as the place we had Come from he said very well, any thing
you please but this is merely for the information of your freinds. In the
proa were some small turtle, many fouls and ducks, also parrots, paroquets,
Rice birds and monkies, some few of which we bought at the rate of a
dollar for a small turtle, the same at first for 10 afterwards for 15 large
fowls, two Monkies or a whole cage of Paddy birds.


1770 October 4.

Lightning in the night. In the morn calms and light breezes not sufficient
to stem the current which was very strong. To make our situation as
tantalizing as possible innumerable Proas were sailing about us in all
directions. A boat was sent ashore for grass and landed at an Indian town
where by hard bargaining some Cocoa nuts were bought at about three
halfpence a peice and rice in the straw at about 5 farthings a gallon; neither
here or in any other place where we have had connections with them would
they take any money but Spanish dollars. Large quantities of that floating
substance which I have often mentiond before under the name of Sea Saw
dust had been seen ever since we came into the streights and more
particularly today; among it were many leaves, fruits, old stalks of Plantain
trees, Plants of Pistia Stratiotes and such like trash, from whence we almost
concluded that it came out of some river. At noon by a good Observation
we found Pulo Pissang off which we lay at an anchor to be laid down 5
miles to[o] far to the Northward in La Neptune Oriental. In the Evening
light breezes so that we got a little ahead.


1770 October 5.

Early in the morn a Proa came on board bringing a Duch man who said
that his post was much like that of him who was on board on the 3d; he
presented a printed paper of which he had Copies in English, French and
Duch regularly signd in the name of the governor and council of the Indies
by their Secretary. These he desird we would give written answers to
which he told us would be sent express to Batavia where they would arrive
tomorrow at noon. He had in the boat turtle and eggs of which latter he
sold a few for somewhat less than a penny apeice and then went away. The
day was spent as usual in getting up and letting down the anchor; at night
however we were very near Bantam point.


1770 October 6.

Saild all night; in the morn were almost up with an Island calld Pulo Babi
or Pulo Tounda but were so far without it that it was thought best to go the
outer passage. The land breeze however left us as usual about O'Clock and
we came to an anchor and spent the whole day without any sea breeze
sufficient to stem the current, which was very strong and ran constantly to
the westward. We have Observd it to be very various since we came into
the streights, sometimes running with much greater violence than at others
but setting almost if not quite continualy to the Westward: once only it was
thought to have turnd to the Eastward for a few hours but that was never
made sufficiently clear: this violence would sometimes alter very
considerably several times in an hour. At night observd fire upon Pulo
Tounda.


1770 October 7.

Got the Land breeze in the Night as usual and saild with it till morn,
when we were almost up with Wapping Isle calld by the Malays Pulo
Tidong where we anchord and lay still. The current was pretty strong and
brought with it great plenty of Sea sawdust among which were even here
some leaves and other productions of the land, also many Cuttle Fish
bones, Portugese men of war and other recrements of the Sea. In the
afternoon we had a faint sea breeze which ran us very near the lengh of the
third Island and then left us, so that the Current took hold of the ship
unawares and had almost set her ashore on a small ledge of rocks, on
which was not water enough for a small boat which we sent to examine
them. After we were at an anchor in the night we observd lights upon some
of the Islands cald Bedroe or Les Milles Isles, some of which lay much
nearer to Pulo Tidong than they are laid down in any of the draughts.


1770 October 8.

Breezes were very uncertain all night attended with Thunder, lightning
and heavy rain, so that tho we got out from our Last nights disagreable
situation and saild all night we were not in the morn at all ahead, so we
anchord at 6. At 8 Dr Solander and myself went ashore on a small Islet
belonging to the Milles Isles not laid down in the Draught, laying from
Pulo Bedroe NbE 5 miles. The whole was not above 500 yards long and
100 broad yet on it was a house and a small plantation, in which however
at this time was no plant from whence any profit could be derivd except
Ricnus palma Christi, of which the Castor oil is made in the West Indies.
Upon the shoal about ¼ of a mile from the Island were two people in a
canoe who seemd to hide themselves as if afraid of us; we supposd them to
be the inhabitants of our Island. We found very few species of plants but
shot a Bat whose wings measurd 3 feet when strechd out (Vesp.
Vampyrus) and 4 plovers exactly like our English golden plover
(Charadrius Pluvialis); with these and the few plants we returnd and very
soon after a small Indian boat came alongside, having in her 3 turtle, some
dry fish and pumkins. We bought his turtle which weighd all together 146
lb for a dollar, with which bargain he seemd well pleasd, but could scarcely
be prevaild upon to take any other Coin for his Pumpkins, often desiring
that we would cut a dollar and give him a part; at last however a Portugese
Petacka shining and well coind tempted him to part with his stock which
consisted of 26. He told us that the Island calld in most draughts Pulo Babi
was realy calld Po Tounda, and that calld Pulo Bedroe Pulo Payon. At
parting he made signs that we should not tell at Batavia that any boat had
been on board us. At 1 the sea breeze sprang up and carryd us by 5 the
lengh of all the Islands calld Pulo Pare; off the E end of them however was
a shoal on which it broke a good deal which we could not weather, so were
obligd to anchor abreast a passage between it and the Island in which was
22 fathom water, not having day light to carry us through. On all the
Islands of Pulo Pare were Cocoa nut trees, some houses and vessels hauld
up, and along the sides of the Beach were neat fishing weirs.


1770 October 9.

A fine Land breeze which held the greatest part of the night ran us by
morn abreast of the Island of Edam so that we saw the vessels at anchor in
Batavia road and Onrust Island. At 10 it left us and we anchord; by 11 it
cleard up towards Batavia so much that we saw distinctly the Dome of the
great church; at ½ after sea breeze set in and before 4 we were at anchor
in Batavia Road. A boat came immediately on board us from a ship which
had a broad Pendant flying, the officer on board her enquird who we were
etc. and immediately returnd. Both himself and his people were almost as
Spectres, no good omen of the healthyness of the countrey we were arrived
at; our people however who truly might be calld rosy and plump, for we
had not a sick man among us, Jeerd and flouted much at their brother sea
mens white faces. By this time our boat was ready which went ashore with
the first lieutenant who had orders to acquaint the commanding officer
ashore of our arrival. At night he returnd having met with a very civil
reception from the Shabandar who tho no military officer took cognizance
of all these things. I forgot to mention before that we found here the
Harcourt Indiaman Captn Paul and 2 English Private traders from the Coast
of India.


1770 October 10-20.

After breakfast this morning we all went ashore in the Pinnace and
immediately went to the house of Mr Leigth, the only English man of any
Credit Resident in Batavia. We found him a very Young Man, under
twenty, who had lately arrivd here and succeeded his uncle a Mr Burnet in
his Business which was pretty considerable, more so we were told than our
New Comer had either money or credit to manage. He soon gave us to
understand that he could be of very little service to us either in
introductions, as the Duch people he said were not fond of him, or in
Money affairs as he had began trade too lately to have any more than what
was employd in getting more. He however after having kept us to dine with
him offerd his assistance in shewing us the method of living in Batavia and
Assisting us in setling in such a manner as we should think fit. In order to
this here were two alternatives; either to go to the Hotel, a kind of Inn kept
by order of goverment where it seems all Merchant strangers are obligd to
reside, Paying ½ PC. for warehouseroom for their Goods which the
master of the house is Obligd to find for them: we however having come in
a Kings Ship were free from that Obligation and might live where ever we
pleas'd after having ask'd leave of the Council which was never refus'd. We
might therefore if we chose it take a house in any part of the town and
bringing our own servants ashore keep it, which would be much Cheaper
than living at the Hotel provided we had any body on whoom we could
depend to buy in our provisions; but this not being the Case as we had none
with us who understood the Malay Language we concluded that the Hotel
would be the best for us, certainly the least troublesome and may be not
vastly the most expensive. Accordingly we went there, bespoke beds and
slept there at night.

The next Morning we agreed with the keeper of the House whose name
was Van Heys the Rates we should pay for living as follows: Each person
for Lodging and eating two Rix dollars or 8s pr Diem; for this he agreed as
we were five of us who would probably have many visitants from the Ship
to keep us a seperate table: for each stranger we were to pay one Rix dollar
4s for dinner, and another for supper and bed if he staid ashore: we were to
have also for selves and freinds Tea, Coffee, Punch, and Pipes and tobacco
as much as we could destroy, in short every thing the house afforded
except wine and beer which we were to pay for at the following rates:

                         s d
Claret      39 Stivers   3/3
Hock         1 Ryxr      4/
Lisbon      39           3/3
Sweet wine  39           3/3
Madera       1 Rupee     2/6
Beer         1 Rupee     2/6
Spa Water    1 Ryxr      4/-

Besides this we were to pay for our Servants ½ a rupee 1/3 a day each.
For these rates, which we soon found to be more than double the
common charges of Boarding and lodging in the town, we were furnishd
with a Table which under the appearance of Magnificence was wretchedly
coverd; indeed Our dinners and suppers consisted of one course each, the
one of fifteen the other of thirteen dishes, of which when you came to
examine seldom less than 9 or 10 were of Bad Poultrey roasted, boild, fryd,
stewd etc.etc. and so little concience had they in serving up dishes over
and over again that I have seen the same identical roasted Duck appear
upon table 3 times as a roasted duck before he found his way into the
fricassee, from whence he was again to Pass into forcemeat.

This treatment however was not without remedy: we found that it was the
constant custom of the house to supply strangers at their first arrival with
every article as bad as possible, which if they through good nature or
indolence put up with it was so much the better for the house; if not it was
easy to amend their treatment by degrees till they were satisfied. On this
discovery we made frequent remonstrances and amended our fare
considerably, so much that had we had any one among us who understood
this kind of wrangling I am convinc'd we might have liv'd as well as we
could have desird.

Being now a little settled I hird a small house next door to the hotel on
the Left hand for which I paid 10 Rixd 2£/ a month; here Our books etc.
were lodg'd but here we were far from private, Every Duchman almost that
came by running in and asking what we had to sell, for it seems that Hardly
any individual had ever been at Batavia before who had not something or
other to sell. I also hird 2 Carriages which are a kind of open Chaises made
to hold two people and drove by a man setting on a Coachbox, for each of
these I paid 2 Rxr 8s/ a day by the Month; and now being fairly settled we
sent for Tupia ashore to us who had till now remaind on board on account
of his Illness which was of the Bilious kind, and for which he had all along
refusd to take any medecines. On his arrival his spirits which had long
been very low were instantly raisd by the sights which he saw, and his boy
Tayeto who had always been perfectly well was allmost ready to run mad.
Houses, Carriages, streets, in short every thing were to him sights which he
had often heard describd but never well understood, so he lookd upon them
all with more than wonder, almost made with the numberless novelties
which diverted his attention from one to the other he danc'd about the
streets examining every thing to the best of his abilities. One of Tupia's
first observations was the various dresses which he saw worn by different
people; on his being told that in this place every different nation wore their
own countrey dress He desird to have his, on which South Sea cloth was
sent for on board and he cloathd himself according to his taste. We were
now able to get food for him similar to that of his own countrey and he
grew visibly better every day, so that I doubted not in the least of his
perfect recovery as our stay at this place was not likely to be very short.
Ever since our arrival at this place Dr Solander and myself had apply'd to
be introduc'd to the General or Governor on one of his Publick or Council
days. We had been put off by various foolish excuses and at last were
plainly told that as we could have no business with him we could have no
reason to desire that favour. But as we had often press'd the thing this as an
excuse did not satisfie us so I went myself to the Shabandar, who is also
master of the Ceremonies, in order to ask his reasons for refusing so
trifling a request; but was surprizd at being very politely receivd and told
that the very next morning he would attend us, which he did and we 20.]
were introduc'd and had the honour of conversing for a few minutes with
his high Mightiness who however was very polite to us.

Ever since our first arrival here we had been universaly told of the
extreme unwholesomeness of the place which we, they said, should
severely feel on account of the freshness and heal[t]hiness of our
countenances. This threat however we did not much regard thinking
ourselves too well season'd to variety of Climates to fear any, and trusting
more than all to an invariable temperance in every thing, which we had as
yet unalterably kept during our whole residence in the warm latitudes so
had small reason to doubt our resolutions of keeping for the future. Before
the end of this month however we were made sensible of our Mistake. Poor
Tupias broken constitution felt it first and he grew worse and worse every
day. Then Tayeto his boy was attackd by a cold and i[n]flammation on his
lungs; then my Servants Peter and James and myself had Intermitting
fevers and Dr Solander a constant nervous one; in short every one on shore
and Many on board were ill, cheifly of intermittents, Occasiond no doubt
by the lowness of the countrey and the numberless dirty Canals which
intersect the town in all directions.

Some days before this as I was walking the streets with Tupia a man
totaly unknown to me ran out of his house and eagerly acosting me askd if
the Indian whoom he saw with me had not been at Batavia before. On my
declaring that he had not and asking the reason of so odd a question he told
me that a year and a half before Mr De Bougainville had been at Batavia
with two French ships, and that with him was an Indian so like this that he
had imagind it to be the identical same person had not I informd him to the
contrary. On this I enquir'd and found that Mr De Bougainville who was
sent out by the French to the Malouine or Fauklands Islands (in order, as
they said here, to sell them to the Spanyards) Had gone from thence to the
River Plate and afterwards having passd into the South Seas maybee to
other Spanish ports, where he and all his people had got an immense deal
of Money in new Spanish Dollars, and afterwards came here Across the
South seas in which passage he discoverd divers lands unknown before and
from one of them brought the Indian in question.

This at once cleard up the account given us by the Indians of Otahite of
the two ships which had been there ten Months before us, V.I, p. 164 of
this Journal. These were undoubtedly the ships of Mr De Bougainville, and
the Indian Otourrou the Brother of Rette Cheif of Hidea. Even the story of
the woman was known here--she it seems was a French woman who
Followd a young man sent out in the character of Botanist in mens cloaths.
As for the Article of the colours, the Indians might easily be Mistaken or
Mr De Bougainville if he had traded in the S. Sea under Spanish colours
might chuse to go quite across with them. As for the Iron which most
misled us that he undoubtedly bought in Spanish America. Besides the
Botanist mentiond above these ships were furnish'd with one or more
Draughtsmen so that they probably have done some part of our work for
us.


1770 October 21.

After Petitioning and Repetitioning the Council of the Indies our affairs
were at last settled and orders given to heave down the Ship with all
expedition, so she this Day went down to Kuyper calld by the English
Coopers Island where a warehouse was allotted for her to lay up her stores
etc.

We now began sensibly to feel the ill Effects of the unwholesome climate
we were in: our appetites and spirits were gone but none were yet realy
sick except poor Tupia and Tayeto, both of which grew worse and worse
daily so that I began once more to despair of poor Tupias life. At last he
desird to be removd to the ship where he said he should breathe a freeer air
clear of the numerous houses which he beleivd to be the cause of his
disease by stopping the free draught.


1770 October 28.

Accordingly on the 28th I went down with him to Kuyper and on his
liking the shore had a tent pitch'd for him in a place he chose where both
sea breeze and land breeze blew right over him, a situation in which he
expressd great satisfaction. The Seamen now fell sick fast so that the tents
ashore were always full of sick.


1770 October 30.

After a stay of two days I left Tupia well satisfied in Mind but not at all
better in body and returnd to town where I was immediately seizd with a
tertian, the fits of which were so violent as to deprive me intirely of my
senses and leave me so weak as scarcely to be able to crawl down stairs.


1770 November. [1-3?]

My servants Peter and James were as bad as Myself, and Dr Solander
now felt the first attacks of his fever but never having been in his life time
once ill resisted it in a manner resolvd not to apply to a physician. But
worst of all was Mr Monkhouse the ships surgeon; he was now confind to
his bed by a violent fever which grew worse and worse notwithstanding all
the Efforts of the Physician.


1770 November 4.

At last after many delays causd by Duch ships which came alon[g]side
the wharfs to load Pepper the Endeavour was this day got down to Onrust
where she was to be hove down without delay, most welcome news to us
all now heartily tired of this unwholsome countrey.
Poor Mr Monkhouse became worse and worse without the intervention
of one favourable symptom so that we now had little hopes of his life.


1770 November 5.

In the afternoon of this day poor Mr Monkhouse departed the first
sacrafice to the climate and the next day was buried.


1770 November 7.

Dr Solander attended his funeral, and I should certainly have done the
same had I not been confind to my bed by my fever. Our case now became
melancholy, neither of my Servants were able to help me no more than I
was them, and the Malay Slaves who alone we depended upon, naturaly
the worst attendants in nature, were render'd less carefull by our incapacity
of scolding them on account of our ignorance of the language. When we
became so sick that we could not help ourselves, they would get out of
Call, so we were oblig'd to lie still till able to get up and go in search of
them.


1770 November 9.

This day we receivd the disagreable news of the death of Tayeto, and that
his death had so much affected Tupia that there was little hopes of his
surviving him many days.


1770 November 10.

Dr Solander and myself still grew worse and worse, and the Physician
who attended us declard that the countrey air was necessary for our
recovery, so we began to look out for a countrey house, tho with a heavy
heart as we knew that we must there commit ourselves intirely to the care
of the Malays, whose behavior to sick people we had all the reason in the
world to find fault with. For this reason we resolvd to buy each of us a
Malay Woman to Nurse us, hoping that the tenderness of the sex would
prevail even here, which indeed we found it to do for they turnd out by no
means bad nurses.


1770 November 11.

We receivd the news of Tupias death. I had given him quite over ever
since his boy died whoom I well knew he sincerely lovd, tho he usd to find
much fault with him during his life time.


1770 November 12.

Dr Solander, who had not yet intirely taken to his bed, returnd from
airing this even extreemly ill; he went to bed immediately, I sat by him,
and soon observd symptoms which alarmd me very much. I sent
immediately for Our Physician Dr Jaggi, who apply'd sinapisms to his feet
and blisters to the calves of his legs, but at the same time gave me little or
no hopes of even the possibility of his living till Morning. Weak as I was I
sat by him till morn, when he chang'd very visibly for the better; I then
slept a little and waking found him still better than I had any reason to
hope.


1770 November 13.

As Dr Jaggi had all along insisted on the Countrey air as necessary for
our recovery, I immediately agreed with my Landlord Vn Heys for his
countrey house, which he immediately furnishd for us, and agreed to
supply us with provisions and give us the use of 5 slaves who were there,
as well as three we were to take with us at a dollar a day, 4s/ more than our
common agreement. This countrey house tho small and very bad was
situate about 2 miles out of town in a situation that preposest me much in
its favour, being situate on the banks of a briskly running river and well
open to the sea breeze, two circumstances which must much contribute to
promote circulation of air, a thing of the utmost consequence in a countrey
perfectly resembling the low part of my native Lincolnshire. Accordingly,
Dr Solander being much better and in the Drs opinion not too bad to be
removd, we carried him down to it this day, and also receivd from the ship
Mr Sporing our writer, a Seaman, and the Captains own servant who he
had sent on hearing of our melancholy situation; so that we were now
sufficiently well attended, having 10 Malays and 2 whites besides Mr
Sporing. This night however the Dr was extreemly ill, so much so that
fresh blisters were applyd to the inside of his thighs which he seemd not at
all sensible of; nevertheless in the morn he was something better and from
that time recoverd tho by extreemly slow degrees till his second attack.
Myself, either by the influence of the Bark of which I had all along taken
quantities or by the anziety I sufferd on Dr Solanders account, Miss'd my
fever, nor did it return for several days till he became better.


1770 November 14.

This day we had the agreable news of the repairs of the ship being
compleatly finishd and that she was returnd again to Coopers Island, where
she provd to be no longer at all leaky. When examind she had provd much
worse than any body expected, her main plank being in many places so cut
by the rocks that not more than one eighth of an inch in thickness remaind,
and here the worm had got in and made terrible havock; her false keel
intirely gone, and her main keel much wound'd. These damages were now
however intirely repaird, and very well too in the opinion of Every body
who saw the Duch artificers do their work.

This completion of our repairs gave us hopes that our stay here would be
of no very long duration, as we had now nothing to do but to get on board
our stores and provisions; but our hopes were not a little dampd by the
accounts we every day had from the ship, where the people were so sickly
that not above 13 or 14 were able to stand to their work.

Dr Solander grew better tho by very slow degrees; myself soon had a
return of my ague which now became quotidian, the Captain also was
taken ill on board and of course we sent his servant to him, soon after
which both Mr Sporing and our seaman were seizd with intermittents, so
that we were again reduc'd to the melancholy necessity of depending
intirely upon the Malays for nursing us, all of whoom were often sick
together.


1770 November 24.

We had for some nights now had the wind on the western board, generaly
attended with some rain, thunder and lightning; this night blew strong at
SW and raind etc. harder than ever I saw it before for 3 or 4 hours; Our
house raind in in every part, and through the lower part of it ran a stream
almost capable of turning a mill. In the morn I went to Batavia, where the
quantities of Bedding that I every where saw hung up to dry made a very
uncommon sight; for every house that I was acquainted with, and I was
told almost every house in the town and neighbourhood, sufferd more or
less. This was certainly the shifting of the Monsoon, for the winds which
had before been con[s]tantly to the Eastward Remaind ever after on the
western bord; the people here however told us that it did not commonly
shift so suddenly, and were loth to believe that the westerly winds were
realy set in for several days after.

Dr Solander was recovered enough to be able to walk about the house but
gatherd strengh very slowly. Myself was given to understand that curing
my ague was of very little consequence while the cause remaind in the
badness of the air; the Physician however bled me and gave me frequent
gentle purges, which he told me would make the attacks less violent, as
was realy the case; they came generaly about the hour of 2 or 3 in the
afternoon, a time when every body in these climates is asleep, and by 4 or
5 I generaly had recoverd to get up and walk in the garden etc.
The rainy season was now set in and we had generaly some rain in the
night; the days were more or less cloudy and sometimes wet; this however
was not always the case, for after this time we had once a whole week of
dry clear weather. The Frogs in the diches, whose voices were ten times
louder than those of European ones, made a noise on those nights when
rain was to be expected almost intolerable; and the Mosquitos, or Gnats,
who had been sufficiently troublesome even in the dry time, now breeding
in every splash of water became innumerable, especialy in the Moonlight
nights; their stings however tho painfull and troublesome enough at the
time never continued to itch above half an hour, so that no man in the day
time was troubled with the bites of the night before. Indeed I never met
with any whose bites caus'd swellings that remaind 24 hours, except the
Midges or Gnats of Lincolnshire (which are identicaly the same insect as is
calld Mosquito in most parts of the world) and the sand flies of North
America.


1770 December 1.

About this time Dr Solander had a return of his fever which increasd
gradualy for 4 or 5 days, when he became once more in imminent danger.


1770 December 7.

We receivd the agreable news of the ships arrival in the road, having
compleated all her rigging etc. etc. and having now nothing to take in but
provisions and a little water. The people on board however were extremely
sickly and several had dyed, a circumstance necessarily productive of
delays; indeed had the ships company been strong and healthy we should
have been before now at Sea.

Dr Solander had chang'd much for the better within these two last days,
so that our fears of losing him were intirely dissipated, for which much
praise is due to his ingenious Physician Dr Jaggi who at this Juncture
especialy was indefatigable.


1770 December 14.

Arrivd the Earl of Elgin Indiaman Captn Cooke, having lost her passage
to China, and being in want of anchors, cables and other stores. Dr
Solander continued to mend tho slowly.


1770 December 16.

Arrivd the Phoenix Captn Black, a private trader from India. Our
departure being now very soon to take place, I thought it would be very
convenient to cure the ague which had now been my constant companion
for many weeks; accordingly I took decoction of bark plentifully, and in
three or 4 days missd it. I then went to town, settled all my affairs and
remaind impatient to have the day fix'd.


1770 December 24.

The 25th Xmas day by our account being fixd for sailing, we this morn
hird a large countrey Praw, which came up to the door and took in Dr
Solander, now tolerably recoverd, and carried him on board the ship where
in the evening we all joind him. See Account of Batavia, below


1770 December 25.

There was not I beleive a man in the ship but gave his utmost aid to
getting up the Anchor, so compleatly tird was every one of the
unwholesome air of this place. We had buried here 8 people, in general
however the Crew was in rather better health than they had been a fortnight
before.

While we were at work a man was missd who it was supposd did not
intend to stay ashore, so a boat was sent after him, which before its return
delayd us so long that we lost intirely the sea breeze, and were obligd to
come too again a few cables lenghs only from where we lay before.


1770 December 26.

Weighd and having very faint land breeze got no farther than to the
Island of Edam.


1770 December 27.

Sea breeze was faint again today so that we got but little on our way.


1770 December 28.

We had a good sea breeze which carried us to Maneaters Island where
we anchord for the night.


1770 December 29.

We were again fortunate and at night anchord under Pulo Babi.


1770 December 30.

This day in Entering the Narrows we found some dificulty, and at night
came to an anchor under some small Islands on the Coast of Sumatra
almost abreast of Thwart the Way, from whence we saw a large Dutch
Ship at an anchor under North Island, a small Island likewise on the
Sumatra Coast to the N of us.

Sumatra in this place was very woody and seemd but thinly inhabited;
there were however some cleard spots and a few fires seen.


1770 December 31.

Workd all day against the wind hoping to see some boat come off to us
which might sell us fruits or greens, but none came.


SOME ACCOUNT OF BATAVIA

1770 December 24

Batavia, the capital of the Duch Dominions in India, and Generaly
esteemd to be by much the finest town of those in the possession of
Europeans in these parts, is situated in a low fenny plain where several
small rivers which take their rise in the mountains calld Blaes Berg, about
40 miles inland, empty themselves into the sea. This situation seems to
have been pitchd upon by the Duch (always true to their commercial
interests) intirely for the convenience of water carriage, which indeed few
if any towns in Europe enjoy in a higher degree than this place. Few streets
in the town are without canals of a considerable breadth running through,
or rather stagnating in them, which canals are continued for several miles
round the town, and with 5 or 6 rivers, some of which are navigable 30, 40,
or maybe many more miles into the inland countrey, make the carriage of
every species of its produce inconceiveably cheap.

It is very dificult to judge of the size of the town; the size of the houses,
in general large, and the breadth of the streets increasd by their canals,
makes it impossible to compare it with any English town; all I can say is,
that when seen from the top of a building from whence the eye takes it in at
one view, it does not look near so large as it seems to be when you walk
about it. Valentyne, who wrote about and before the year 1726, says that in
his time there were within the walls 1242 Dutch houses and 1200 Chinese,
without 1066 Dutch and 1240 Chinese, besides 12 Arrack houses; this
number however appeard to me to be very highly exagerated, those within
the walls especialy, but of all this I confess myself a very indifferent judge,
having enjoyd so little health especialy towards the latter part of my stay
that I had no proper oportunities of satisfying myself in such like
particulars.

The streets are broad and hansome and the Banks of the canals in general
planted with rows of trees; a stranger on his first arrival is very much
struck with these, and often led to observe how much the heat of the
climate must be temperd by the shade of the trees and coolness of the
water. Indeed as to the first, it must be convenient to those who walk on
foot, but a very short residence will shew him that their inconveniencies far
overbalance any convenience he can derive from them in any but a
mercantile light. Instead of cooling the air they contribute not a little to
heat it, especialy the stagnating ones of which sort are by far the greatest
number, by reflecting back the fierce rays of the sun; in the dry season
these stink most intolerably, and in the wet many of them overflow their
banks, filling the lower stories of the houses near them with water. Add to
this that when they clean them, which is pretty often as some are not more
than 3 or 4 feet deep, the black mud taken out is sufferd to lie upon their
banks, that is in the middle of the street, till it has acquird a sufficient
hardness to be conveniently laden into boats; this mud stinks most
intolerably, as indeed it must, being cheifly formd from human ordure of
which (as there is not a necessary house in the whole town) the Canals
every morning receive their regular quota, and the more filthy recrements
of housekeeping, which the uncommon police of the countrey suffers every
body to throw into them. Add to this that the running ones, which are in
some measure free from the former inconveniences, have every now and
then a dead horse or hog stranded in the shallow parts of them, a nuisance
which as I was inform'd no particular person was apointed to remove--
which account I am inclind to beleive, as I remember a Dead Buffaloe
laying in one of the principal streets of thoroughfare for more than a week,
which was at last carried away by a flood.

The houses are in general large, well built, and conveniently enough
contrivd for the climate. The greatest part of the ground floor is always laid
out into one large room, with a door to the street and another to the yard,
both which generaly stand open; below is the ground plot of one below
stairs where a is the street door, b the back door, c a room where the master
of the house does his business, d a court to give light to the room as well as
increase the draught, and e the stairs for going upstairs where the rooms are
generaly large tho few in number. Such in general are their town houses,
differing however in size very much and sometimes in shape; the principles
however on which they are built universaly the same--two doors opposite
each other, and one or more courts between them to cause a draught, which
they do in an eminent degree, as well as dividing the room into alcoves in
one of which the family dine, while the female slaves (who on no occasion
set any where else) work in another.

Shewy however as these large rooms are to a stranger at his first seeing
them, his eye has scarce measurd round him before he is sensible of the
thinness of furniture which is universal in all of them; in short the same
quantity of furniture is sufficient for them as is necessary in our smaller
rooms in Europe, as in those we entertain full as many guests at a time as
ever is done in these; consequently the chairs, which are spread at even
distances from each other, are not very easily collected into a circle if 4 or
5 visitors arrive at once.

Publick buildings they have several, most of them old and executed in
rather a clumsey taste; their new church however, which is Built with a
dome (that is seen very far out at sea) is certainly far from an ugly building
on the outside, tho rather heavy, and on the inside is a very fine room. Its
organ is well proportiond, being large enough to fill it, and it is so well
supplied with Chandeliers that few churches in Europe are so well lighted.
From buildings I should make an easy transition to fortifications was it
not a subject which I must confess myself totaly ignorant of; I shall atempt
however to describe what I have seen in general terms. The city of Batavia
is enclosd by a stone wall of a moderate hight, old, and in many parts not
in the best repair; besides this a river in different places from 50 to 100
paces broad, whose stream is rather brisk but shallow, incircles it without
the walls, and within again is a canal very various in breadth, so that in
passing out or in their gates you cross two draw bridges; this canal, usless
as it seems, has however this merit that it prevents all walking upon the
ramparts as is usual in fortified towns, and consequently all idle
examination of the Number or Condition of the guns, with which they
seem to be very ill provided; all those that are seen being of very light
metal, and the west side of the town, where alone you have an opportunity
of examining, being almost totaly unprovided.

In the NE corner of the town stands the Castle or citadel, the walls of
which are higher and larger than those of the town, especialy near the
Landing place for boats which it compleatly Commands, and where are
mounted several very large and well looking Gunns. The neighbourhood
however of the NE Corner on both sides seems sufficiently weak, especialy
on the east side.

Within this Castle, as it is call'd, are apartments for the Governor general
and all the members of the council of India, to which they are enjoind to
repair in case of a seige; here are also large storehouses, where are kept
great quantities of the companies good[s], especialy European, and where
almost all their writers etc. do their business. Here are also a large quantity
of Cannon laid up in store, but whether to mount on their walls or furnish
their shipping in case of the aproach of an enemy I could not learn, tho
from their appearance I should judge them to be intended for the latter. As
for powder, they are said to be well supplied with it, and that it is dispers'd
in various magazines on account of the frequency of lightning.

Besides the fortifications of the town, there are numerous forts up and
down the countrey, some between 20 and 30 miles from the town; most of
these seem to be very poor defences and are probably intended for little
more than to keep the natives in awe. They have also a kind of houses
which mount about 8 Guns apeice, and seem to me to be the best defences
against Indians I have ever seen; these are generaly plac'd in such
situations as will command the navigation of three or four Canals, and at
the same time as many roads upon their banks. Some there are in the very
town, and one of them it was which in the time of the Chinese rebellion (as
the Duch call it) quickly leveld all the best Chinese houses to the ground;
indeed I was told that the natives are more afraid of these than any other
kind of Defences. Of them are many in all parts of Java and the other
Islands in the posession of the Duch; I lamented much not being able to get
a drawing and plan of one, which indeed had I been well I might easily
have done, as I suppose they never could be jealous of a defence which one
gun would destroy in half an hour.

If the Dutch fortifications should be even quite as weak and difenceless
as I [imagine,] they have nevertheless some advantages in their situation
among morasses, where the roads, which are almost universaly a bank
thrown up between a canal and a ditch, might easily be destroyd and
consequently the bringing of heavy artillery very much retarded, unless
they could be got upon some canal and a sufficient number of proper boats
securd to transport them, of which there are plenty, but they all muster
every night under the very guns of the Castle from whence it would be
impossible to take them. Delays howsoever, from whatever cause they
might happen, would be inevitably fatal: in less than a week we were
sensible of the unhealthyness of the climate, and in a months time one half
of the ships company were unable to perform their duty; but could a very
small body of men get soon to the walls of Batavia bringing with them a
few Battering cannon, the town must inevitably yeild on account of the
weakness of its defence. We were told that of a hundred soldiers who
arrive here from Europe it is a rare thing for 50 to outlive the first year, and
of those 50 half will at that time be in the hospitals, and of the [other?] half
not 10 in perfect health; whether this account may not be exagerated I
cannot say, but will venture to affirm that it seemd to me probable from the
number of pale faces, and limbs hardly able to support a musquet, which I
saw among the few soldiers that were to be seen upon duty. The white
inhabitants indeed are all soldie[r]s, the younger ones musterd, and those
who have servd 5 years to be calld out on any occasion; but as neither the
one nor the other are ever Excersisd or made to do any kind of duty, it is
impossible to expect much from them, more versd in handling pens than
guns. The Portugese indeed are generaly good marksmen, as they employ
themselves much in shooting wild hogs and deer; as for the Mardykers
who are certainly numerous, being Indians of all nations who, or whose
Ancestors have been slaves made free, few either of them or the Chinese
know the use of fire arms; their numbers however might be troublesome as
some of them are esteemd brave with their own weapons, Lances, swords,
daggers, etc.

Thus much for the land: By Sea it is impossible to attack Batavia on
account of the shallowness of the water, which will scarce suffer even a
longboat to come within Canon shot of the walls unless she keep a narrow
channel walld on both sides by strong piers and running about ½ a mile
into the harbour, which channel terminates exactly under the fire of the
strongest part of the Castle, where is a large wooden boom which is shut
every night at 6 o clock and not opend again till the morn upon any
pretence. It is said that before the earthquake in [] , Ships of large Burthen
usd to come up to this place and be likewise shut up by the Boom, but at
present nothing but boats atempt it.

The Harbour of Batavia is generaly accounted the finest in India; and
indeed it answers that character, being large enough to contain any number
of ships, and having such good holding ground that no ships ever think of
mooring but ride with one anchor, which always holds as long as the cable.
How it is shelterd is dificult to say, the Islands without it being not by any
means sufficient, but so it is that there never in it runs any sea to be at all
troublesome to shipping. Its greatest inconvenience is the shoal water
between the ships and the mouth of Batavia river, which when the sea
breeze has blown pretty fresh, as it often does, makes such a cockling sea
as is very dangerous for boats. Our longboat once, in attempting to come
off, struck two or three times and with dificulty regaind the rivers mouth;
the same even, a Duch boat loaded with sails and rigging for one of their
India-men was intirely lost.

Round the outside of the harbour are many small Islands, some of which
the Duch make use of: as Edam, to which they transport all Europeans who
have been guilty of Crimes not worthy of death--some of these are
sentenc'd to remain there 99, others 40, 20, 5, etc. years, according to their
deserts, during which time they work as Slaves making Ropes etc. etc.;
Purmerent, where they have a hospital, in which people are said to recover
much faster than at Batavia; Kuyper, where are warehouses belonging to
the company, in which are storehouses in which are kept many things
belonging to the Company, cheifly such as are of small value as Rice, etc.;
here also all foreign ships who are to be hove down at Onrust discharge
their cargoes at wharves very convenent for the purpose. Here the Guns,
Sails etc. of the Falmouth, a gun ship which was condemnd here in the
Year on her return from the Manilla, were kept, and she herself remaind in
the harbour with only her warrant officers on Board, who had remittances
most regularly from home but no notice ever taken of the many memorials
they sent desiring to be recalld. The Dutch however, for reasons best
known to themselves, thought fit about Six months before our arrival to
sell her and all her stores by publick auction, and send her officers home in
their ships.

The next Island, which indeed is of more consequence to the Dutch than
all the rest, is Onrust. Here they heave down and repair all their shipping,
and consequently keep a large quantity of Naval stores. On this Island are
artificers of almost all kinds that are employd in the Ship building way, and
very clever ones, so at least all our most experienc'd seamen allowd, who
said they had seen ships hove down in most parts of the world, but never
saw that business so cleverly done as here. The Dutch seem to think this
Island of not so much consequence as perhaps they would do if all their
naval Stores were here, the greatest part of which are at Batavia; be it as it
will however, it seems to be so ill defended that one 60 gun ship would
Blow it up without a possibility of failing, as she might go alon[g]side the
wharfs as near as she pleasd.

It is generaly said in Europe that the Dutch keep a strong fleet in the East
Indies, Ready and able to Cope with any European power which might
attack them there. This is true thus far and no farther, their Indiamen,
which are all very large ships, are peercd for 50 or 60 guns each; now
should they be attackd when all these were in India, or indeed a little
before the Sailing of the Europe fleet, they might if they had sufficient
warning to Get in their guns etc. etc. raise 40 or 50 sail, but how it would
be possible for them to man this fleet, if they kept any body at all on shore,
is to me a mystery; again, should they be atackd when the fleets are saild,
they have very few ships and those terribly out of Condition; for they keep
no ships even in tolerable repair in India except those Employd to go to
Ceylon and the Coast, which places indeed are generaly taken in the way to
or from Europe; as for the Eastern Islands, no ships of any force are
employd there but all the trade carried on in small vessels, many of which
are Brigs and Sloops.

The countrey round about Batavia for some miles is one continued range
of Countrey houses and gardens, some of which are very large, and all
universaly planted with trees as thick almost as they can stand by each
other, so that the countrey enjoys little benefit of being cleard, the woods
standing now almost as thick as when they grew there originaly, with only
this difference, that one is of usefull, the other was of useless trees; but
usefull as these trees are to their respective owners who enjoy their fruits,
to the community they are certainly highly detrimental in preventing the
Sea breeze from penetrating into the countrey as it ought, or at best loading
it with unwholesome vapours, collected and stagnating under their
branches. This, according to our modern theory, should be the reason why
thunder and lightning are so frequent and mischeivous here that scarce a
month passes in which either ships or houses do not feel the Effects of it.
While we stayd three accidents happned; the first a few days after our
arrival Dismasted a large Duch Indiaman which lay next ship to us, and
wounding two or three of her people; Nor were we totaly exempt from the
consequences of that very flash, which according to the beleif of those on
board came down the lightning chain and certainly struck down the Sentry
who stood near it.

Besides these frugiferous forests, the countrey has all the appearance of
unwholsomeness imaginable. I may venture to call it for some miles round
the town one universal flat, as I know few exceptions to it; this flat is
intersected in many directions by rivers, in still more by Canals navigable
for small vessels, but worst of all is the Ditches, which as in the marshes of
Lincolnshire are the universal fences of feilds and gardens, hedges being
almost totaly unusd here; nor are filthy fenny bogs and morasses, as well
fresh and salt, wanting even in the near neighbourhood of the town, to add
their banefull influence to the rest and compleat the unhealthyness of the
countrey, which much as I have said of it I beleive I have not exagerated.
The people themselves speak of it in as strong terms as I do, while the pale
faces and diseasd bodies of those who are said to be inurd to it, as well as
the preventive medicines etc. etc. and the frequent attacks of disease they
are subject to, abundantly testifie to the truth of what they assert. The very
church yards shew it by the number of graves constantly open in them, far
disproportionate to the number of people; the inhabitants themselves talk
of death with the same indifference as people in a Camp--it is hardly a
peice of news to tell any one of the death of another unless the dead man is
of high rank or somehow concer[n]d in money matters with the other; if the
death of any acquaintance is mentiond it commonly produces some such
reflexion as Well, it is very well he owed me nothing, or I should have had
it to get from his Executors.

So much for the neighbourhood of Batavia. As far round it as I had an
opportunity of going I saw only two exceptions to this general description:
one, where the Generals countrey house is situated, which is a gradualy
rising hill of a tolerable extent, but so little raisd above the common level
that you are hardly sensible of being upon it by any mark but the canals
leaving you and the ditches being changd into bad Hedges; the Governor
himself has however straind a Point to enclose his own garden with a ditch,
to be in fashion I suppose. The other is the place where a famous market
calld Passar Tanabank is held; here and here only during my whole stay I
had the satisfaction of mounting up a hill of about ten yards perpendicular
hight and tolerably steep. About 40 miles inland however are some pretty
high hills, where as we were informd the countrey is healthy in a high
degree and even at certain hights tolerably cool; there European vegetables
flourish in high perfection, even strawberries which bear heat very ill; the
people who live there also have Colour in their cheeks, a thing totaly
unknown at Batavia where the milk white faces of all the inhabitants are
unstaind with any Colour, especialy the women who never go into the sun,
are consequently free from tann, and have certainly the whitest skins
imaginable. From what cause it proceeds is difficult to say, but in general it
is observ'd that they keep their health much better than the men, even those
lately arrivd from Europe. On these hills some of the principal people have
countrey houses which they visit once a year; the General especialy has
one, said to be built upon the Plan of Blenheim house near Oxford, but
never finishd. Physicians also often send people here for the recovery of
health lost in the low countrey and say that the effects of such a change of
air is almost miraculous, working an instant change in favour of the
patient, who during his stay there remains well, but no sooner returns to his
necessary occupations at Batavia than his complaints return in just the
same degree as they were in before his departure.

Few parts of the world I beleive are better furnish'd with necessaries, as
well as Luxuries of life, than the Island of Java. The unhealthyness of the
countrey about Batavia is in this particular rather an advantage to it, for the
very cause of it, a low flat situation, is likewise the cause of a fruitfullness
of Soil hardly to be paraleld; which is suficiently testified by the
flourishing condition of the immense quantities of fruit trees all round the
town, as well as by the quantity and excellence of their Crops of sugar
Cane, Rice, Indian Corn etc. etc. Indeed the Whole Island is allowd to be
uncommonly fruitfull by those who have seen it, and in general as
wholesome, excepting only such low fenny spots as the Neighbourhood of
Batavia, far fitter to sow Rice upon than to build towns.

The Tame quadrupeds are Horses, Cattle, Buffaloes, Sheep, Goats and
Hogs. The horses are small, never exceeding in size what we call a stout
Gallaway, but nimble and spirited; they are said to have been found here
when the Europeans first came round the Cape of Good Hope. The Cattle
are said to be the same as those in Europe, but differ from them in
appearance so much that I am much inclind to Doubt; they have however
the Palearia, which naturalists make to be the Distinguishing mark of our
Species; on the other hand they are found wild not only on Java but on
several of the Eastern Islands. The flesh of those that I eat at Batavia was
rather finer Graind than European Beef, but much Drier and always terribly
lean. Buffaloes are very plentifull, but the Dutch are so much prejudic'd
against them that they will not at all eat their flesh nor even drink their
milk, affirming that it causes fevers; the natives however and Chinese do
both, and have no such opinion concerning them. Their sheep, which are of
that sort whose ears hang down and have hair instead of wool, are most
intolerably bad, lean, and tough to the last degree; they have however a few
Cape sheep which are excellent, tho intolerably dear, we gave 2£/5s apeice
for four which we bought for sea stock, the heavyest of which weighd only
45lb. Their Goats are much of a par with their sheep, but their hogs are
certainly excellent, especialy the Chinese, which are so immensely fat that
no one thinks of Buying the fat with the Lean; the Butcher when you buy it
cuts off as much as you please and sells it to his countrey men the Chinese,
who melt it down and eat it instead of Butter with their rice.

Notwithstanding the excellence of this Pork, the Duch are so prejudic'd in
favour of every thing which comes from Fatherland that they will not at all
eat it but use intirely the Dutch Breed, which are sold as much dearer than
the Chinese here as the Chinese are dearer than them in Europe.
Besides these Domestick animals their woods afford some wild Horses
and Cattle, But these only in the distant mountains and there very scarce.
Buffaloes are not wild upon Java, tho they are upon Macassar and several
of the Eastern Islands plentifully; the Neighbourhood of Batavia however
is pretty plentifully supplyd with Deer of two kinds and wild hogs, both
which are very good meat and often shot by the Portugese, who sell them
tolerably cheap; Monkeys also there are tho but few in the Neighbourhood
of Batavia.

On the mountains and in the more desert part of the Island are Tygers, it
is said in too great abundance, and some Rhinocerosses, but neither of
these animals are ever heard of in the Neighbourhood of Batavia or indeed
any well peopled part of the Island.

Fish are in immense plenty, many sorts of them very excellent, and
inconceiveably cheap, But the Dutch, true to the dictates of Luxury, buy
none but these which are scarce. We who in the course of our long
migration in the warm latitudes had learnd the real excellence of many of
the cheapest sorts, wonderd much at seeing them the food of none but
Slaves; on enquiry however of a sensible housekeeper he told us that he as
well as us knew that for 1 shilling he could purchase a better dish of fish
than he did for 10; but said he I dare not do it, for should it be known that I
did, I should be look'd upon in the same light as one in Europe who coverd
his table with offals fit for nothing but Beggars or dogs. Turtle is also here
in abundance, but despisd by Europeans, indeed for what reason I know
not: it is neither so sweet or so fat as our West India Turtle even in
England. They have also a kind of Large Lizards or Iguanas some of which
are said to be as thick as a mans thigh; I shot one about 5 feet long and it
provd very good meat.

Poultrey is prodigiously plentifull; very large fowls, Ducks also and
Geese are cheap, pidgeons are rather dear, and Turkies extravagant; in
general what we eat at Batavia were lean and dry, but this I am convinc'd
proceeds from being ill fed, as I have eat there of every kind as good or
better than commonly met with in Europe.

Wild Fowl in General is here scarce, I saw during my stay one wild duck
in the feilds but never one to be sold; Snipes however of 2 kinds, one
exactly the same as those in Europe, and a kind of Thrushes are plentifully
sold every day by the Portugese, who for I know not what reason seem to
monopolize all the wild game.

Nor is the earth less fruitfull of vegetables than she is of animals. Rice,
which every body knows is to the inhabitants of these countreys the
Common corn which serves instead of Bread, is very plentifull. One kind
of it is planted here and in many of the Eastern Islands which in the
western parts of India is totaly unknown; it is calld by the Natives Paddy
Gunang, that is mountain rice; this, contrary to the other sort, which must
be under water three parts of the time of its growth, is planted upon the
sides of hills where no water but rain can possibly come; they take
however the advantage of planting it in the beginning of the rainy Season
by which means they reap it in the beginning of the dry. How far this kind
of rice might be useful in our West Indian Islands, where they grow no
bread corn at all, I leave to the judgement of those who know their
respective interests; and whether the Cassava or Manihot, their substitute
for bread, is not as wholesome and cheaper than any thing else which could
be introducd among them. Besides rice they grow also Indian corn or
Mayz, which they gather when young and toast in the Ear; they have also
vast variety of kidney beans and Lentils, which they call Cadjang, and
make a great part of the food of the common people; they have also Millet,
Yams both wet and dry, sweet Potatoes, and some European potatoes not
to be despisd but dear. Their Gardens produce Cabbage, Lettuce,
Cucumbers, Radishes, China white Radishes which boil almost as well as
Turnips, carrots, parsley, Selery, Pidgeon pease (Cytissus Cajan), kidney
beans of two sorts (Dolichos chinensis and Lignosus), Egg plant (solanum
Melongena) which eats delicately broild with pepper and salt, a kind of
greens much like spinage (Convolvulus reptans), Onions very small but
good, Asparagus scarce and very bad; they had also some strong smelling
European plants, as sage, Hyssop, and Rue, which they thought smelt much
stronger here than in their native soils tho I cannot say I was sensible of it.
But the produce of the Earth from whence they derive the greatest
advantage is Sugar; of it they grow immense quantities and have vast crops
with little care of the finest largest canes imaginable, which I am inclind to
beleive contain in an equal quantity a far larger proportion of sugar than
our West India ones. White sugar is sold here for about 2½d a pound,
besides which the Molasses makes their Arrack, in which, as in rum, it is
the cheif ingredient, a small quantity of Rice only and some Cocoa nut
wine being added, which I suppose gives it its particular flavour. Indigo
also they grow a little of, but I beleive no more than is necessary for their
own use.

The fruits of the East Indies are in general so much cryd up by those who
have eat of them, and so much prefer'd to our European ones, that I shall
give a full list of all the sorts which were in Season during our stay, and
afterwards my judgement of Each, which I must confess is not so much in
their favour as that of the generality of Europeans after their return home,
tho while here I did not find that they were more fond of them or spoke
more in their praise when compard with European fruits than I did.

1. Pine apple           Bromelia Ananas
2. Sweet Oranges        Citrus Aurant Sinens
3. Pumplmoes            Citrus Decumanus
4. Lemon                Citrus medica Limon
5. Lime                 Citrus
6. Mango                Mangifera indica
7. Bananes              Musa
8. Grapes               Vitis vinifera
9. Tamarinds            Tamarindus indica
10. Water melons        Cucurbita Citrullus
11. Pumkins             Cucurbita Pepo
12. Papaws              Carica Papaia
13. Guava               Psidium pomiferum
14. Sweet Sop           Annona squamosa
15. Custard apple       Annona reticulata
16. Cashew apple        Anacardium occidenta[le]
17. Cocoa nut           Cocos Nucifera
18. Mangostan           Garcinia Mangostana
19. Jambu               Eugenia Malaccensis
20. Jambu ayer          Eugenia
21. Jambu ayer Mauwar   Eugenia Jambos
22. Pomgranate          Punica Granatum
23. Durion                ..
24. Nanca               Sitodium cauliflor
25. Tsjampada           Sitodium
26. Rambutan
27. Jambolan
28. Boa Bidarra         Rhampus Jujuba
29. Nam Nam             Cynometra cauliflora
30. Catappa             Terminalia Catappa
31. Canari              Canarium commune
32. Madja               Limonia
33. Suntul
34. Blimbing            Averrhoa Bilimbi
35. Blimbing Bessi      Averrhoa Carambola
36. Cherrema            Averrhoa acida
37. Solack              Calamus Rotang Zalacca

Besides these, they have several fruits which the natives only eat, as
Kellor Guilindina, Moringa Succum of two or three kinds, the same as is
calld bread fruit in the South Seas; all the kinds here however, are so
incomparably inferior to the South Sea ones, that was it not for the great
similitude of the outward apearance of both tree and fruit, they would
scarce deserve that name, Bilinju (Gnetum Gnemon) Boa Bune etc. etc. All
which I shall pass over in silence as not deserving to be mentiond to any
but hungry people, and pass to those of a more gratefull flavour, among the
first of which the pine apple Calld here Nanas, will always appear. These
are here very large, and so plentifull that in cheap times I have been told
that a man who buys them at the first hand may get them for a farthing
apeice; when we were there we could get without much hagling two or
three for two pence halfpenny at the common fruit shops. In quality they
are certainly good and well flavourd, as good but not a bit better than those
which are calld good in England. So Luxuriant are they in their growth that
most of them have 2 or 3 crowns and a large number of suckers from the
bottom of the fruit, I have counted nine; these are so forward that they
often while still adhering to the mother shoot out their fruit, which by the
time the large one is ripe are come to a tolerably large size; of these I have
seen 3 upon one apple and have been told that 9 have been seen, but that
was esteemd so great a curiosity that it was preservd in sugar and sent to
the Prince of Orange.

2. Oranges are tolerably good but while we were here were very dear,
seldom less than 6 pence apeice.

3. Pumplemoeses, calld in the West Indies Shaddocks, were well flavourd
but had no juice in them, which we were told depended upon the season.

4. Lemons were very scarce but the want of them was amply made up by the
plenty of 5. Limes, of which the best were to be bought for about
12 pence a hundred. Seville Oranges I saw 2 or 3 only, which were
almost all peel; besides these there are many sorts of oranges and
lemons, none of which are at all esteemd by Europeans or indeed
by the natives themselves. 6. Mango; this fruit during our stay was
so infested with maggots, which bred in the inside of them, that out of 10
scarce 4 would be free, nor were those which were by any means so good
as those of Brazil. Europeans commonly compare this fruit with a melting
peach, to which in softness and sweetness it certainly aproaches, but in
flavour as certainly falls much short of any that can be calld good. The
Climate as I have been told here is too hot and Damp for them, and on the
Coast of India they are much better. Here are as many sorts of them almost
as of Apples in England, some much superior to others; some of the worse
sorts are so bad that the natives themselves can hardly eat them when ripe,
but use them as an acid when just full grown. One sort Calld by them
Mangha Cowani has so strong a smell that a European can scarce bear one
in the room; these however the natives are fond of. The best sorts for eating
are first, Mangha Doodool, incomparably better than any other, next
Mangha Santock and Mangha Gure, and besides these three I know no
other which a European would at all be pleasd with. 7. Of Bananes here are
likewise innumerable kinds, 3 only of which are good to eat as fruit, viz.
Pissang Mas, Pissang Radja, and Pissang Ambon, all of which have a
tolerably vinous taste; the rest however are usefull in their way, some are
fried with batter, others boild in Lieu of Bread, which is here a dearer
article than meat etc. One of the sorts however deserves to be taken notice
of by Botanists, it being contrary to the nature of the rest of its tribe full of
seeds, from whence it is calld Pissang Batu or Pissang Bidjis; it has
however no excellence to recommend it to the taste or any other way
except it is, as the Malayers think, good for the flux. 8. Grapes are here to
be had but in no great perfection; they are however sufficiently dear, a
bunch about the size of a fist costing a shilling or 18 pence. 9. Tamarinds
are prodigiously common and as cheap; the people however either do not
know how to put them up as the West Indians do, or do not practise it, but
cure them with Salt, by which means they become a black mass so
disagreable to the sight and taste that few Europeans chuse to meddle with
them. 10. Water melons are plentifull and good, as are also 11. Pumkins,
which are certainly almost, or quite, the most usefull fruit which can be
carried to sea, keeping without any care for several months, and making
with Sugar and lemon juice a pye hardly to be distinguishd from Apple
pye, as well as with Pepper and salt a substitute for Turnips not to be
despisd. 12. Papaws. This fruit when ripe is full of seeds and almost
without flavour, but while green if par'd, the Core taken out, and boild is
also as good or better than turnips. 13. Guiava is a fruit praisd much by the
inhabitants of our West Indies, who I suppose have a better sort than we
met with here, where the smell of them alone was so abominably strong
that Dr Solander, whose stomack is very delicate, could not even bear them
in the room; nor did their taste make any amends, partaking much of the
Goatish rankness of their smell. Baked in pyes however they lost much of
this rankness and we less nice ones eat them very well. 14. Sweet Sop,
Also a West Indian fruit, is nothing but a vast quantity of large kernels,
from which a small proportion of very sweet pulp may be suckd, but
almost totaly devoid of flavour. 15. Custard Apple likewise is common to
our West Indies, where it has got its name which well enough expresses its
qualities, for certainly it is as like a Custard, and a good one too, as can be
imagind. 16. Casshew apple is seldom or never eat on account of its
astringency; the nut that grows on the top of it is well known in Europe,
where it is brought from the West Indies. 17. Cocoa nut is well known
Every where between the tropicks, of it are infinite different sorts; the best
we met with for drinking is calld Calappa Edjou, and easily known by the
redness of the flesh between the Skin and the shell. 18. Mangostan. As this
and some more are fruits peculiar to the East Indies I shall give short
descriptions of them. This is about the size of a Crab apple and of a deep
red wine Colour; at the top of them is a mark made by 5 or 6 small
triangles, joind in a circle, and at the bottom several hollow green leaves,
the remains of the flower; when they are to be eat the skin or rather flesh,
which is thick, must be taken of, under which are found 6 or 7 white
kernels placd in a circular figure; the pulp with which these are invelopd is
what is eat and few things I beleive are more delicious; so agreably is acid
mixd with sweet in this fruit that without any other flavour it comes in
competition with, if not excells the finest flavourd fruits. So wholesome
also are these Mangostans that they, as well as sweet oranges, are allowd
without stint to people in the highest fevers. 19. Jambu is esteemd also a
most wholesome fruit; it is of a deep red and oval shape, the largest as big
as a small apple; it has not much flavour but is certainly very pleasant on
account of its Coolness; there are several sorts of it, but without much
reference to kinds the Largest and reddest are always the best. 20. Jambu
Ayer. Of these are two sorts, alike in shape, resembling a bell, but
differing, one red and the other white; in size they a little exceed a large
cherry, in taste they are totaly devoid of flavour or even sweetness, being
nothing more than water a little acidulated, and yet their Coolness
recommends them very much. 21. Jambu Ayer MauwarÊis more pleasant
to the smell than the taste, in the latter resembling something the Conserve
of Roses, as in the former the fresh scent of those flowers. 22. Pomegranate
is the same fruit in England and every where else that I have met with it, in
my opinion but ill repaying any one who takes the trouble of breaking its
tough hide. 23. Durion in shape resembles something a small Melon, but
has a skin coverd over with sharp conical spines, whence its name Dure,
signifying in the Malay language a spine; this fruit when ripe divides itself
longitudinaly into 7 or 8 compartments, each of which contains 6 or 7
Nuts, not quite so large as chestnuts, coated over with a substance both in
colour and consistence resembling much very thick cream; this is the
delicate part of the fruit which the natives are vastly fond of, but few
Europeans at first however can endure its taste, which resembles sugard
cream mixd with onions; the smell also prejudices them much against it,
being most like that of rotten onions. 24 Nanca, calld in some parts of India
Jack, has like the Durion a smell very disagreable to strangers, like very
mellow apples with a little garlick; the taste however in my opinion makes
amends for the smell, tho I must say that among us English I beleive I was
single in that opinion. Authors tell strange Stories of the immence size to
which this fruit grows in some countries which are favourable to it:
Rumphius says that they are sometimes so large that a man can not easily
lift one of them; the Malays told me that at Madura they were so large that
two men could but carry one of them; at Batavia however they never
exceed the size of a large melon, which in shape they resemble, but are
coated over with angular spines like the shootings of some Chrystals,
which however are soft and do not at all prick any one who handles them.
25. Tsjampada differs from Nanka in little else than size. 26. Rambútan is a
fruit seldom mentiond by Europeans; it is in appearance much like a
Chestnut with the husk on, being like it coverd with soft prickles, but
smaller and of a deep red colour; when eat this skin must be cut, and under
it is a fruit the flesh of which indeed bears but a small proportion to the
stone, but makes rich amends for the smallness of its quantity by the
elegance of its acid, superior to any other (maybe) in the whole vegetable
kingdom. 27. Jambolan is in size and appearance not unlike a Damson in
England, but has always rather to[o] astringent a flavour to Allow it to be
compard even with that fruit. 28. Boa Bidara is a round yellow fruit about
the size of a musquet Bullet; in flavour it is compard to an apple but like
the former has too much astringency to be compard with any thing but a
Crab. 29. Nam Nam is shapd something like a kidney, very rough and
rugged on the outside and about 3 inches long; it is seldom eat raw, but
fryd with batter makes very good fritters. 30. Catappa, 31. Canari are both
nutts, the kernels of which are compard to almonds, and indeed are full as
sweet, but the difficulty of getting their kernels from out of their tough
rinds and hard shells is so great that they are no where publickly sold, nor
did I taste any others than those which for curiosity sake I gatherd from the
tree, and had opend under it. 31. Madja, under a hardish brittle shell
Contains a lightly acid pulp, which is not eat unless mixd with sugar, nor is
it then to be calld pleasant. 33. Suntul is by far the worst fruit of any I have
or shall mention; it is in size and shape much like the Madja, as large as a
midling apple but rounder; it has a thick hide containing within it kernels
like the Mangostan, the taste of which is both acid and astringent without
one merit to recomend it; indeed I should not have thought it eatable had I
not seen it often publickly exposd to sale upon the fruit stalls.

34. Blimbing, 35. Blimbing Bessi, 36. Cherrima are all three species of one
genus, which tho they differ much in shape agree in being equaly acid, too
much so to be usd without dressing, except only Blimbing Bessi which is
sweeter than the other two; they make however excellent sour sauce and as
good pickles. 37. Salack is the fruit of a most prickley bush; itself is as big
as a walnut and coverd over with scales like those of a lizzard or snake;
these scales however easily strip off and leave two or three soft and yellow
kernels, in flavour to me resembling a little Strawberries; in this however I
was particular, for no one but myself likd them. In short I beleive I may say
that bad as the Character is that I have given of these fruits, I eat as many
of them as any one, and at the time thought as well and spoke as well of
them as the Best freinds they had. My opinions were then as they are now;
whether my shipmates may change theirs between here and home I cannot
tell.

Besides they no doubt have many more which were not in Season during
our stay. We were told also that several kinds of European fruits, as apples,
strawberries etc. had been planted up in the mountains where they came to
great perfection, but this I can only advance upon the credit of Report.
Several other fruits they have also which they preserve in Sugar as Kimkit,
Boa Atap, etc. etc. but these require to be that way prepard before they are
at all eatable.

Batavia consumes a quantity of fruits hardly to be beleivd, the greatest
part of which before they are sold are over ripe or otherwise bad, nor can a
stranger easily get any that are good unless he goes to a street cald Passar
Pissang, which lies North from the great church and very near it. Here live
none but Chinese, who sell fruit; they are in general supplied from
Gentlemens gardens in the neighbourhood of the town, and consequently
have the best and always fresh; for this excellence of their goods however
they are well paid, for they will not take less for any kind than 3 or 4 times
as much as the market price, nor did we ever grudge to give it as their fruit
was always ten times better than any in the market. The cheif supplies of
Batavia Come from a pretty considerable distance, where great quantities
of land are cultivated merely for the sake of fruits; the countrey people to
whoom these Lands belong meet the towns people at two great markets,
one on Mondays calld Passar Sineen, and the other on Saturdays calld
Passir Tanabank, held at very different places for the convenience of
Different districts, each however about 5 miles from Batavia; here the best
of fruits may be got at the cheapest rates. The sight of these markets is to a
European very entertaining: the immense quantities of fruit exposd here is
almost beyond beleif, 40 or 50 Cartloads of pine apples packd as carelessly
as we would do Turnips in England is nothing extrordinary and every thing
else is in the same profusion; the time of these markets is however so ill
contrivd that as on Monday or Saturday all the fruit for the ensueing week,
both for retailers and houseke[e]per[s], must be bought in. Before Friday
there is no good fruit in the hands of any people but the Chinese in Passar
Pisang.

Thus much for meat. In the article of Drink nature has not been quite so
bounteous to the inhabitants of this Island as she has to some of us sons of
the Less abundant north; they are not however totaly devoid of strong
liquors tho their religion, Mahometanism, forbids them the use of such, by
this means driving them from liquid to solid intoxicators, as Opium,
tobacco etc. etc.

Besides their Arrack, which is too well known in Europe to need any
description, they have Palm wine made from a species of Palm cald in the
Malay and Javan Language Aren ( ). This Liquor is Extracted from the
Branches which were to have born flowers, but are cut by the people who
make it their business and Joints of Bamboe cane hung under them, into
which the Liquor intended by nature for the nourishment of both flowers
and fruit distills in tolerable abundance; and so true is nature to her paths
that as long as the fruit of that branch would have remaind unripe, so long
she supplys the liquor or sap, but no longer. This liquor is sold in three
states: the first is almost as it comes from the tree, prepard only a little by
some method unknown to me which causes it to keep 36 or 48 hours
instead of only 12; in this state it is sweet and pleasant, only tasting a little
of smoak, which tho at first disagreable becomes agreable by use and not at
all intoxicating; it [is] Calld Tuackmanise or sweet palm wine. The other
two, one of which is calld Tuack cras, and the other Tuack cuning, are
prepard by laying certain herbs and roots in them, and then fermenting so
that their taste is alterd from sweet to [a] rather astringent and disagreable
taste, and they have acquird the property of intoxicating in a pretty high
degree. Besides this they have Tuack from the Cocoanut tree, but very little
of this is drank as a liquor, it being mostly us'd for putting into the arrack,
in which when intended to be good it is a necessary ingredient.
Next to eating and drinking and one more delicious as well as less
blameable luxury, the inhabitants of this part of India seem to place their
cheif Delight in sweet smells, of Burning rosins etc. and sweet scented
woods; but more than all in sweet flowers, of which they have several sorts
very different from ours in Europe, of which I shall give a short account,
confining myself however to such as were in season during our stay here,
beginning with a list of them.

All these sorts were sold about the streets every night at sunset, either
strung upon strings in wreaths of about 2 feet (a Duch ell) long, or made up
into different sorts of nosegays, either of which cost about a halfpenny
apeice. But I shall now proceed to give a short description of each. 1. then,
Champacca. It grows upon a tree as large as an apple tree, and like it
spreading; the flower itself consists of 15 longish narow petala, which
gives it the appearance of being double tho in reality it is not; its colour is
yellow, much deeper than that of a Jonquil, which flower however it
somewhat resembles in Scent only is not so violently strong. 2. Cananga is
a green flower, not at all resembling any European flower, either in
appearance which is more like a bunch of leaves than a flower, or smell
which however is very agreable. 3. Mulatti is wel known in English hot
houses under the name of Arabian Jasmine; it is here in prodigious
abundance and certainly as fragrant as any flower they have, but of this as
well as all the Indian flowers it may be said that tho full as sweet as any
European ones even of the same sorts, they have not that overcoming
strengh, in short their smell tho very much the same, is much more delicate
and elegant than any we can boast of. 4 and 5. Combang Caracnassi and
Combang Tonquin are much alike in shape and smell, small flowers of the
dogs bane kind, hardly to be compard to any in our English gardens, but
like all the past most elegant in their fragrance. 6. Sundal Malam, the same
as our English Tuberose, this flower is less in size considerably as well as
more mildly fragrant than ours in Europe. The Malay name signifies
intriguer of the night, from an Idea rather pretty: the heat of the climate
here allows few or no flowers to smell in the day, and this especialy from
its want of smell and modest white array seems not at all desirous of
admirers, but when night comes its fragrance is diffusd around and attracts
the attention as well as gains the admiration of every passer by. 7. Bonga
Tanjong is shapd quite like a star of 7 or 8 rays, about ½ an inch in
diameter; it is of a yellowish colour, and like its fellows a modest agreable
smell, but its cheif use is contrasting the Mulatti on the wreaths which the
ladies here wear in their hair, and this it does very prettily.
Besides these there are in private gardens many other sweet flowers
which are not in sufficient plenty to be brought to market, as Cape Jasmine,

1. Champacka        Michelia Champacca
2. Cananga          Uvaria Cananga
3. Mulatti          Nyctanthes Sambac
4. Caracnassi
5. Combang Tonquin  Pergularia glabra
6. Sundal Malam     Polianthes tuberosa
7. Bonga Tanjong    Mimusops Elengi

several sorts of Arabian Jasmine, tho none so sweet as the Common etc.
etc. They have also a mixture of several of these flowers and leaves of a
plant Calld Pandang (Pandanus ) choppd small, with which they fill their
hair and cloths etc.; but their great Luxury is strewing their beds full of this
mixture and flowers so that you sleep in the midst of perfumes, a luxury
scarce to be expressd nor at all conceivd in Europe, where stewing under 3
or 4 blankets even fragrant odours cannot enjoy that liberty they do in India
under none, or at most the covering of a single peice of fine Chintz.
Before I leave the Productions of this countrey I cannot help saying a
word or two about spice, tho in reality none but pepper is a native of the
Island of Java, and but little even of that. Of pepper however I may say that
large as the quantities of it are that are annualy imported into Europe, little
or none is usd in this part of the Indies; Capsicum or Cayan pepper as it is
call'd in Europe has almost totaly supplyd its place. As for Cloves and
Nutmegs, the monopoly of the Duch has made them too dear to be
plentifully usd by the Malays, who are otherwise very fond of them.
Cloves, tho said to be originaly the Produce of Machian or Bachian, a
small Island far to the Eastward and only 15 miles to the Northward of the
Line, from whence they were when the Duch came here disseminated over
most or all of the Eastern Isles, are now intirely confind to Amboina and its
Neighbouring small Islets; the Dutch having by different treaties of peace
made with the conquerd kings of all the other Islands stipulated that they
should have only a certain number of trees in their dominions, and in future
quarrels, as a punishment, lessned their quantity till at last they left them
[none] Nor any right to have any. Nutmegs have been in the same manner
extirpated in all the Islands except their native Banda, which easily supplys
this world, and would as easily supply another if the Duch had but another
to supply. Of nutmegs however there certainly are a few upon the Eastern
coast of New Guinea, a place on which the Duch hardly dare set their feet
on account of the treachery and warlike disposition of the natives; there
may be also both Cloves and nutmegs upon others of the Islands far to the
Eastward, for those I beleive neither the Dutch or any other nation seem to
think it worth while to examine at all into.

The town of Batavia, tho the Capital of the Duch Dominions in India, is
so far from being peopled with Dutch men that I may safely affirm that of
the Europeans inhabiting it and its neighbourhood not one fifth part are
Dutchmen; besides these are Native, Portugese, Indians, and Chinese, the
two last many times exceeding the Europeans in Number. Of Each of these
I shall speak seperately, beginning with the Europeans, of which there were
some especialy in the troops of almost every nation in Europe; the
Germans however are so much the most numerous that they 2 or 3 times
exceed in number all other Europeans together. Fewer English are settled
here than of any other nation, and next to them French: the Politick Dutch
well knowing that the English and French being maritime powers must
often have ships in the East Indies, and will demand and Obtain from them
the subjects of their respective kings, will not enter either English or
Frenchman into their service, unless they give in their place of natavity to
be in some place out of their own countrey. This trick, foolish as it is, was
playd with us in the case of an Irishman who we got on board, and they
demanded for a Dane, Offering to prove by their books that he was born at
Elsinoor; but our Captn convinc'd by the mans Language what countrey
man he was, refus'd to give him up so resolutely that they soon ceasd their
demands. Notwithstanding the very great number of other Europeans the
Duch are political enough to keep all or near all the Great posts, as Raads
of India, Governors, etc. in their own hands: other nations may make
fortunes here by trafick if they can, but not by employments. No man can
come over here in any other character than that of a soldier in the
Companies service, in which before they can be accepted they must agree
to remain 5 years; as soon however as ever they arrive at Batavia, they by
applying to the counsel [may?] be allowd to Absent themselves from their
Core, and enter immediately into any vocation in which they have any
money or credit to set them up in.

Women may come out without any of these restrictions, or indeed any
others, be they of what nation they will. We were told that there were not
in Batavia 20 women born in Europe, the rest of the white women, who
were not very scarce, were born of white parents, possibly through three or
four families, as many generations distant from their European mothers.
These imitate the Indian in every particular: their dress except in form is
the same, their hair is worn in the same manner, and they chew Betele as
plentifully as any Indians, notwithstanding which I never saw a white man
chew it during my whole stay.

Merchandise is carried on in an easier and more indolent way here I
beleive than in any other part of the world. The Chinese carry on every
manufacture of the place and sell the produce to the resident merchants, for
indeed they dare not sell to any foreigner; consequently when a Ship comes
in and bespeaks 100 Leggers off Arrack or any thing else, he has nothing to
do but to send orders to his China man to deliver them on board such a
ship; which done he brings the Master of the ships receipt for the goods to
his Employer, who does nothing but receive money from the Stranger, and
reserving his profit, pay the China man his demands. With imports
however, they must have a little more trouble, for them they must examine,
receive, and preserve in their own warehouses, as other merchants do.
To give a character of them in their dealings, I need only say that the
Jewel known to English merchants by the name of fair dealing is totaly
unknown here--they have joind all the art of trade that a Dutchman is
famous for to the deceit of an Indian. Cheating by false weights and
measures, false samples, etc., etc. are lookd upon only as arts of trade: if
you do not find them out tis well; if you do, Well they say, then we must
give you what is wanting, and refund without a blush or the least wrangle,
as I myself have seen in matters relating to the ship. But their great fort is
asking one price for their commodities and charging another, so that a man
who has laid in 100 pecol of sugar, as he thinks at 5 dollars a pecul, after it
has been a week or ten days on board will have a bill brought him in at 7,
nor will the Merchant go from his charge unless a written agreement or
witnesses can be brought to prove the bargain. For my own part, I was
fortunate enough to have heard this character of them before I came here,
and wanting nothing but daily provision agreed immediately in writing for
every article at a certain price, which consequently my Landlord could
never depart from; I also, as long as I was well, constan[t]ly once a week
lookd over my bill and took it into my posession, never however without
scratching out the charges of things which I had never had, to a
considerable amount, which was always done without a moments
hesitation.

Next to the Dutch are the Portugese, who are calld by the Native Oran
serane, that is Nazareens, to distinguish them from other Europeans,
Notwisthstanding which they are included in the general Name of Capir or
Cafir, an approbious term given by the Mahometans to all those who have
not enterd into their faith, of whatsoever religion they may be. These tho
formerly they were Portugese have no longer any pretentions to more than
the name; they have all chang'd their religion and become Lutherans, and
have no communication or even knowledge of the Countrey of their
forefathers; they speak indeed a corrupt dialect of the Portugese language,
but much oftener Malay. None of them are sufferd to employ themselves in
any but mean occupations, many make their livelihood by hunting, taking
in washing, and some by handicraft trades; their Customs are precisely the
same as those of the Indians, like them they chew Betele, and are only to
be distinguishd from them by their noses being sharper, their skins
considerably blacker, and their Hair dress'd in a manner different from that
us'd by the Indians.

The Duch, Portugese and Indians here are intirely waited upon by Slaves
whoom they purchase from Sumatra, Malacca, and almost all their Eastern
Islands; the natives of Java only have an exemption from slavery, enforc'd
by strong penal laws, which I beleive are very seldom broke through. The
price of these slaves is from 10 to 20 pound Sterling apeice, excepting
young girls who are sold on account of their beauty, these sometimes go as
high as 100 but I beleive never higher. They are a most lazy set of people,
but contented with a little boild rice with a little of the cheapest fish, is the
food which they prefer to all others. They differ immensely in form of
Body and disposition, consequently in Value according to the countries
they come from: African negroes calld here Papua are the cheapest and
worst disposd of any being given up to stealing and almost incorrigible by
stripes; next to them are the Bougis and the Macassars, Both inhabitants of
the Island of Celebes, they are lazy and revengefull in the highest degree,
Easily giving up their lives to satisfie their revenge; the Island of Bali
sends the honestest and most faithful, consequently the dearest slaves; and
Nias, a small Island on the Coast of Sumatra, the hansomest women but of
tender delicate Constitutions, ill able to bear the unwholesome climate of
Batavia. Besides these are many more sorts whose names and
qualifications I have intirely forgot.

The laws and customs regarding the punishment of Slaves are these: A
master may punish a slave as far as he thinks proper by stripes, but should
death be the consequence he is calld to a very severe account, if the fact is
provd very rarely escaping with life. There is however an officer in every
quarter of the town, calld Marineu, who is a kind of constable; he attends
to quell all riots, takes up all people guilty of crimes etc., but is more
particularly used for the apprehending runaway slaves, and punishing them
for that or any other crime for which their master thinks they deserve a
greater punishment than he chuses to inflict. These punishments are
inflicted by slaves bred up to the business; on men they are inflicted before
the door of their masters house, on women for decency sake within it; they
are stripes given in number according to custom and the nature of the
Crime, with rods made of split rattans which fetch blood at every stroke,
consequently they may be and sometimes are very severe; a common
punishment costs the master of the slave a rixdollar, 4s, and a severe one
about a ducatoon, 6s8d. For their encouragement however and to prevent
them from stealing, the master of every slave is obligd to give him 3
dubbelcheys, 7½d a week.

Extrordinary as it may seem there are very few Javans, that is
descendants of the original inhabitants of Java, who live in the
neighbourhood of Batavia. But as many countries as the Dutch import
slaves from, so many sorts of Indians are there, who are either slaves made
free or the desendants of such; they are alltogether calld by the name of
Oran Slam or Isalam, a name by which they distinguish themselves from
all other religions, it signifying beleivers of the true faith. They are again
subdivided into innumerable divisions, every countrey keeping themselves
in some degree distinct from the rest; the dispositions generaly observd in
the slaves are however verified in the free men, who compleatly inherit the
different vices or virtues of their respective countries.

Many of these employ themselves in cultivating gardens and selling
fruits and flowers; Betele and Arec, calld here Siri and Pinang, is all grown
by them, of which an immense qua[n]tity is chewd by Portugese, Chinese
and Slams, slaves and free men. The lime that they use here is however
slackd, by which means their teeth are not eat up in the same manner as the
Savoo people, who use it unslackd; they mix with it also a substance calld
Gambir which is brought from the Continent of India, and the better sort of
women use with their chew many sorts of perfumes, as cardamoms etc.
etc. to give the breath an agreable smell. Many also get a livelihood by
fishing and carrying goods upon the water etc. etc.; some however there are
who are very rich and live splendidly in their own way, which consists
almost intirely in a number of Slaves.

In the article of food no people can be more Abstemious than they are.
Boild rice is of Rich as well as poor the principal part of the subsistence,
this with a small proportion of fish, Buffaloe or fowl, and sometimes dryd
fish and dry shrimps brought here from China, is the cheif of their food;
every thing however must be highly seasond with Cayan pepper. They
have also many pastry dishes made of Rice flower and other things I am
totaly ignorant of, which are very pleasant, fruit also they eat much of
especialy plantanes.

Their feasts are plentifull and in their way magnificent, tho they consist
more of shew than meat; artificial flowers etc. are in profusion and meat
plentifull tho of no great variety of dishes. Their religion of Mahometanism
denies them the use of strong liquors, nor I beleive do they trespas much in
that way, having always Tobacco, Betele and opium to intoxicate
themselves. Their weddings are carried on with vast form and shew, the
families concernd borrowing as many Gold and silver ornaments as
possible to adorn the Bride and bride groom, so that their dresses are
always costly; the feasts and ceremonies relating to them last in rich mens
families a fortnigh[t] or more, all which time the man, tho married the first
day, is by the women kept from his wife.

The language spoke among them is intirely Malay or at least so calld, for
I beleive it is a most corrupt dialect of that Language, for notwistanding
that Java has two or three, and almost every little Island beside its own
language distinct from the rest, yet none use or I beleive remember their
own language; so that this Lingua Franca Malay is the only Language you
hear spoken in this neigbourhood, and I have been told over a very large
part of the East Indies.

Their women, and in imitation of them the Dutch also, wear as much hair
as ever they can nurse up on their heads, which by the use of oils etc. is
incredibly great; it is universaly black, and they wear it in a kind of circular
wreath upon the tops of their heads fastned there with a Bodkin, in a taste
inexpressibly elegant. I have often wishd that one of our ladies could see a
malay womans head dressd in this manner, with her wreath of flowers,
commonly Arabian Jasmine, round that of hair, for in that method of dress
there is certainly an Elegant simplicity and unafected shew of the beauties
of nature, incomparably superior to any thing I have seen in the Labourd
head dresses of my fair countrey women.

Both sexes bathe themselves in the river constantly, at least once a day, a
most necessary custom in hot climates where the profuse perspiration
attracts and retains dirt of all kinds in a high degree. Their teeth also,
disgustfull as they must appear to an European from their blackness
occasiond by their continual chewing of Betele, are a great object of their
attention; every one must have them fil'd into the fashionable form, which
is done with whetstones by a most troublesome and painfull operation.
First both the upper and under teeth are rubbd till they are perfectly even
and quite blunt, so that the two jaws lose not less than ½ a line each in the
operation; then a deep groove is made in the middle of the upper teeth,
crossing them all and itself cutting through at least one fourth of the whole
thickness of the teeth, so that the Enamel is cut quite through--a fact
which we Europeans who are taugh[t] by our dentifricators that any
damage done to the enamel is mortal to the tooth, find it difficult to
beleive; yet among these people, where this custom is universal, I have
scarce seen even in old people a rotten tooth. Much may certainly be
attributed to what they chew so continualy, which themselves and indeed
every one Else agree is very beneficial to the teeth. The blackness however
causd by this, of which they are so proud, is not a fixd stain but may be
rubbd off at pleasure and then their teeth are as white as Ivory, but very
soon again regain their original blackness.

No one who has ever been in these countries can be ignorant of the
practise here which is calld Amoc, which is, that an Indian intoxicated with
opium rushes into the street with a drawn Dagger in his hand and kills
every body he meets, especialy Europeans, till he himself is either killd or
taken. This happned at Batavia three times while we were there to my
knowledge, and much oftener I beleive, for the Marineu or Constable
whose business it is to apprehend such people himself, told me that there
was scarce a week when either himself or some of his brethren were not
calld upon to seize or kill them. So far however from being an accidental
madness which drove the people to kill whoomsoever they met without
distinction of persons, the three that I knew of--and I have been told all
others--had been severely Injurd, cheifly in love affairs, and first revengd
themselves on the party who had Injurd them. It is true they had made
themselves drunk with opium before they committed this action, and when
it was done rushd out into the streets, foaming at the mouth like made
dogs, with their drawn Crise or Dagger in their hands; but they never
attempted to hurt any one except those who attempted, or appeard to them
to attempt to stop or seize them, whoever ran away or even went on the
other side of the street was safe. To prove that these people distinguishd
persons, mad as they are with the use of Opium, there is a famous story in
Batavia, of one who run Amoc on account of stripes and ill usage which he
had receivd from his mistress and her elder daughter, but on the contrary
had been always well usd by the younger; he stabbd first the eldest
daughter, the youngest hearing the bustle ran to the assistance of her
mother and placd herself between him and her, attempting to persuade him
from his design, but he repeatedly pushd her on one side before he could
get at her mother, who when he had killd he ran out as usual. These people
are generaly slaves, who indeed are by much the most subject to insults
which they cannot revenge. Freemen however sometimes do it: one of
them who did it while I was there was free, and of some substance; the
cause was Jealousy of his own brother, whoom he killd with two more that
attempted to oppose him before he was taken; he however never came out
of his house, which he attempted to defend, but so mad was he with the
Effects of the opium that out of three musquets which he attempted to use
against the officers of Justice not one was either loaded or Primd.
The Marineu as he is calld, a petty officer of Justice somewhat
resembling our constable, who regulates all riotous proceedings etc. etc.,
has also these Amoc's committed to his charge; if he takes them alive his
reward is great, if he kills them that reward is lost. Notwithstanding which
3 out of 4 are killd, so resolute and active is their resistance when attacked,
and that they have contrivances like large tongs or pincers to catch them
and hold them till disarmd; those who are taken are generaly wounded
severely, for the Marineus assistants, who are all armd with hangers, know
how to lame the man if once they can get within reach of him. The
punishment of this crime is always breaking upon the wheel, nor is that
ever relaxd, but so strictly adheerd to that if an amoc when taken is Judgd
by the Physicians to be in danger from his wounds, he is executed the very
next day, as near as possible to the place where he committed his first
murther.

Among their absurd opinions proceeding from their original Idolatry, of
which they have some, is certainly the custom of Consecrating Meat,
money etc., to the Devil, whoom they call Satan; this is done either in cases
of dangerous sickness, when they by these means try to appease the devil
who they beleive to be the cause of all sickness, and make him spare the
diseasd mans life, or in consequence of Dreams. If any man is restless and
dreams much for two or three nights, he immediately Concludes that Satan
has taken that method of laying his Commands upon him, which if he
neglects to fullfill he will certainly suffer sickness or death as a punishment
for his inattention; consequently he begins to Labour over in his brains all
the circumstances of his dream, and try his utmost to put some explanation
or other upon them; in this if he fails, he sends for the Cawin or Preist who
assists him to interpret them. Sometimes Satan orders him to do this or that
or the contrary, but generaly he wants either meat or money, which is
always sent him, and hung up on a little plate made of Cocoa nut leaves on
the bough's of a tree near the river. I have askd them what they thought the
devil did with the money, and whether or no they thought that he eat the
victuals: as for the money, they said, so that the man orderd to do so did
but part with it, it signified not who took it, therefore it was generaly a prey
to the first stranger who found it; and the meat he did not eat, but bringing
his mouth near it he suckd at once all the savouryness out of it without
disturbing its position in the least, but rendering it tasteless as water.
But what is much more difficult to reconcile to the rules of human
reason, is the beleif which these people have that women who bring forth
children sometimes bring forth at the same time young Crocodiles, as twins
to the Children; these creatures are receivd by the midwives most carefully
and immediately carried down to the river, where they are turnd lose, but
have victuals supplyd them constantly from the family, especialy the twin,
who is necessitated to go down to the river every now and then and give
meat to this Sudara as it is calld, who if he is deprivd of such attendance
constantly aff[l]icts his relation with sickness. The existence of an opinion
so contradictory to human reason, and which seemd totaly unconnected
with religion, was with me long a subject of doubt, but the universal
testimony of every Indian I ever heard speak of it was not to be withstood.
It seems to have taken its rise in the Island of Celebes and Bouton, very
many of the inhabitants of which have crocodiles in their families; from
thence it has spread itself all over the Eastern Islands, even to Timor and
Ceram, and west again as far as Java and Sumatra, on which Islands
however such instances are very scarce among the natives. To shew how
firmly this prejudice has layd hold of the minds of these ignorant people, I
shall repeat one story out of the multitude I have heard confirming it from
ocular demonstration.

A Slave girl who was born and bred up among the En[g]lish at
Bencoulen on the Island of Sumatra, by which means she had learnt a little
English, told me that her father when on his Death bed told her that he had
a Crocodile for his sudara, and chargd her to give him meat etc. after he
was gone, telling her in what part of the river he was to be found. She went
she said constantly, and calling him by his name Radja pouti (white king),
he came out of the water to her and eat what she brought; he was, she said,
not like other crocodiles but hansomer his body being spotted and his nose
red, moreover he had bracelets of Gold on his feet, and ear rings of the
same metal in his ears. I heard her out patiently without finding fault with
the absurdity of her giving ears to a crocodile. While I am writing this my
Servant, who I hird at Batavia and is a mongrel between a Duch man and
Javan woman, tells me that he has seen at Batavia a crocodile of this kind;
it was about 2 feet long being very young, Many both Malays and Dutch
saw it at the same time, it had gold bracelets on. Ah, said I, why such a one
at Batavia told me of one which had Ear rings likewise, and you know that
a crocodile has no ears. Ah but, said he, these Sudara Oran are different
from other Crocodiles; they have 5 toes on each foot, and a large tongue
which fills their mouth, and they have ears also but they are very small. So
far will a popular Error deceive people unusd to examine into the truth of
what they are told.

The Bougis, Macassars and Boetons, many of whoom have such relations
left behind in their own countrey, make a kind of Ceremonial feast in
memory of their relations. A large party of them go in a boat furnish'd with
plenty of provisions of all kinds and musick; in this they row about in
places where crocodiles or allegators are most common, singing and crying
by turns, each invoking their relation; in this manner they go on till they
are fortunate enough to see or fancy at least that they see one, when at once
their musick stops and they throw overboard Provisions, Betele, Tobacco
etc., imagining I suppose that their civility to the species will induce their
kindred at home to think well of them, tho unable to pay their proper
offerings.

Next come the Chinese, who in this place are very numerous but seem to
be people of small substance. Many of them live within the walls and keep
shops, some few of which are furnishd with a pretty rich shew of European
as well as Chinese goods; but far the greatest number live in a Quarter by
themselves without the walls calld Campon China. Besides these there are
others scatterd every where about the Countrey, where they cultivate
gardens, sow rice and sugar, or keep Cattle and buffaloes whose milk they
bring daily to town.

Nor are the inhabitants of the town and Campon China less industrious;
you see among them Carpenters, Joiners, smiths, Taylors, Slipper Makers
and dyers of Cottons, Embroiderers etc.; in short the general character of
Industry given to them by all authors who have wrote upon them is well
exemplified here, tho the more genteel parts of their customs cannot, on
account of the want of rich and well born people be found among them;
those China alone can shew, here nothing can be sought for but the native
disposition of the lower Class of people.

There is nothing be it of what nature it will, clean or dirty, honest or
dishonest (provided there is not too much danger of a halter) which a
Chinese will not readily do for money; they work diligently and
laboriously, and loth to lose sight of their main point, money getting. No
sooner do they leave of work than they begin to game, either at Cards, dice
or some one of the thousand games they have which are unknown to us in
Europe; in this manner they spend their lives working and gaming, scarce
allowing themselves time for the necessary refreshments of food and sleep;
in short it is as extrordinary a sight to see a China man Idle, as it is to see a
Dutchman or Indian at work.

In manners they are always civil or rather obsequious, in dress always
neat and clean in a high degree, from the highest to the lowest. To atempt
to describe either their dresses or persons would be only to repeat some of
the many accounts of them that have been publish'd, as every one has been
wrote by people who had much better opportunities of seeing them and
more time to examine them than I have had. Indeed a man need go no
farther to study them than the China paper, the better sort of which
represents their persons and such of their Customs, dresses etc. as I have
seen most strikingly like, tho a little in the Caracatura stile; indeed some of
the Plants which are common to China and Java, as Bamboe, are better
figurd there than in the best botanical authors that I have seen.
In Eating they are easily satisfied, not but that the richer have many
savoury dishes; Rice however is the cheif food of the poorer with a little
fish or flesh as they can afford it. They have a great advantage over the
Malays, not being taught by their laws or religion to abstain from any food
that is wholesome, so that besides Pork, Dogs, cats, Frogs, Lizzards and
some kinds of snakes, as well as many sea animals lookd upon by other
people to be by no means Eatable, are their Constant food. In the vegetable
way they also eat many things which Europeans would never think of even
if starving with hunger, as the young leaves of many trees, that lump of
Bractea and flowers at the end of a Bunch of Plantains, the flowers of a
tree calld by the Malays Combang Ture (Eschinomine grandiflora), the
Pods of Kellor (Guilandina Moringa), two sorts of Blites (Amaranthus)--
all which are boild or stewd; also the seeds of Taratti (Nympha Nelumbo)
which indeed are almost as good as hazel nuts. All these however the
Malays also Eat, as well as many more whose names I had not an
opportunity of Learning, as my Ilness rendering me weak and unable to go
about, prevented me from mixing with these people as I should otherwise
have done.

In their Buryings the Chinese have an extrordinary superstition, which is
that they will never more open the ground in the place where a man has
been buried, by which means it happens that their burying grounds in the
neigbourhood of Batavia cover many hundred acres; on which account the
Dutch, grudging the quantity of ground laid waste by this method, will not
sell them ground for it but at enormous prizes, notwithstanding which they
will always raise money to purchase Grounds whenever they can find the
Duch in a Humour to sell it, and actualy had while we were there a great
deal of land intended for that purpose but not yet began upon. Their
funerals are attended with much purchasd and some real lamentations, the
relations of the deceasd attending as well as women hird to weep. The
Corps is Naild up in a large thick wooden Coffin, not made of Plank but
hollowd out of the trunk of a tree; this is let down into the Grave and then
surrounded 8 or 10 inches thick with their mortar or chinam as it is calld,
which in a short time becomes hard as stone, so that the bones of the
meanest among them are more carefully preserv'd from Injury than those of
our greatest and most respected people.

Of the Goverment here I can say but very little, only that an uncommonly
great subordination is kept up, every man who is able to keep house having
a certain rank acquird by the lengh of his services to the Company, which
ranks are distinguishd by the ornaments of the Coaches and dresses of the
Coachmen of such as have them: as for instance, one must ride in a plain
Coach, another Paints his Coach with figures and gives his Coachman a
lacd hat, another gilds his Coach etc.

The Governor General as he is calld who resides here, is superior over all
the Dutch Governors and other officers in the East Indies, who to a man are
obligd to come to him at Batavia to have their accounts past; and if they are
found to have been at all negligent or faulty it is a common practise to
delay them there 1, 2 or 3 years according to the pleasure of the Governor,
for no one can leave the place without his consent and approbation. Next to
the general are the Raaden van Indïë or members of the Councel, calld here
Edele Heeren and by the corruption of the English Idoleers, in respect to
whoom every one who meets them in a carriage is obligd to drive on one
side of the Road and stop there till they are past, which distinction is
expected by their wives and even children, and commonly paid to them;
nor can the coachmen who are hird be restraind from paying this slavish
mark of respect by any thing but the threats of instant death, as some of our
captains have experiencd, who thought it beneath the dignity of the rank
they held under his Britannick majestys service to submit to any such a
humiliating Ceremony.

Justice is administerd here by a parcel of gentlemen of the law, who have
ranks and dignities among themselves as in Europe. In civil matters I know
nothing of their proceedings, but in criminal they are rather severe to the
natives, and too Lenient to their countreymen, who whatever crime they
have committed are always allowd to escape if they chuse it, and if brought
to tryal very rarely punishd with death; while on the other hand, the Poor
Indians are floggd, hangd, Broke upon the wheel, and even impald without
mercy. While we were there 3 remarkable Crimes were committed by
Christians. 2 duelists killd each his antagonist and both fled; one took
refuge on board our ship, bringing with him so good a character from the
Batavians that the Captian gave him protection, nor was he ever demanded;
the other I suppose went on board some other as he was never taken. The
other was a Portugese, who by means of a false key had robbd an office to
which he belongd of 14 or 15 hundred pounds; he however was taken, but
instead of death Condemnd to a publick whipping and banishment to
Banda for 99 years.

The Malays and Chinese have each proper officers of their own, a
Captain and lieutenants as they are calld, who administer Justice among
them in Civil cases, liable to an appeal to the Dutch court, which however
rarely happens. Before the Chinese Rebellion as the Dutch, or Massacre as
the Chinese themselves and most Europeans Call it, in 1740, when the
Dutch upon may be too slight an information massacred no man knows
how many thousand Chinese unresisting, for a supposd rebellion, which
they to this day declare to have been never so much as thought of by them,
the Chinese had two or three of their body in the Council and many more
priviledges than now; nor have they from that time to this by any means
recoverd either their former Oppulence or numbers, every one now who
has got any thing considerable chusing to retire with it either to China, or
any where, rather than remain in the power of a people who have behavd
so ill to them.

The taxes paid by these people to the Company are very considerable,
among which that commonly said to be paid for the liberty of wearing their
hair is not inconsiderable; it is however no other than a kind of head money
or Poll tax, for no Chinese can wear his hair who has ever been in China, it
being a principle of their religion never to let their hair grow again when
once it has been shavd off. These taxes are paid monthly, when a flag is
hoisted at a house in the middle of the town appointed for that purpose.
The money current here is Ducats worth 11s/- sterling, Ducatoons 6/8,
Imperial Rixdollars 5/, Rupees 2/6, scellings /6, Dubblecheys /2½, and
doits ¼. Spanish dollars were when we were there at 5/5 and we were told
were never lower than 5/4 even at the Companies warehouse. For English
guineas I could get no more than 19/, for tho the China men would give 20/
for some of the Brightest they would for those at all worn give no more
than 17/. Strangers must however be cautious in receiving money, as there
are of several kinds two sorts, milld and unmilld. Ducatoons for example
when milld are worth 6/8, unmilld only 6/-. All accounts are kept in
Rixdollars and Stivers, both imaginary Coins, at least here: the first worth
4/ the other /1. It must also be remar[k]d that this valuation of their coin is
rated on the supposition of a Stiver being worth a penny which is realy
worth more, a current Rixdollar of 48 stivers being worth 4/6.


1771 January 1.

Workd all night and today likewise. At night Anchord under a high
Island call[d] in the draughts Cracatoa and by the Indians Pulo Racatta.
I had been unacountably troubled with Musquitos ever since we left
Batavia, and still imagin'd that they increasd instead of decreasing,
although my opinion was universaly thought improbable; today however
the mystery was discoverd, for on getting up water today, Dr Solander who
happned to stand near the scuttle cask observd an infinite number of them
in their water state in it, who as soon as the sun had a little effect upon the
water began to come out in real Effective mosquetos incredibly fast.


1771 January 2.

This morn when we rose we saw that there were many houses and much
Cultivation upon Cracatoa, so that probably a ship might meet with
refreshments who chose to touch here in preference to Princes Island. The
wind was so foul and balkd us so often that after having saild the whole
day we were glad at night to come back again to our old Birth under
Cracatoa.


1771 January 3.

Tho we had again got under way in the night, Yet this morn we had gaind
but little, nor did we much more all day; at night however a breeze sprung
up at SE and we saild on Chearily.


1771 January 4.

Soon after Dinner time today we anchord under Princes Island and went
ashore. The People who met us carried us immediately to a man whoom
they told us was their king, with whoom after a few Compliments we
proceeded to business, that was to settle the price of Turtle, in which we
did not well agree. This however did not at all discourage us, as we
doubted not but that in the morn we should have them at our own price, so
we walkd a little way along shore and the Indians dispersd. One Canoe
however remaind and just as we went off sold us three turtle on a promise
that we should not tell the king.


1771 January 5.

Ashore today trading; the Indians dropd their demands very slowly but
were very civil, towards noon however they came down to the offerd price,
so that before night we had bought up a large quantity of Turtle. In the
Evening I went to pay my respects to his majesty the king, who I found at
his house in the middle of a rice feild cooking his own supper; he receivd
me however very politely.


1771 January 6.

Many People were down at the trading place with fowls, fish, Monkeys,
small Deer, etc. etc. but few or no Turtle, they said that we had bought
them all the day before.


1771 January 8.

In the Morn the ship which had in the night been driven something nearer
the shore, was so near being ashore that the foot of the rudder touchd
several times, and indeed gave the first intimation of our danger, but by the
alertness of the officers she was hove into deep water in a very short time.
The day was rainy throughout and very few Indians came to the watering
place, so that nothing was bought but a few fish and fowls.


1771 January 9.

Fine weather today and rather more trade than usual. Early in the morn 8
guns were heard within Pepper point, but no ship had been seen by either
us or the Islanders so we could not even guess the Occasion of them.


1771 January 10.

Little trade; the people brought down a deer of a kind weighing about 40
lb; our stock of Turtle was now Considerably increasd, some few having
been bought every day, tho the Joint number did not equal what had been
bought the first day.


1771 January 11.

My Servant Sander who I had hir'd at Batavia having found out that these
people had a town somewhere along shore to the Westward and not very
far off, I resolvd to visit it, but knowing that the inhabitants were not at all
desirous of our company kept my intentions secret from them. In the morn
I set out accompanied by our second Lieutenant and went along shore,
telling all whoom I met that I was in search of plants which indeed was
also the case. In about 2 hours we arrivd at a place where were about 4 or 5
houses, here we met an old man and venturd to ask him questions about the
town; he said it was very distant, but we not much relying on his
information proceeded on our way, as did he in our company, atempting
however several times to lead us out of the pathway which we were now
in; we remaind firm to our purpose and soon got sight of our desird Object.
The old man then turnd our freind and accompanied us to the houses, I
suppose near 400 in number, divided into the old and new town between
which was a brackish river. In the old town we met with several old
acquaintances, one of whoom at the rate of 2d a head undertook to
transport us over the river, which he did in two very small Canoes which
we prevented from oversetting by laying them alongside each other and
holding them together; in this manner we safely went through our
navigation and arrivd at the new town, where the kings and all the
nobilities houses were which the inhabitants very freely shewd to us. The
most of them were shut up, the people in general at this time of the year
living in their rice feilds to defend the Crop from Monkies, Birds etc.
When our curiosity was satisfied we hird a large sailing boat for which we
gave 2 Rupees 4s/, which carried us home time enough to dine upon the
deer we had bought the day before, which provd very good and savoury
meat.

In the Evening when we went ashore we were acquainted that an axe had
been stole from one of our people; this as the first theft we thought it not
proper to pass over, so immediate application was made to the king, who
after some time promisd that it should be returnd in the morn.


1771 January 12.

The hatchet was brought down according to promise, the theif they said
afraid of conviction had in the night conveyd it into the house of the man
who brought it. Trade as usual, 2 or 300 weight of Turtle in a day with
fowls etc. Myself was this day seizd with a Return of my Batavia Fever,
which I attributed to being much exposd to a burning sun in trading with
the Natives.


1771 January 13.

It was resolvd to sail tomorrow, which the natives had been informd of
yesterday, so they brought down rather more turtle than usual. My Fever
returnd, but I resolvd not to atempt to cure it till in the main Ocean I should
meet with a better air than this uncleard Island could possibly have.
In the Eve after my fit I went ashore to the king, to whoom time after
time I had made small presents altogether not of 5 shillings value, carrying
2 Qrs of Paper, which as he had done every thing else he most thankfully
receivd. We had much conversation, the purport of which was his asking
why the English ships did not touch here as they had usd to do; I told him
that as they had not on the Island Turtle enough to supply one ship the[y]
could not expect many, but advisd him to breed Cattle, Sheep and
Buffaloes, which advise however he did not seem much to approve. See
Account of Batavia below


1771 January 14.

Our intention of sailing this morn was delayd by want of wind, it being
calm till 11 O'Clock when a gentle breeze sprang up which was favourable;
the morning however was not thrown away for the Indians seeing us not
gone brought fish and some Turtle which were bought. Our breeze tho
favourable was however so slack that by night we had got no farther than
abreast of the town where we anchord.


1771 January 15.

Weighd again and stood out to sea with a breeze so gentle that at night
we were still in sight of Land.


1771 January 16.

This Morn we wakd in the open Ocean, nothing in sight but sea and sky.
The winds tho fair continud yet so gentle that we hardly knew whether we
went on or stood still. At night a booby made us a visit and slept his last
sleep in the stomachs of some of our men, not induc'd quite to forsake the
old trade of Booby Eating even by the present abundance of victuals.


1771 January 17.

Calms and light breezes still detaind us till eve when a pleasant breeze
sprung up and gave us hopes of soon gaining the trade wind, which we
impatiently longd for, especialy myself who had my fever every day; nor
was I the only sick man, many began to complain of purgings. Some
tropick birds and Gannets (Pelecanus risc) were seen.


1771 January 18.

In the Morn Rain with light breezes. Several Man of war birds and some
shearwaters were about the ship.


1771 January 19.

Light breezes all day. A ship in sight but too far off to distinguish her
colours.


1771 January 20.

Weather as usual. 2 ships in sight who shew'd us Dutch Colours and then
saild ahead of us, letting us know that sure as our ship might be she was
too slow to outsail even a Dutchman. Several tropick birds were seen. In
the Even the wind came foul.

Myself who had began with the Bark Yesterday miss'd my fever today,
the people however in general grew worse and many had now the
dysentery or bloody flux.


1771 January 21.

The Wind remaind as it was but one of the Duchmen had so far outsaild
us as to be intirely out of sight; the other however was not so much ahead
but that we sometimes flatterd ourselves with thinking that we could sail as
fast as her. Some few Gannets and porpoises were about the ship.


1771 January 22.

Our freind the slow Dutchman was this morn out of sight: the wind still
foul. Almost all the Ships Company were now ill with either fluxes or
severe purgings; myself far from well, Mr Sporing very ill and Mr
Parkinson very little better, his complaint was a slow fever.


1771 January 23.

Myself was too ill today to do any thing; one of our people died of the
flux in the Evening.


1771 January 24.

My distemper this day turnd out to be a flux attended (as that disease
always is) with excrutiating pains in my bowels, on which I took to my
bed. In the Eve Mr Sporing died.


1771 January 25.

One more of the People died today. Myself endurd the pains of the
Damnd almost; at night they became fixd in one point in my bowels on
which the surgeon of the ship though[t] proper to order me the hot bath,
into which I went 4 times at the intervals of two hours and felt great releif.


1771 January 26.

Tho better than yesterday my pains were still almost intolerable. In the
Evening Mr Parkinson died and one of the ships crew.


1771 January 28.

Self something easier but still in great pain. This day Mr Green our
astronomer and two of the people died, all of the very same complaint as I
labourd under, no very encouraging circumstance.


1771 January 29.

Self still Bad; three more of the people died this day.


1771 January 30.

For the first time I found myself better and slept some time, which my
continual pains had never sufferd me to do before notwistanding the
opiates which were constantly administerd. One person only died today,
but so weak were the people in general that, officers and men included, not
more than 8 or nine could keep the deck so that 4 in a watch was all they
had.


1771 January 31.

This day I got out of my bed in good spirits and free from pain but very
weak. My recovery had been as rapid as my disease was violent, but to
what cause to attribute either the one or the other to we all were equaly at a
loss.

The wind which came to E and SE yesterday blew today in the same
direction so we had little reason to doubt its being the true trade, a
circumstance which raisd the spirits of even those who were most afflicted
with the tormenting disease, which now ragd with its greatest violence.


SOME ACCOUNT OF PRINCES ISLAND

[From 13 January 1771]

Princes Island as it is calld by the English, in Malay Pulo Selan, and in
the language of its inhabitants Pulo paneitan, is a small Island situated in
the Western mouth of the streights of Sunday; it is woody, and has no
remarkable hill upon it, tho the English call the small one which is just
over the anchoring place the Pike. This Island was formerly much
frequented by India ships of many nations but especialy English, who have
of late forsaken it on account it is said of the Badness of its water, and stop
either at North Island, a small Island on the Sumatra Coast without the East
Entrance of the Streights, or at New Bay, a few leag[u]es only from Princes
Island, at neither of which places however any quantity of refreshments
can be procurd.

Its cheif produce is water, which is situated in such a manner that if you
are not carefull in filling high enough up the Brook it will inevitably be
brackish, from which circumstance alone I beleive it has got a Bad name
with almost all nations; Turtle, of which however its supplys are not great,
so that if a ship comes second or third in the season she must be contented
with small ones, and no great plenty of them--as indeed was in some
measure our case; we bought at very various prizes according to the
humour of the people, but altogether I beleive they came to about 1
halfpenny or ¾ a pound. They were of the Green kind, but not fat or well
flavourd in any degree as they are in most other parts, which I beleive is in
great measure owing to the people keeping them sometimes very long in
crawls of Brackish water, where they have no kind of food given to them.
Fowls are tolerably cheap, a dozen of large ones sold when we were there
for a Spanish Dollar which is /5d a peice. They have also plenty of
Monkeys and small deer (moschus pygmaeus) the largest of which are not
quite so big as a new faln Lamb, and another kind of Deer calld by them
Munchack about the size of a sheep; the monkeys were about ½ a dollar
2/6, the small deer /2d, the larger, of which they brought down only 2, a
rupee or 2s/. Fish they have of many various kinds which are sold by hand
as you can bargain, we found them however always tolerably cheap.
Vegetables they have, Cocoa nuts a dollar for 100 if you chuse them or 130
if you take them as they come; Plantanes Plenty, some water melons, pine
apples, Jaccas, Pumkins, also Rice cheifly of the mountain sort which
grows on dry land, Yams and several other vegetables all which are sold
reasonably enough.

The inhabitants are Javans whose Radja is subject to the Sultan of
Bantam, from whoom they receive orders and to whoom they possibly pay
a tribute, but of that particular I am not certain. Their customs I beleive are
very much like those of the Indians about Batavia, only they seem much
more jealous of their women, so much so that I never saw one the whole
time of our stay except she was running away full speed to hide herself in
the woods. Their Religion is Mahometanism but I beleive they have not a
Mosque upon the Island; they were however very strict in the observance
of their Fast (the same as the Ramdan of the Turks) during which we
hapned to come: not one would touch victuals till sun set or even chew
their Betele, but ½ or an hour before all went home to cook the kettle nor
would they stay for any thing but view of extrordinary profit.
Their food was nearly the same as the Batavian Indians, adding only to it
the nuts of the Palm calld Cycas circinalis with which on the Coast of New
Holland some of our people were made ill and some of our hogs Poisond
outright. Their method of preparing them to get out their deleterious
qualities they told me were first to cut the nuts into thin slices and dry them
in the sun, then to steep them in fresh water for three months, afterwards
pressing the water from them and drying them in the sun once more; they
however were so far from being a delicious food that they never usd them
but in times of scarcity when they mixt the preparation with their rice.
Their Town which they calld Samadang consisted of about 300 houses;
great part of the old town however was in ruins. Their houses were all built
up on pillars 4 or 5 feet above the ground. The Plan of that of Gundang, a
man who seemd to be next in riches and influence to the king, will give an
Idea of them all: it was walld with boards, a luxury none but the king and
himself had, but in no other respect differd from those of the midling
people except being a little longer.

The walls were made of Bamboo platted on small perpendicular sticks
fastned to the Beams; the floors were also of Bamboo, Each stick however
laid at a small distance from the next so that the air had a free passage from
below, by which means these houses were always cool; the thach of Palm
leaves was always thick and strong so that neither rain nor sunbeams could
find entrance through it.

When we were at the town there were very few inhabitants there; the rest
livd in Ocasional houses built in the rice feilds where they watchd the crop
to prevent the devastations of Monkies, birds, etc. These occasional houses
are smaller than those of the town; the posts which support them also
instead of being 4 or 5 feet in hight are 8 or 10, otherwise the divisions etc.
are quite the same.

Their dispositions as far as we saw them were very good, at least they
dealt very fairly with us upon all occasions: Indian like however, always
asking double what they would take for whatever they had to dispose of.
This however producd no inconvenencees to us who were us'd to this kind
of trafick.

In making out Bargains they were very handy and supplyd the want of
small money reasonably well by laying together a quantity of any thing,
and when the price was settled dividing it among each other according to
the proportion each had brought to the general stock. They would
sometimes change our money, giving 240 doits for a Spanish dollar, that is
5s/ sterling, and 92, that is 2s/ sterling for a Bengall Rupee. The money
they chose however was doits in all small bargains; dubblecheys they had
but wer[e] very nice in taking them.

Their Language is different both from the Malay and Javan; they all
however speak Malay.

These specimens of Languages so near each other in situation I chose to
give together and selected the words without any previous choise as I had
wrote them down on a paper, that the similar and dissimilar words might
Equaly be seen. As for the parts of the Body which I have made the subject
of this and all my specimens of Language, I chose them in preference to all
others as the names of them are easily got from people of whose Language
the enquirer has not the least Idea. What I call the Javan is the Language
spoke at Samarang, a days journey from the seat of the Emperor of Java. I
have been told that there are several other languages upon the Island but
those I had no opportunity of collecting words from, meeting with no one
who could speak them.

Princes Island          Java         Malay                English
Jalma                   Oong Lanang  Oran Lacki Lacki     a man
Becang                  Oong Wadang  Parampuan            a woman
Oroculatacke            Lari         Anack                a child
Holo                    Undass       Capalla              the head
Erung                   Erung        Edung                the Nose
Mata                    Moto         Mata                 the Eyes
Chole                   Cuping       Cuping               the Ears
Cutock                  Untu         Ghigi                the teeth
Beatung                 Wuttong      Prot                 the belly
Serit                   Celit        Pantat               the Backside
Pimping                 Poopoo       Paha                 the thigh
Hullootoor              Duncul       Lontour              the Knee
Metis                   Sickil       Kauki                the Leg
Cucu                    Cucu         Cucu                 a Nail
Langan                  Tangan       Tangan               a hand
Ramo                    Langan       Jari Jaring          a finger

The Princes Islanders call their langu[a]ge Catta Gunung, that is the
Mountain Language, and say that it is spoken upon the mountains of Java
from whence their tribe originaly came, first to New Bay a few leagues
only off and from thence to Princes Island, driven there by the quantities of
Tygers. The Malay, Javan and Princes Island all have words in them either
e[x]actly like, or else plainly deriving their origin from the same source
with others in the Language of the South Sea Islands: this is particularly
visible in their Numbers, from whence one should at first be enclind to
suppose that their learning at least had been derivd originaly from one and
the same source. But how that strange problem of the numbers of the Black
inhabitants of Madagascar, so vastly similar to those of Otahite, could have
come to pass surpasses I confess my skill to conjecture. The numbers that I
give overleaf in the Comparative table I had from a Negro slave Born at
Madagascar, who was at Batavia with an English ship, from whence he
was sent for merely to satisfie my curiosity in the language. There being
much fewer words in the Princes Island language similar to S. Sea words is
oweing in great measure to my not having taken a sufficient quantity of
words upon the spot to compare with it.


SPECIMENS OF LANGUAGE

South Sea    Malay           Java                   Princes Island

1. Matta     Majta           Moto                   Mata an Eye
2. Maa       Macan           Mangan to eat
3. Einu      Menum           Gnumbe to drink
4. Matte     Matte           Matte to kill
5. Outou     Coutou a louse
6. Euwa      Udian           Udan Rain
7. Owhe                                             Awe Bambu cane
8. Eu                        Sousou Sousou a Breast
9. Mannu                     Mannu                  Mannuk a bird
10. Eyea     Ican            Iwa a fish
11. Uta      Utan inland
12. Tapoa                    Tapaan the foot
13. Tooura   Udang           Urang a lobster
14. Eufwhe   Ubi             Uwe Yams
15. Etannou  Tannam          Tandour to bury
16. Enammou  Gnammuck a Muscheto
17. Hearu    Garru           Garu to scratch
18. Taro     Tallas          Talas cocos roots
19. Outou                                           Sungoot the mouth
20. Eto                                             Tao sugar cane



S. Sea            Malay      Java      Princes Isle      Madagascar

1. Tahie          Satou      Sigi      Hegie             Ifse
2. Rua            Dua        Lorou     Dua               Rua
3. Torou          Tiga       Tullu     Tollu             Tellou
4. Haa            Ampat      Pappat    Opat              Effats
5. Rima           Lima       Limo      Limah             Limi
6. *Wheney        Annam      Nunnam    Gunnap            Ene
7. Hetu           Tudju      Petu      Tudju             Fitou
8. Waru           Delapan    Wolo      Delapan           Walou
9. Iva            Sembilan   Songo     Salapan           Sivi
10. Ahouroo       Sapoulou   Sapoulou  Sapoulou          Fourou
11. Matahie       Sabilas    Suvalas
12. Marua         Dubilas    Roalas
20. Tahie Taou    Duapoulou  Rompoulou
100. Rima Taou    Saratus    Satus     Satus
200. Mannu        dua ratus  Rongatus
1000. Lima mannu  Soreboo    Seawo     Seawo
2000. Mannu Tine

* N.B. in the Island of Ulietea 6 is calld ono.

The Madagascar language has also som[e] words similar to Malay words,
as ouron the nose, in Malay Erung Lala, the tongue Lida Tang, the hand
Tangan Taan, the ground Tanna.

From this similitude of language Between the inhabitants of the Eastern
Indies and the Islands in the South Sea I should have venturd to conjecture
much did not Madagascar interfere; and how any Communication can ever
have been carried between Madagascar and Java to make the Brown long
haird people of the latter speak a language similar to that the Black wooly
headed natives of the other is I confess far beyond my comprehension--
unless the Egyptian Learning running in two courses, one through Africa
the other through Asia, might introduce the same words, and what is still
more probable Numerical terms, into the languages of people who never
had any communication with each other. But this point requiring a depth of
knowledge in Antiquities I must leave to Antiquarians to discuss.


1771 February 1.

Fine brisk trade kept up our spirits and helpd to raise me fast. Two of the
people died today Nevertheless.


1771 February 2.

Breeze continued today: the Surgeon began to think that the rapid
progress of the disease was checkd by it but declard at the same time that
several people were still without hopes of recovery.


1771 February 3.

Some of the people who were the least affected began now to shew signs
of amendment but two of the bad ones died notwithstanding.


1771 February 4.

Weather fine: as no one had been taken ill since we got the trade wind we
were now well convin[c]d of its salutary effects.


1771 February 5.

Weather as usual but tho' it prevented it could not cure intirely our
disease, one more dying of it today.


1771 February 7.

Our people who were not very bad before the 1st of this month were now
almost universaly recoverd, but there were still several in the ship who at
that time were very bad; these remaind unalterably the same neither
becoming better nor worse. Through the whole course of this distemper
Medicine has been of little use, the Sick generaly proceeding gradualy to
their end without a favourable symptom, till the change of weather stopd in
a manner instantaneously the Malignant quality of the disease.


1771 February 8.

A large Dutch ship in sight but she soon outsaild us as her fellows had
done before her.


1771 February 11.

One more of the people died.


1771 February 12.

Another died.


1771 February 14.

A third died today; neither of these people had grown either better or
worse for many days.


1771 February 18.

An uncommonly large Number of Tropick birds were about the ship this
day.


1771 February 20.

Lost another man.


1771 February 24.

An Albatross seen, the first sign we have had of approaching the South
again which we have for some days done pretty fast.


1771 February 26.

Lost 3 more people today, and got the Wind at NE for the first time it has
varied from the true trade.


1771 February 27.

At 4 this morn we were taken aback by a strong breeze of wind at SW,
not without some danger as our people yet only recovering from their late
Illnesses had scarce strengh to get the ship before the wind. All morn it
blew fresh from the same point but at night veerd round to South. Many
Albatrosses and sheerwaters were about the ship all day.


1771 February 28.

Wind still at south, blew fresh but weather dry and clear; in the Even
came to SE. Several fish were about the ship.


1771 March 1.

Light winds and variable all day.


1771 March 2.

Winds and weather much as yesterday. At night a Bank of Clouds were
seen to the Wrd which had very much the appearance of Land.


1771 March 3.

Wind at SW with dirty foggy weather. In the evening some of the people
thought that they saw Land but that opinion was rejected almost without
examination, as the journals in the ship which had been kept by the Log
were still above a hundred leagues and those which had been corrected by
Observations of the sun and moon full 40. The night was cheifly calms and
light breezes with fog and mist.


1771 March 4.

Day broke and shewd us at its earliest dawn how fortunate we had been
in the Calms of last night: what was then supposd to be land provd realy so
and not above 5 miles from us, so that another hour would have infallibly
have carried us upon it. But fortunate as we might think ourselves to be yet
unshipwreckd we were still in extreme danger, the wind blew right upon
the shore and with it a heavy sea ran which broke mountains high on the
rocks with which it was every where lind, so that tho some in the ship
thought it possible the major part did not hope to be able to get off. Our
anchors and cables were accordingly prepard but the sea ran too high to
allow us a hope of the Cables holding should we be drove to the Necessity
of making use of them, and should we be drove ashore the Breakers gave
us as little hope of saving even our lives: at last however after 4 hours
spent in the vicissitudes of hope and fear we found that we got gradualy off
and before night were out of Danger. The land from whence we so
narrowly escapd is part of the Terra de Natal, laying between the rivers
Sangue and Formis about 20 Leagues to the southward of the Bay of Natal.
The shore seemd every where steep and rocky but the hills inland rose in
gradual slopes spotted here and there with woods, and where it was not
lookd Green and pleasant.


1771 March 5.

For this day or two we have thought it rather colder than we should
chuse; at noon today the Thermometer in the shade was at 70. Land today
in sight and no more.


1771 March 6.

Foul wind and cloudy weather all day.


1771 March 7.

Fair wind accompanied with clear weather. Over the land however, at
least in that direction, hung clouds and appearances of rain as indeed was
generaly the case. For these some days past the seamen have found the ship
to be Drove hither and thither by currents in a manner totaly unacountable
to them.


1771 March 8.

Calmish. Many Birds were observd such as Albatrosses, black and grey
Shearwaters cheifly setting upon the water. The surface was pretty thickly
strewd with the substance that I have before often mentiond under the
name of Sea Saw dust; the sea water likewise emitted a strong smell like
that of Seaweeds rotting on the shore.


1771 March 9.

Struck soundings today on the Cape Bank, the Water on it appeard thick
and muddy; many Birds especialy Gannetts were seen about the ship. In
the Night especialy the fore part of it a very heavy dew fell.


1771 March 10.

In the morn the Water was clear and blue very unlike the muddy
complexion it had yesterday. At 10 the Land was seen which provd to be to
the Eastward of Cape Das Aguillas: it appeard low and sandy near the
shore with high land rising behind it inland resembling very some parts of
New Holland. In the Evening Cape das Aguilas was not more than 6
Leagues off so that we doubted not at all of being round it before morn, at
night fall however the wind came right ahead and threatned a gale.


1771 March 11.

All last night the wind was foul, the Current however assisted us a little.
In the morn the water was clear but we saw Gannetts and Albatr[o]sses;
soon after the wind favourd and we got round Cabo das Aguillas when we
had the water again very thick and foul with many birds about the ship. At
night were abreast of the high land between Cabo das Aguillas and Cabo
Falzo; the water was as full of shining insects as we have seen it in the
Voyage. In the day several fires were seen ashore.


1771 March 12.

In the morn saw Cape Falso and soon after the Cape of Good Hope off
which we observd a rock not laid down in the Charts; the breeze was fresh
and fair, it carried us as far as Table Bay off which we anchord. In coming
along shore we saw several smoaks upon the next hill before the Lions
rump, and when at an anchor fires upon the side and near the top of the
Table mountain. In the Bay were several ships, 4 French, 2 Danes, 1
English viz. the Admiral Pocoke Indiaman, and several Dutch.


1771 March 13.

Wind so fresh at SE that we could not attempt to go ashore; no boat
indeed in the whole Harbour attempted to Stir--the Dutch Commodore
Hauld down his broad Pennant a signal for all Boats belonging to him to
keep on board. Jno Thomas died.


1771 March 14.

In the Morn moderate so that the Ship was got under way and steerd into
the Harbour to her proper birth. A Dutch boat came on board to enquire
from whence we came, and brought with her a Surgeon who examind our
Sick and then gave leave for them and us to come ashore, which we
accordingly did at Dinner time.


1771 March 16.

Captn Riddle Saild this day for England.


1771 March 17.

Dr Solander who had been on board the Indiaman last night was this
Morn taken violently ill with a fever and pain in his Bowels. A Countrey
Physician was immediately sent for, who declard on hearing his Case that
it was the common consequence of Batavia fevers, that the Dr would be
much worse and would for some time suffer very much by his Bowel
complaint, but upon the whole he declard that there was no danger. I could
not however help being a good deal alarmd in my own opinion.


1771 March 18.

The Houghton Indiaman Captn Smith came into the road.


1771 March 30.

The Duke of Gloucester Indiaman Captn Lauder came into the Road.


1771 March 31.

Dr Solander after having been confind to his Bed or chamber ever since
the 17 of this month with an irregularly intermitting fever and violent pains
in his bowels, which alarmd me very much at several different times, this
day came down stairs for the first time, very much emaciated by his
tedious Illness.


1771 April 3.

Theodosio seaman died very suddenly; he had enjoyd an uninterrupted
state of Good health during all our times of sickness.


1771 April 7.

The Europa Indiaman Captn Pelley came into the Bay. Of the four
French vessels which we found in this Harbour 3 are now saild and the
fourth is ready for sea. Of them two were 64 Gun ships, the other a large
Snow and the fourth which still remains a frigate. All these Came from the
Isle de France for Provision, of which they carry away from hence a
prodigious quantity and consequently must have many mouths to feed
upon that Island, from whence it is probable they Meditate some stroke at
our East Indian Settlements in the beginning of a future war; which
however our India people are not at all alarmd at, trusting intirely to the
vast standing armies which they constantly keep up, the support of which
in the Bengall alone Costs 840000 eight hundred and forty thousand
pounds a Year!

Mr De Bougainville pleasd with the Bea[u]ty of the Ladies of Otahite
gave that Island the Name of Cypre. In his return home he touchd at Isle de
France where the Person who went out with him in the character of Natural
Historian was left and still remains. Otorroo the Indian whoom he brought
from thence was known on board his ship by the name of Tootavee, a plain
corruption of Bougainville, with whoom it may be suppos'd he meant to
change names according to his Custom. This man is now at L'Isle de
France, from whence a large ship is very soon to Sail and carry him back to
his own countrey where she is to make a settlement, in doing which she
must Necessarily follow the Tract of Abel Jansen Tasman and
consequently if she does not discover Cooks Streights, which in all
probability she will do, must make several discoveries on the Coast of New
Zealand. Thus much the French who were here made no secret of. How
necessary then will it be for us to publish an account of our voyage as soon
as possible after our arrival if we mean that our own countrey shall have
the Honour of our Discoveries! Should the French have publishd an
account of Mr De Bougainvilles voyage before that of the second Dolphin
how infallibly will they claim the Discovery of Cypre or Otahite as their
own, and treat the Dolphins having seen it as a fiction, which we were
enabled to set forth with some shew of truth as the Endeavour realy did See
it, a twelvemonth however after Mr De Bougainville; which if England
chuses to exert her Prior Claim to it, as she may hereafter do, if the French
settle it may be productive of very disagreable consequences. See Account
of Cape of Good Hope below.


1771 April 14.

Saild from the Road but having very little wind were obligd to anchor
abreast of Robben Island.


1771 April 15.

In the Morn it was quite calm so a boat was hoisted out in order to Land
on the Island in hopes of purchasing some refreshments, especialy of
Garden stuff and salletting with which two articles it is said to abound; but
as soon as the boat came near the shore the Duch haild her and told the
people in her at their peril to attempt Landing, bringing down at the same
time 6 men with Musquets who paraded on the Beach as long as she stayd,
which was but a short time not thinking it worth while to risk landing in
opposition to them when a few Cabbages was the only reward to be
expected.

This Island which is named after the Seals that formerly usd to frequent
it, Calld in Dutch Robben, is low and sandy, situate in the mouth of Table
bay. Here are confind such criminals as are judgd not worthy of Death for
terms of Years proportiond to the heinou[s]ness of their Crimes; they are
employd as Slaves in the Companies Service, cheifly in digging for Lime
Stone which tho very scarce upon the Continent is plentifull here. Their
reason for not letting foreigners land here is said to be this: formerly a
Danish ship which by sickness had lost the greatest part of her crew came
into the Cape and askd for assistance, which being refusd she came down
to this Island, and sending her boats ashore securd the Guard and took on
board as many of the Criminals as she thought proper to navigate the ship
home.

In the evening we had a fair breeze of wind with which we put to sea.
This night died Mr Molineux Master of the ship.


1771 April 16.

In the Course of this day we took our final leave of the table land, having
a pleasant breeze and fair.


1771 April 17.

Many Birds such as Albatrosses and some shearwaters were about the
ship, also many peices of Trumpet weed ( ) floating by.


1771 April 18.

Moderate weather but a great rolling sea from the Southward.


1771 April 19.

Got the Wind at NW right in our teeth, not strong however.


1771 April 20.

Wind and weather continuing just as yeste[r]day.


1771 April 21.

Got the Wind again astern with pleasant weather which already alterd
much for the warmer.


1771 April 23.

Foul wind again very veerable.


1771 April 25.

Crossd the tropick this day with a fresh breeze of Wind at SW. So far we
are unlucky, not having as yet met with the trade wind which ships in
general meet about Lat. 30 at this time of the year as we have been told.


1771 April 26.

Saw two Sternas, probably blown off from the Coast of Africa tho they
seem little to regard the ship but flew towards the sea. In the even Dr
Solander and several more heard a noise rumbling like distant thunder
which was in general supposd to be a gun from some ship not in sight; the
Dr however thought that its duration was considerably Longer than that of
a gun fird in the open Sea where there is no Eccho.


1771 April 27.

A large Shoal of Whales passd us today Who seemd to keep a pretty
regular course nearly in the same direction as the ship.


1771 April 28.

This day we crossd our first meridian and Compleated the
Circumnavigation of the Globe, in doing which we as usual lost a day
which I should upon this occasion have expended properly had not I Lost it
the second time I know not how in my irregular journal at the Cape.


SOME ACCOUNT OF THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE


[From 1771 April 13.]

Notwistanding Hydrographers limit the Cape of Good Hope to a single
point of Land on the SW end of Africa which is not the Southermost part
of that immense continent I shall under that name speak of the Southern
parts of Africa in general as far as Lat. 30..00 at least, which countrey was
originaly inhabited by the Hottentots alone but is now settled by the Dutch,
and from its conveniency of situation as a place of refreshment for ships
sailing to and from India is visited perhaps by Europeans oftener than any
other distant part of the Globe.

This tract of Land, vast as it is, is settled by the Dutch who have also
people much farther in land if their accounts can be credited; they have
upon the whole of it however only one town which is generaly known by
the Name of the Cape Town. It is situated on the Atlantick side, about 20
miles to the Northward of the Real Cape, on the Banks of a bay shelterd
from the SE wind by a large mountain level at the top, from whence both
itself and the bay have got the name of Tafel or Table. It is of late years
very much increasd in size and consists of about a thousand houses neatly
built of Brick and in general whited over; the Streets in general are broad
and commodious all crossing each other at Right angles; in the Cheif of
them is a Canal on each side of which is a row of Oak trees which flourish
tolerably well and yeild an agreable shade to walkers. Besides this there is
another Canal running through the town, but the slope of the Ground is so
great that both are obligd to be furnishd with sluices at the intervals of little
more than 50 yards.

In the Houses the same poverty of inventions exists here as at Batavia:
they are almost universaly built upon one and the same plan whether small
or large; in general they are low and universaly they are coverd with
thatch, precautions said to be necessary against the violence of the SE
winds which at some seasons of the year come down from the Table
mountain with incredible violence.

Of the Inhabitants a far larger proportion are real Dutch than of those of
Batavia. But as the whole town in a manner is supported by entertaining
and supplying strangers, each man in some degree imitates the manners
and customs of the Nation with which he is cheifly concernd: the Ladies
however do not follow their husbands in this particular but so true are they
to the customs of fatherland that scarce one of them will stir without a
Sooterkin or Chaufett ready to place under her feet whenever she shall set
down; the Younger ones tho in general do not put any fire in them but
seem to use them merely for shew. In general they are hansome with clear
skins and high Complexions and when married (no reflextions upon my
countrey women) are the best housekeepers imaginable and great
childbearers; had I been inclind for a wife I think this is the place of all
others I have seen where I could have best suited myself.
Their servants are in general Malay slaves who are brought here from
Batavia. To these they behave much better than the Batavians in
consequence of which these Malays are much quieter, honester, more
diligent and less wicked than those in that place, in instance of which I
need only say that there was never known an instance of running Amoc in
this place.

The Town is governd by a Governor and Council who are quite
independent of Batavia. The Present Governor is Ryck Tulback. He is very
old and has long enjoyd his present station with a most universal good
Character, which is easily explaind in this manner: he is unmarried and has
no connections which may make him wish to make more money than his
Salary furnishes him with, consequently not entering into trade he
interferes with no man, and not wishing to be bribd does always to the best
of his abilities strict justice on all occasions.

The Climate tho not at all too hot for those who come from India would
doubtless appear sufficiently warm could any one be transported
immediately from England to this place; upon the whole it seems much of
the same temperature as the Island of Madera tho scarce quite so hot, this I
judge from the productions in general. During the whole Summer the air is
frequently fannd by SE winds which come off the hills above the town
with vast violence and during the time of their blowing, especialy at the
beginning, are very troublesome to such as are obligd to be abroad in them
by raising the Sand with which the whole countrey abounds and filling
their eyes with it; nor are the houses quite free from its effects however
close they are shut up, the Sand will find an entrance and in a short time
cover every kind of furniture with a thick dust.

Inconvenient as this certainly is it however does not seem to have any
effect beyond the present moment, tho the inhabitants must in the course of
a summer inspire an immence quantity of this sand, which has been
thought by some Physicians to be productive of Ulcers in the Lungs etc.
etc.; yet Consumptions are diseases scarcely known here and the healthy
countenances, fresh complexions and above all the number of Children
with which all ranks of people here are blessd abundantly prove that the
Climate in general is very freindly to the human constitution.
Diseases brought here from Europe are said to be almost immediately
cur'd but those of the Indies not so easily, which latter we ourselves
experiencd, our sick recovering very little for the first fortnight and after
that very slowly, so that after a months stay several of them were far from
recruited.

The industry of the Dutch, so well known and so constantly exerted in all
foreign settlements, has supplyd this place with a profusion of all kinds of
European provisions. Wheat and barley is here as good as in Europe; hops
however will not grow here so beer they cannot make even tolerable. Cattle
are in great plenty and beef very tolerable, Sheep likewise in great plenty;
both these the Native Hottentots had before the Dutch settled the place so
they both differ a little in appearance from those of other places. The Oxen
are lighter and more neatly made and have vast spreading horns; the Sheep
instead of Wool are coverd with a kind of Substance between hair and
wool, their tails are also very large--I have seen such as could not weigh
less than 10 or 12 pounds and was told that they are often much larger. Of
the Milk of their Cows they make very good butter but Cheese they know
not how to make in any degree of Perfection.

Besides these they have Goats in plenty which however they never Eat,
and hogs but these are less plentifull. Poultrey as Fowls, ducks, Geese etc.
are in tolerable plenty; besides they have wild game, as hares exactly like
ours in Europe, partridges of two kinds, Quails, Antelopes of many kinds,
Bustards in general very well flavourd but rather drier than those of the
same kinds in Europe.

As their feild[s] produce European Wheat and barley, so their Gardens
produce the same kinds of vegetables as we have in Europe--Cabbages,
turnips, potatoes, Asparagus, Brocoli etc. etc. are all plentifull and
excellent in their kinds. Their fruits are also the same, Apples, Pears,
oranges, Peaches, apricots and figgs etc. Of Indian fruits they have
plantains, Guavas and Jambu but neither of these in any kind of perfection.
Besides these their vineyards produce a great quantity of Wine which they
range into many sorts, calling one Madera another Frontiniac etc. None of
these are comparable to the wines which we commonly drink in Europe yet
they are all light, well cur'd and far from unpalatable in taste, not unlike
some of the light French and Portugese white wines. The famous
Constantia, so well known in Europe, is made genuine only at one vineyard
which is about 10 miles distant from the Cape town; near that however is
another vineyard which likewise is calld Constantia, where a wine not
much inferior to it is made which is always to be had at an inferior price.
The common method of living is to lodge and board with some one of the
inhabitants, many of whose houses are always open for the reception of
Strangers; the prizes are 5, 4, 3, or 2 shillings a day for which all
necessaries are found you according as your situation leads you to chuse a
more or less expensive method of living, in what may truly be calld a
profusion in proportion to the price you give. Besides this there is hardly
an expence in the Place. Coaches are seldom or never usd but may be hird
at the rate of 6 Rx or 1lb 4s a day, Horses are at 6s a day but the Countrey
is not tempting enough to induce any one often to make use of them.
Publick entertainments there are none nor were there any private ones
owing to the measles which broke out about the time of our arrival; at other
times I was told that there were and that strangers were always welcome to
them if of any rank.

At the farther end of the high street is the Companies garden which is
near 2/3 of an English mile in lengh; the whole is divided by walks
intersecting each other at right angles planted with Oaks which are clippd
into wall hedges, except in the center walk where they are sufferd to grow
to their size. This walk therefore at all times of the day furnishes an
agreable shade no doubt highly beneficial to the sick, as the Countrey is
not furnishd with the least degree of shade nor has nature given one tree to
the soil capable of producing it at least within several miles round the
town.

Infinitely the largest part of this Garden is employd in producing
Cabbages, Carrots etc. Two small squares however are set apart for
Botanical plants which are well taken care of and neatly kept. At the time
we were there the greatest part of the plants, as the annuals, Bulbs etc.
were under ground; upon the whole however I am of opinion that the
numbers now to be found there will not amount to above half of what they
were when Oldenland wrote his Catalogue; indeed at that time it is possible
that more ground was imployd for the purpose.

At the farther end of the Garden is a vivarium or Menagerie, supported
also at the expence of the Company, where rare Beasts and birds are kept:
here were Ostrigdes, Cassowaris, Antilopes of several kinds, Zebras and
several other animals seldom or never seen in Europe, particularly that
calld by the Hottentots Coedoe whose beautifull spiral horns are often
brought over to Europe. This animal who was as large as a horse died
while we were there but not before I had had time to get a description and
drawing of him.

Near this enclosure is another for birds, in which were the Crownd
Pidgeons of Banda and several more rare birds especialy of the Duck kind,
of which were indeed a very fine collection. Both birds and beasts were
very carefully and well taken care of.

It remains now after having describd the town and its environs to say a
little of the Countrey about it: of this indeed I can say but little and even
for that little am obligd to depend intirely upon hearsay, not having had an
opportunity of making even one excursion owing in great measure to Dr
Solanders illness.

The Dutch say that they have settled the Countrey inland as far as 2200
miles, at least so far it is to the most distant habitations of Europeans; how
far it may be however upon a straight line north and south is hard to say
nor do they pretend to guess. Supposing it however the shortest distance
possible, it is sufficient to prove the infinite and indeed to an European
almost inconceivable barrenness of the Countrey in general, that the mere
supplys of food should make it necessary for men to spread themselves
over such an immense tract of countrey in order to find fertile spots
capable of producing it. How far distant such spots are from each other
may be concluded from what one farmer told us while there, on being askd
why he brough[t] his young children with him to the Cape from whence he
livd 15 days journey, and told that he had better have left them with his
next neighbour. Neighbour? said he, my nearest neighbour lives 5 days
Journey from me.

Nor does the Countrey immediately in the neighbourhood of the Cape
give any reason to Contradict the idea of immense barrenness which must
be formd from what I have said. The Countrey in general is either bare
rock, shifting sand or grounds coverd with heath etc. like the Moors of
Derbishire, Yorkshire etc. except the very banks of the few rivulets, where
are a few plantations cheifly employd if well shelterd in raising Garden
stuff, and if rather less so in vineyards; but if expos'd nothing can stand the
violence of the winds which blow here through the whole summer or dry
season. During my whole stay I did not see a tree in its native soil so tall as
myself; indeed Housekeepers complain of the Dearnes of firewood as
almost equal to that of provisi[o]ns, nothing being burnt here but roots
which must be dug out of the ground. What indeed proves the influence of
the wind in prejudice to vegetation is that a stem not thicker than my
thumb will have a root as thick as my arm or leg and thicker they never are.
As their distant settlements are directly inland and the whole coast either
is or is thought to be totaly destitute of Harbours their whole
Communication is carried on by Land carriage. Waggons drawn by Oxen
are employd in that service; they are however very light and the Cattle so
much more nimble than ours in Europe that they assurd us that they
sometimes traveld at the rate of 8 miles an hour. Traveling is also very
cheap: as there are no inns upon the road every one must carry his own
provision with him, and the Oxen must live upon the Heath or ling which
they meet with upon the road and this indeed they are accustomd to do. But
great as these conveniencies are the people who come from afar must do
little more than live, as there is no trade here but for a few articles of
provision which are sent to the East Indies, and curiosities, so they can
bring nothing to market but a little butter, such skins of wild beasts as they
have been able to procure, and some of them a few kinds of Drugs.
There remains nothing now but to say a word or two concerning the
Hottentots so frequently spoken of by travelers, by whoom they are
generaly represented as the outcast of the Human species, a race whose
intellectual faculties are so little superior to those of Beasts that some have
been inclind to suppose them more nearly related to Baboons than Men.
Notwistanding I very much desird it I was not able to see any of their
habitations, there being none as I was universaly informd within less than
four days journey from the Cape in which they retaind their original
Customs. Those who come to the Cape, which are in number not a few, are
all servants of the Dutch farmers whose cattle they take care of and
generaly run before their waggons; these no doubt are the lowest and
meanest of them and those alone I can describe.

These were in general slim in make and rather lean than at all plump or
fat, in size equal to Europeans, some as tall as 6 feet and more; their eyes
not expressive of any liveliness but rather dull and unmeaning; the colour
of their skins nearest to that of soot owing in great measure to the Dirt
which by long use was ingraind into it, for I beleive that they never wash
themselves; their hair curld in very fine rings like that of Negroes or a
Persian Lambs skin, but hanging in falling ringlets 7 or 8 inches long.
Their Cloths consisted of a skin, generaly of a sheep, under which for
decency sake the men wore a small pouch and the women a broad leather
flap fastned round their wastes by a belt, which in both Sexes was richly
ornamented with beads and small peices of Copper; besides this both sexes
wore necklaces and sometimes bracelets likewise of beads, and the women
had round their legs certain rings made of Leather very hard which they
said servd to defend them from the thorns with which the countrey every
where abounds; under their feet some wore a kind of Sandal of wood or
bark but the greatest number went intirely unshod. For bodily
qualifications they were strong and appeard nimble and active in a high
degree.

Their language which appears to an European but indistinctly articulated
has this remarkable singularity, in that in the pronouncing a sentence they
Click or Cluck with their tonges at very frequent intervals, so much so that
these cliks do not seem to have any particular meaning except possibly to
divide words or certain combinations of words. How this can be effected
unless they can click with their tongues without inspiring their breath
appears mysterious to a European, and yet I am told that many of the Dutch
Farmers understand and speak their language very fluently. Almost all of
them however speak Dutch which they do without clicking their tongues or
any peculiarity whatsoever.

In general they have more false shame (Mauvais Honte) than any people
I have seen, which I have often had occasion to experience when I have
with the greatest dificulty persuaded them to dance or even to speak to
each other in their own Language in my presence. Their songs and dances
are in Extremes, some tolerably active consisting of brisk musick and
quick motions generaly consisting of distortions of the body with unnatural
leaps, crossing the legs backwards and forwards etc. and then again as dull
and spiritless as can be imagind, one of which consists intirely of Beating
the earth first with one foot and then with the other without moving their
place at all, to the Cadences of a tune furnishd with little more variety than
the Dance.

Smoaking is a custom most generaly usd among them, in doing which
they do not as the Europeans admit the smoak no farther than their mouths
but like the Chinese suck it into their Lungs, where they keep it for near a
minute before they expire it. They commonly mix with their Tobacco the
leaves of Hemp which they cultivate for that purpose or Phlomisleonurus
which they call Dacha. Their food is the same as that of the farmers,
cheifly bread and coarse cheese, but they are immensely fond of spirituous
liquors and will never fail to get drunk with them if they have an
opportunity.

This little and no more of the customs of this much spoke of people Had
I myself an opportunity of seeing. From the Dutch indeed I heard much, of
which I select the following.

Within the boundaries of the Dutch settlements are many different
nations of Hottentots differing from each other in customs very materialy.
Of these some are far superior to others in arts in general, however all live
peaceably with each other seldom fighting, except those who live to the
Eastward who are much infested with people calld by the Dutch Bosch
men, who live intirely upon plunder, stealing the Cattle of the Hottentots
but never openly attacking them. They are armd however with Lances or
Assagays, arrows which they know how to poison, some with the juice of
herbs others with the poison of the Snake calld Cobra di Capelo, and stones
which some particular tribes know so well how to throw that they will
repeatedly strike a dollar or crown peice at the distance of 100 paces.
Besides this they train up Bulls which they constantly place round their
Crawls or towns; in the night these will constantly Assemble and oppose
either man or beast that aproaches them, nor will they desist till they hear
the voices of their masters, who know how either to encourage them to
fight or in an instant make them as tame and tractable as their other Cattle.
Some Nations know how to melt and prepare Copper, which is found
among them probably native, and make of it broad plates with which they
ornament their foreheads; others again, indeed most, know how to harden
bitts of Iron which they procure from the Dutch and make of them knives
of a temper superior to any the Dutch can sell them.

Their cheif people, many of whoom have a large quantity of Cattle of
their own, are generaly clad in the skins of Lions, Tygers or Zebras etc.
which they know how to fringe and ornament very prettily, especi[a]ly the
Women who as in all other Countreys are fond of dress. Both sexes grease
themselves very frequently but never use any stinking grease if they can
possibly get either fresh mutton suet or sweet butter, which last made by
shaking the milk in a bag made of skin is generaly usd by the richer sort.
The Ceremony of the Preist giving his Matrimonial benediction by a
plentifull sprinkling of Urine often repeated I heard confirmd. The Dutch
however universaly denied their having seen women whose legs were
wrappd round with Sheeps gutts, which it has been supposd were to be a
part of their food. Their Monorchides or semicastration was in general
totaly denied; some however said that among the nation who knew how to
melt copper were some who had undergone this ceremony, and that these
were their best warriors and the individual people who so well knew how
to throw stones.

In regard to the Sinus Pudoris, that grand Quaere of Natural historians,
Many whoom I askd both Dutch and Malays declard positively that it did
not at all exist, and several of these Assurd me that they had during
intrigues with Hottentot women had an opportunity of knowing which they
had made use of. One however declard that something he had met with but
what it was he could not tell; and above all a physician of the place declard
that he had curd many Hundred Hottentot women of venereal Complaints,
and that he never saw one without what he describd to be fleshy or rather
skinny appendages proceeding from the upper part of the Labia, in
appearance somewhat like Cows teats but flat which hung pendulous; these
were very various in lengh, in some scarce half an inch, in others three or
four; that those, which were the only particularities he knew of in those
women, he apprehended to be what a[u]thours have calld sinus pudoris, tho
some have describd it as a large skin equal to a garment for all purposes of
decency, and others have thought it to be no more than an elongation of the
Clytoris in those women, which does not exist in those women at all more
remarkable than in Europeans.

A table of the Value of Money Supposing a Styver Dutch
equal to a penny Sterling.

                        &pound;  S  D

A Guinea                00 18 00
half of Do              00  9 00
a Crown peice            0  4  0
half of Do               0  2  0
a Shilling               0  0 10
a Louis D'Or
a French Crown              4  6
a Ducat                     9  0
a Ducatoon                  6  0
a Skilling                  0  6
a Dubblechey                0  2
a Stuiver                   0  1
an Imperial Rixdollar       4  0
Alberts Do                  6  0
Danes Rixdollar             4  0
Spanish Dollar              4  6
a Quarter of Do             1  0


1771 May 1.

In the Morn at daybreak saw the Island of St Helena about six Leagues
ahead; consequently before noon arrivd in the Road where we found his
Majesties ship Portland Capt Elliot, sent out to convoy home the India men
on account of the likeleyhood of a breach with Spain, also his Majesties
sloop Swallow which had the day before brought word of the Pacifick
measures adopted by that court, also 12 Sail of Indiamen.


1771 May 2.

As the fleet was to sail immediately and our ship to accompany it, it
became necessary to make as much of a short time as possible, so this
whole day was employd in riding about the Island, in the course of which
we made very nearly the Compleat Circuit of it visiting all the most
remarkable places that we had been told of.


1771 May 3.

Spent this day in Botanizing on the Ridge where the Cabbage trees grow,
visiting Cuckolds point and Dianas peak, the Highest land in the Island as
settled by the Observations of Mr Maskelyne, who was sent out to this
Island by the Royal Society for the Purpose of Observing the transit of
Venus in the Year [1761]. See Account of St Helena below


1771 May 4.

Saild after dinner in company with 12 Indiamen and his Majesties ship
Portland, resolvd to steer homewards with all expedition in Order (if
possible) to bring home the first news of our voyage, as we found that
many Particulars of it has transpird and particularly that a copy of the
Latitudes and Longitudes of most or all the principal places we had been at
had been taken by the Captns Clerk from the Captns own Journals and
Given or Sold to one of the India Captns. War we had no longer the least
suspicion of: the India men being orderd to sail immediately without
waiting for the few who were not yet arrivd was a sufficient proof that our
freinds at home were not at all apprehensive of it.


1771 May 6.

Pleasant breeze but our ship very far astern; she certainly sails worse than
any one of the fleet yet as she keeps up with [them] at least in sight hope
they will not get home much before us.


1771 May 7.

Still kept company and today were abreast of the headmost ship. Many
flying fish were seen and some few Birds.


1771 May 10.

This day we saw the Island of Ascencion which is tolerably high Land;
Our Captn however did not chuse to anchor unwilling to give the fleet so
much start of him. Those who have been ashore upon this Island say that it
is little more than a heap of Cinders, the remains of a Volcano which burnt
even since the discovery of the Indies. Osbeck who was ashore upon it
found only 5 species of plants but I am much inclind to beleive that there
are others which escapd his notice, as he certainly was not on the side of
the Island where the French land, in which place I have been informd is a
pretty wide plain coverd with herbage among which grows Cactus Opuntia,
a plant not seen by that gentleman.


1771 May 11.

Pleasant weather. Saw Holothuria Physalis which our seamen call
Portugese man of war for the first time since we left these seas in going
out.


1771 May 12.

Rainy misty weather, the air very damp and unwholesome, the breeze
however continues.


1771 May 15.

Our trade begins now to slacken very much. A man of war bird was seen.


1771 May 16.

Caugh[t] a small Shark.


1771 May 17.

Struck one bonito weighing near 20 pounds.


1771 May 18.

Our trade wind gone to day, the winds variable and very light.


1771 May 19.

Squally with frequent calms, such weather as ships never fail to meet
with in passing from one trade wind to the other: to make the most
however of this disagreable weather we went on Board the Portland and
spent the day with Captn Elliot.


1771 May 23.

Calms still continued. Dind on board the Portland with Captn Elliot;
while on board her saw a common house martin flying about the Ship.


1771 May 26.

Heavy rain and frequent squalls from the NE gave us great reason to
expect the trade very quickly. During the day we were very much ahead of
the Fleet, at night however they came up with us fast.


1771 May 27.

In the night the wind settled at NE and in the morn to our great [surprize]
we had no sight of the Fleet even from our mast heads so were obligd to
jogg on by ourselves. A bird something like a gannet but darker was seen
about the ship which settled upon the water and remaind there till out of
sight.


1771 May 29.

Fresh trade which quickly releivd every body from the depression of
spirits etc. which is the constant companions of the Damp Calms we have
now passd through.


1771 May 30.

Trade very fresh indeed with a heavy sea, so that the Ship pitchd and
tumbled very disagreably to us whoom a continuance of fine weather has
made almost unfit for a Gale.


SOME ACCOUNT OF ST. HELENA

[From 1771 May 3.]

This small Island, which is no more than twelve miles long and seven
broad, is situated in a manner in the Middle of the Vast Atlantick Ocean
being 400 Lgs. distant from the Coast of Africa and above 600 from that of
America. It appears to be or rather is the summit of some immence
mountain which towering far above the level of the Earth (in this part of
the Globe very much depressd) elevates itself even considerably above the
surface of the Sea, which covers its highest neigbours with a body of water
even to this time unfathomable to the researches of Mankind.
The higher parts of all Countreys have been observd almost without
exception to be the seats of Volcanoes while the lower parts are much
seldomer found to be so. Etna and Vesuvius have no land higher than
themselves in their neighbourhood; Heckla is the highest hill in Iceland; in
the highest part of the Andes in South America volcanoes are frequent; and
the Pike of Teneriffe still is on fire. These still Continue to burn, but
numberless others have been found to shew evident marks of Fires now
extinct and which have been so from the times of Our Earliest traditions.
That this has been the Case with St Helena and that the great inequalities
of the ground there have been originaly causd by the sinking of the ground,
easily appears to an observing eye who compares the opposite ridges,
which tho seperated always by deep and sometimes by tolerably broad
Valleys, have such a perfect similarity in appearance as well as direction as
scarce leaves room for a doubt that they formerly made a part of a much
less uneven surface; and that this sinking in of the Earth has been
occasiond by subterraneous fires the stones Abunduntly testifie, as they
universaly shew marks of having been some time or other exposd to the
effects of a great degree of heat. Some are Evidently burnt almost to a
cinder, especialy those which are found near the bottoms of Valleys, as
may be seen in going up Side Path and probably Ladder Hill also; others
shew small bubbles as is seen in glass which has been urgd almost to
fusion; again others which perhaps from their situation on the tops of
Ridges have been exposd to a far less degree of heat or from their own
apyrous qualities shew scarce any signs of having been in fire: yet in many
of these if carefully examind are found small peices of extraneous bodies
such as Mundics etc. which have submitted to the fire, tho it was not able to
make any alteration in the appearance of the stone which containd them.
Thus much for these Suggestions, fit only for those who can beleive a
Babilonian Chronology. I Pass now to the present state of the Island, a
subject which would afford much entertainment to a contemplative mind
and more food to an inquisitive one than the shortness of my stay gave me
opportunity to collect.

Making it as we did and indeed most ships do on the windward side it is
a rude heap of Rocks bounded by precipecis of an amazing height,
composd of a kind of half friable rocks which however shew not the Least
sign of vegetation, nor does a nearer view apear more promising. In sailing
along the shore ships come uncommonly near it so that the huge Clifts
seem almost to overhang and threaten destruction by the apparent
probability of their giving way: in this manner they Sail till they open
Chappel Valley where stands the small town. Even that valley resembles a
large trench, in the bottom of which a few plants are to be seen, but its
sides are as bare as the cliff next the Sea. Such is the apparent barrenness
of the Island in its present cultivated state, nor do you see any signs of
fertility till you have penetrated beyond the first hills; then the Vallies
begin to be green and tho every where inconceivably steep produce a great
deal of good herbage. Among these are the planters houses, near each of
which is a small plantation of Cocos, the only vegetable they seem to
labour much in the Cultivation of.

The Town stands just by the sea side, very small and except a few houses
ill built. The Church which originaly has been a very poor building is now
almost in ruins, and the Market house is advancing by quick steps to the
same situation.

The White inhabitants are almost to a man English, who as they are not
allowd to have any trade or commerce of their own live intirely by
supplying such ships as touch at the Place with refreshments, of which
however to their Shame be it spoken they appear to have by no means a
supply equal to the extent as well as fertility of their soil, as well as the
fortunate situation of their Island seem to promise. Situate in a degree
between temperate and warm their Soil might produce most if not all the
vegetables of Europe together with the fruits of the Indies, Yet both are
almost totaly neglected. Cabbages indeed and garden stuff in general is
very good, but so far from being in plenty so as to supply the ships who
touch here a scanty allowance only of them are to be got, cheifly by favour
from the greater people who totaly monopolize every article produced by
the Island, excepting only beef and mutton which the Company keep in
their own hands; and tho there is a market house in the town yet nothing is
sold publickly, nor could either of the three Kings ships that were there get
greens for their Tables except only Captn Elliot the Commanding Officer
who was furnishd by order of the Governor out of his own garden.
Here are Plantains, Peaches, Lemons, Apples, Guavas and I beleive
scarce any other fruits, tho probably very few kinds exist in either Indies
which might not be cultivated here and brought to at least a great degree of
perfection. But while their Pastures lay as they realy do as much neglected
as their Gardens there can be little hopes of Amendment; in short the
Custom of the Indias Captains, who always make very hansome presents to
the families where they are entertaind besides paying any extravagant
prizes for the few refreshments they get, seem to have inspird the People
with a degree of Lazyness: were refreshments cheap they would probably
upon the whole receive not much more money for them by the year and the
present would be the same, so at least they seem to think. In short the Cape
of Good Hope, which tho by nature a mere desart supplys abundantly
refreshments of all kinds to ships of all nations who touch there, contrasted
with this Island, which tho highly favourd by nature, shews not unaptly the
Genius's of the two nations in making Colonies: nor do I think I go too far
in asserting that was the Cape now in the Hands of the English it would be
a desart, as St Helena in the hands of the Dutch would as infallibly become
a paradise.

Small as this Island is and not raisd very much above the surface of the
Sea it enjoys a varity of Climates hardly to be beleivd. The Cabbage trees,
as they are calld, which grow on the highest ridges can by no art be
cultivated on the lower ones where the red wood and Gum wood grow,
both which in their turns refuse the high ridges, and neither of the three are
to be found in the Vallies, which indeed are in general coverd with
European plants or the more common ones of the Indies--in all probability
originaly brought here by ships, and the more so as much the largest
proportion of them are natives of England, among which I may recon the
Meadow grass Anthoxanthum odoratum which is the cheif covering of
their pastures and to which I am much inclind to atribute the verdure of the
Island, which far exceeds any thing I have before seen in equaly low
latitudes. The Furze also, Ulex Europeus, the seeds of which were brought
over in the beginning of this Century, Thrives wonderfully and is highly
praisd by the Islanders as a great improvement, tho they make no use of it
except heating their ovens.

Barley has been sown upon this Island about 40 years ago. It producd
sufficient to supply itself without any being sent from home; its cultivation
was however suddenly drop'd, for what reason I could not find out, and
since that time has never been atempted. Yams, the same as are calld
Cocos in the West Indies, is what they cheifly depend upon to supply their
numerous slaves with provision: these however are not cultivated in half
the perfect[i]on that I have seen in the South Sea Islands, nor have they like
the Indians several sorts many of which are very palatable, but are confind
to only one and that one of the Worst.

All kinds of Labour is here performd by Man, indeed he is the only
animal that works except a few Saddle Horses nor has he the least
assistance of art to enable him to perform his task. Supposing the Roads to
be too steep and narrow for Carts, an objection which lies against only one
part of the Island, yet the simple contrivance of Wheelbarrows would Doub
[t]less be far preferable to carrying burthens upon the head, and yet even
that expedient was never tried. Their slaves indeed are very numerous: they
have them from most parts of the World, but they appeard to me a
miserable race worn out almost with the severity of the punishments of
which they frequently complaind. I am sorry to say that it appeard to me
that far more frequent and more wanton Cruelty were excercisd by my
countrey men over these unfortunate people than even their neighbours the
Dutch, fam'd for inhumanity, are guilty of. One rule however they strictly
observe which is never to Punish when ships are there.
Nature has blessd this Island with very few Productions either usefull for
the support or conducive to the Luxury of Mankind. Partriges and Doves
are the only animals except possibly rats and mice, much more probably
brought here by ships. Among vegetables Purslain, Celery, Water Cresses,
wild mint and Tobacco, tho now common among the rocks, I doubt much
whether they were so before people came here as none except the last are
found in paralel latitudes; the first indeed is found on Ascention and many
Parts equ[a]ly unlikely to have originaly producd it, but that [is] accounted
for by the ancient custom of the Portugese, who finding this herb
particularly beneficial in complaints contracted in long voyages made a
point of sewing it wherever they went ashore, a custom from whence all
nations have since reapd no small benefit. Amongst its native products
however Ebony must be recond, tho the trees that produce it are now
nearly extinct and no one remembers the time when they were at all
plentifull, yet peices of the wood are frequently found in the vallies of a
fine black Colour and a hardness almost equal to Iron; these however are
almost always so short and so crooked that no use has yet been made of
them. Whether the tree is the same as that which produces Ebony on the
Isle of Bourbon and its adjacent Islands is impossible to know as the
French have not yet publishd any account of it. Other species of trees and
plants which seem to have been originaly natives of the Island are few in
number. Insects there are also a few, and one species of Snails who inhabit
only the tops of the Highest ridges and probably have been there ever since
their original creation.

Had our stay upon the Island been Longer we should in all probability
have discoverd some more natural productions but in all likelyhood not
many. Secluded as this rock is from the rest of the World by seas of
immence extent it is dificult to imagine how any thing not originaly created
in that spot could by any accident arrive at it; for my part I confess I feel
more wonder in the finding a little Snail on the top of the Ridges of St
Helena than in finding people upon America or any other part of the Globe.
As the benefits of the Land are so limited the Sea must often be applied
to by the natives of this little rock, nor is she unmindfull of their necessities
which she constantly supplies with immence plenty and no less variety of
Fish. She indeed would be culpable did she do otherwise: she never met
with a calamity equal to that of the earth in the General Deluge, and her
sons have moreover the advantage of a free intercourse with all parts of the
globe Habitable to them without being driven to the Necessity of tempting
the dangers of an element unsuited to their natures--a fatal necessity under
which too many even of us Lords of the Creation Yearly perish, and of all
others through the wide bounds of Creation how vast a proportion must.
The seed of a thistle supported by its down, the Insect by its weak and the
Bird by its more able wing, may tempt the dangers of the sea, but of these
how many milions must perish for one who arrives at the Distance of
twelve hundred miles from the place of his rest; it appears indeed far more
dificult to account for the passage of one individual than to bel[e]ive the
destruction of all that ever may have been by their ill fate hurried into such
an attempt.

Money of all nations passes here according to its real intrinsick European
value, therefore there is no kind of trouble on that head as in all the Dutch
Settlements.


1771 June 1.

Trade more moderate and pleasant weather.


1771 June 2.

Saw some Gulph-weed today for the first time.


1771 June 3.

This day passd under the Sun and were for the last time Ascii. Showers
and squalls of Wind; saw more Gulph weed.


1771 June 4.

Gulph-Weed rather increasd.


1771 June 5.

Less Gulph weed than yesterday, so least we should leave its station we
began to catch it by means of a pole with 6 large hooks fastned to its end.
Out of it we took Scyllaea pelagica, Medusa Porpita, Syngnathus pelagicus
and Lophius pelagicus and Cancer minutus.


1771 June 6.

More Gulf-weed in which took up several individuals of the
aformentiond species, besides which were caught Cancer pelagicus and a
shrimp not describd. Several tropick birds were seen all of which flew in a
strait line towards the Coast of Africa.


1771 June 7.

Still more Gulph-weed, in general laying in long lines upon the water of
a very small breadth but extending in lengh as far as the eye could reach.
More Tropick birds were seen most of which flew as yesterday and one
black shearwater.


1771 June 8.

Less Gulph-Weed; 2 Tropick birds flying as before.


1771 June 9.

Scarce any weed, the water smooth as if there had been no wind for some
time in these Lat.


1771 June 10.

Still Light winds and no sea; very little weed.


1771 June 11.

Rather more weed than lately. Quite calm so that I went out in the boat
and took up many individuals of all the species mentiond before but
nothing new.


1771 June 12.

Water as smooth as in a harbour: were we in an unknown sea we should
build much on the probability of some Land in the neighbourhood. Some
Porpoises and Skipjacks were seen but very little weed.


1771 June 14.

Light winds and smooth water; two turtle were seen and a little Gulphweed.


1771 June 15.

Saw a small sloop which we soon outsaild and left behind. No weed at all
today.


1771 June 16.

Spoke an homeward-bound Brazil-man and soon left him.


1771 June 17.

Saw two Ships very far off.


1771 June 18.

Saw 3 New En[g]land Schooners cruising for whales. Sent a boat on
board one who told us that he had yesterday spoke an outward bound
Englishman, who told him that all was peace in Europe, and that the
Spanyards had agreed to pay the Manilla ransom with interest in one year
and a million of Dollars for damages done at Falklands Islands.
The vessel had by their own account been out 5 weeks and caught
nothing; they had chasd a whale 60 Leagues into Fyall harbour into which
they could not follow it as the Portugese suffer no Whaler to go into any of
their Ports in the Western Islands. They had they said no meat on board but
livd upon what they could catch; they sold us readily 4 large Albacores
saying that they could catch more. As for American news King George
they said had behavd very ill for some time but they had brought him to
terms at last.


1771 June 20.

Saw a large ship ahead which on our lowering our foretopsail hoisted a
flag at her maintopmast head; she soon however made sail and left us.


1771 June 21.

About noon we discoverd a fleet of 13 sail of large ships on our weather
quarter; these we doubted not were our consorts the India fleet. One
Shearwater was seen.


1771 June 22.

The Fleet held so much better a wind than us that the[y] fairly went out
of sight to windward of us, who indeed had split both our Topgallant sails
in a squall.


1771 June 23.

Wind very foul. Saw one Shearwater: the reason of so few having been
seen this passage may be that during their breeding time they do not
wander far out at Sea.


1771 June 30.

Both yesterday and today a few Shearwaters were seen; in the night
many were about the ship crying very much.


1771 July 1.

My Bitch Lady was found dead in my Cabbin laying upon a stool on
which she generaly slept. She had been remarkably well for some days; in
the night she shreikd out very loud so that we who slept in the great Cabbin
heard her, but becoming quiet immediately no one regarded it. Whatever
disease was the cause of her death it was the most sudden that ever came
under my Observation. Many Shearwaters were seen about the ship.


1771 July 5.

In the night the ship passd through a shoal of Macarels and in the
Morning many Crabs and some seaweed was observd with many
Shearwaters.


1771 July 6.

Several shearwaters and one Gannet were seen; much sea weed like tape
flattish and narrow.


1771 July 7.

Several shearwaters and much Tapeweed; the water a little discolourd.
Caught Lepas Cygnifera floating upon the water in round conjeries's, some
of which were large enough to fill a mans hat.


1771 July 8.

Calm: went in boat and shot Fulmar and Manks Puffin of Pennants
British Zoology. Much sea weed but no more Lepades.


1771 July 10.

This Morning the land was discoverd by Young Nick the same boy who
first saw New Zeland: it provd to be the Lizzard.


1771 July 12.

At 3 O'Clock landed at Deal.



End of this Project Gutenberg of Australia ebook




Project Gutenberg Australia


