

Project Gutenberg Australia



Title:      The Silkworms of Florence
Author:     Clifford Ashdown
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.:  0600471.txt
Edition:    1
Language:   English
Character set encoding:     Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted:          April 2006
Date most recently updated: April 2006

This eBook was produced by: Jon Jermey

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


Title:      The Silkworms of Florence
Author:     Clifford Ashdown




"AND this is all that's left of Brede now." The old beadle withdrew his
hand, and the skull, with a rattle as of an empty wooden box, fell in its
iron cage again.

"How old do you say it is?" asked Mr. Pringle.

"Let me see," reflected the beadle, stroking his long grey beard. "He
killed Mr. Grebble in 1742, I think it was--the date's on the tombstone
over yonder in the church--and he hung in these irons a matter of sixty or
seventy year. I don't rightly know the spot where the gibbet stood, but
it was in a field they used to call in my young days 'Gibbet Marsh.'
You'll find it round by the Tillingham, back of the windmill."

"And is this the gibbet? How dreadful!" chorused the two daughters of a
clergyman, very summery, very gushing, and very inquisitive, who with
their father completed the party.

"Lor, no, miss! Why, that's the Rye pillory. It's stood up here nigh a
hundred year! And now I'll show you the town charters." And the beadle,
with some senile hesitation of gait, led the way into a small attic.

Mr. Pringle's mythical literary agency being able to take care of itself,
his chambers in Furnival's Inn had not seen him for a
month past. To a man of his cultured and fastidious bent the Bank Holiday
resort was especially odious; he affected regions unknown to the tripper,
and his presence at Rye had been determined by Jeakes' quaint
"Perambulation of the Cinque Ports," which he had lately picked up in
Booksellers' Row. Wandering with his camera from one decayed city to
another, he had left Rye only to hasten back when disgusted with the
modernity of the other ports, and for the last fortnight his tall slim
figure had haunted the town, his fair complexion swarthy and his
port-wine mark almost lost in the tanning begotten of the marsh winds and
the sun.

"The town's had a rare lot of charters and privileges granted to it,"
boasted the beadle, turning to a chest on which for all its cobwebs and
mildew the lines of elaborate carving showed distinctly. Opening it, he
began to dredge up parchments from the huddled mass inside, giving very
free translations of the old Norman-French or Latin the while.

"Musty, dirty old things!" was the comment of the two ladies.

Pringle turned to a smaller chest standing neglected in a dark corner,
whose lid, when he tried it, he found also unlocked, and which was nearly
as full of papers as the larger one.

"Are these town records also?" inquired Pringle, as the beadle gathered
up his robes preparatory to moving on.

"Not they," was the contemptuous reply. "That there chest was found in
the attic of an old house that's just been pulled down to build the noo
bank, and it's offered to the Corporation; but I don't think they'll
spend money on rubbish like that!"

"Here's something with a big seal!" exclaimed the clergyman, pouncing on
a discoloured parchment with the avid interest of an antiquary. The folds
were glued with damp, and endeavouring to smooth them out the parchment
slipped through his fingers; it dropped plumb by the weight of its heavy
seal, and as he sprang to save it his glasses fell off and buried
themselves among the papers. While he hunted for them Pringle picked up
the document, and began to read.

"Not much account, I should say," commented the beadle, with a
supercilious snort. "Ah! you should have seen our Jubilee Address, with
the town seal to it, all in blue and red and gold--cost every penny of
fifty pound! That's the noo bank what you're looking at from this window.
How the town is improving, to be sure!" He indicated a nightmare in red
brick and stucco which had displaced a Jacobean mansion.

And while the beadle prosed Pringle read:

"CINQUE PORTS TO WIT:

"TO ALL and every the Barons Bailiffs Jurats and Commonalty of the Cinque
Port of Rye and to Anthony Shipperbolt to Mayor thereof:

"WHEREAS it hath been adjudged by the Commission appointed under His
Majesty's sign-manual of date March the twenty-third one thousand eight
hundred and five that Anthony Shipperbolt Mayor of Rye hath been guilty
of conduct unbefitting his office as a magistrate of the Cinque Ports and
hath acted traitorously enviously and contrary to the love and affection
his duty towards His Most Sacred Majesty and the good order of this Realm
TO WIT that the said Anthony Shipperbolt hath accepted bribes from the
enemies of His Majesty hath consorted with the same and did plot compass
and go about to assist a certain prisoner of war the same being his
proper ward and charge to escape from lawful custody. NOW I William Pitt
Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports do order and command you the said Anthony
Shipperbolt and you are hereby required to forfeit and pay the sum of ten
thousand pounds sterling into His Majesty's Treasury AND as immediate
officer of His Majesty and by virtue and authority of each and every the
ancient charters of the Cinque Ports I order and command you the said
Anthony Shipperbolt to forthwith determine and refrain and you are hereby
inhibited from exercising the office and dignity of Mayor of the said
Cinque Port of Rye Speaker of the Cinque Ports Summoner of Brotherhood
and Guestling and all and singular the liberties freedoms licences
exemptions and jurisdictions of Stallage Pontage Panage Keyage Murage
Piccage Passage Groundage Scutage and all other powers franchises and
authorities appertaining thereunto AND I further order and command you
the said Anthony Shipperbolt to render to me within seven days of the
date hereof a full and true account of all monies fines amercements
redemptions issues forfeitures tallies seals records lands messuages and
hereditaments whatsoever and wheresoever that you hold have present
custody of or have at any time received in trust for the said Cinque Port
of Rye wherein fail not at your peril. AND I further order and command
you the said Barons Bailiffs Jurats and Commonalty of the said Cinque
Port of Rye that you straightway meet and choose some true and loyal
subject of His Majesty the same being of your number as fitting to hold
the said office of Mayor of the said Cinque Port whose name you shall
submit to my pleasure as soon as may be FOR ALL which this shall be your
sufficient authority. Given at Downing Street this sixteenth day of May
in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and five.

"GOD SAVE THE KING."

The last two or three inches of the parchment were folded down, and
seemed to have firmly adhered to the back--probably through the
accidental running of the seal in hot weather. But the fall had broken
the wax, and Pringle was now able to open the sheet to the full,
disclosing some lines of script, faded and tremulously scrawled, it is
true, but yet easy to be read: "To my son.--Seek for the silkworms of
Florence in Gibbet Marsh Church Spire SE x S, Winchelsea Mill SW 1/2 W.
A.S."

Pringle read this curious endorsement more than once, but could make no
sense of it. Concluding it was of the nature of a cypher, he made a note
of it in his pocket-book with the idea of attempting a solution in the
evening--a time which he found it difficult to get through, Rye chiefly
depending for its attractions on its natural advantages.

By this time the clergyman had recovered his glasses, and, handing the
document back to him, Pringle joined the party by the window. The
banalities of the bank and other municipal improvements being exhausted,
and the ladies openly yawning, the beadle proposed to show them what he
evidently regarded as the chief glory of the Town Hall of Rye. The
inquisitive clergyman was left studying the parchment, while the rest of
the party adjourned to the council chamber. Here the guide proudly
indicated the list of mayors, whose names were emblazoned on the
chocolate-coloured walls to a length rivalling that of the dynasties of
Egypt.

"What does this mean?" inquired Pringle. He pointed to the year 1805,
where the name "Anthony Shipperbolt" appeared bracketed with another.

"That means he died during his year of office," promptly asserted the old
man. He seemed never at a loss for an answer, although Pringle began to
suspect that the prompter the reply the more inaccurate was it likely to
be.

"Oh, what a smell of burning!" interrupted one of the ladies.

"And where's papa?" screamed the other. "He'll be burnt to death."

There was certainly a smell of burning, which, being of a strong and
pungent nature, perhaps suggested to the excited imagination of the
ladies the idea of a clergyman on fire. Pringle gallantly raced up the
stairs. The fumes issued from a smouldering mass upon the floor, and
beside it lay something which burnt with pyrotechnic sputtering; but
neither bore any relation to the divine. He, though well representing
what Gibbon has styled "the fat slumbers of the Church," was hopping
about the miniature bonfire, now sucking his fingers and anon shaking
them in the air as one in great agony. Intuitively Pringle understood
what had happened, and with a bound he stamped the smouldering parchment
into unrecognisable tinder, and smothering the more viciously burning
seal with his handkerchief he pocketed it as the beadle wheezed into the
room behind the ladies, who were too concerned for their father's safety
to notice the action.

"What's all this?" demanded the beadle, and glared through his
spectacles.

"I've dr-r-r-r-opped some wa-wa-wa-wax--oh!--upon my hand!"

"Waxo?" echoed the beadle, sniffing suspiciously.

"He means a wax match, I think," Pringle interposed chivalrously. The
parchment was completely done for, and he saw no wisdom in advertising
the fact.

"I'll trouble you for your name and address," insisted the beadle in all
the pride of office.

"What for?" the incendiary objected.

"To report the matter to the Fire Committee."

"Very well, then--Cornelius Hardgiblet, rector of Logdown," was the
impressive reply; and tenderly escorted by his daughters the rector
departed with such dignity as an occasional hop, when his fingers smarted
a little more acutely, would allow him to assume.

It still wanted an hour or two to dinner-time as Pringle unlocked the
little; studio he rented on the Winchelsea road. Originally an office, he
had made it convertible into a very fair dark-room, and here he was
accustomed to spend his afternoons in developing the morning's
photographs. But photography had little interest for him to-day. Ever
since Mr. Hardgiblet's destruction of the document--which, he felt
certain, was no accident--Pringle had cast about for some motive for the
act. What could it be but that the parchment contained a secret, which
the rector, guessing, had wanted to keep to himself? He must look up the
incident of the mayor's degradation. So sensational an event, even for
such stirring days as those, would scarcely go unrecorded by local
historians. Pringle had several guide-books at hand in the studio, but a
careful search only disclosed that they were unanimously silent as to Mr.
Shipperbolt and his affairs. Later on, when returning, he had reason to
bless his choice of an hotel. The books in the smoking-room were not
limited, as usual, to a few timetables and an ancient copy of Ruff's
"Guide." On the contrary, Murray and Black were prominent, and above all
Hillpath's monumental "History of Rye," and in this last he found the
information he sought. Said Hillpath: -

"In 1805 Anthony Shipperbolt, then Mayor of Rye, was degraded from
office, his property confiscated, and himself condemned to stand in the
pillory with his face to the French coast, for having assisted Jules
Florentin, a French prisoner of war, to escape from the Ypres Tower
Prison. He was suspected of having connived at the escape of several
other prisoners of distinction, presumably for reward. He had been a
shipowner trading with France, and his legitimate trade suffering as a
result of the war he had undoubtedly resorted to smuggling, a form of
trading which, to the principals engaged in it at least, carried little
disgrace with it, being winked at by even the most law-abiding persons.
Shipperbolt did not long survive his degradation, and, his only son being
killed soon after while resisting a revenue cutter when in charge of his
father's vessel, the family became extinct."

Here, thought Pringle, was sufficient corroboration of the parchment. The
details of the story were clear, and the only mysterious thing about it
was the endorsement. His original idea of its being a cypher hardly
squared with the simple address, "To my son," and the "A. S." with which
it concluded could only stand for the initials of the deposed mayor.
There was no mystery either about "Gibbet Marsh," which, according to the
beadle's testimony, must have been a well-known spot a century ago, while
the string of capitals he easily recognised as compass-bearings. There
only remained the curious expression, "The silkworms of Florence," and
that was certainly a puzzle. Silkworms are a product of Florence, he
knew; but they were unlikely to be exported in such troublous times. And
why were they deposited in such a place as Gibbet Marsh? He turned for
enlightenment to Hillpath, and pored over the passage again and again
before he saw a glimmer of sense. Then suddenly he laughed, as the cypher
resolved itself into a pun, and a feeble one at that. While Hillpath
named the prisoner as Florentin and more than hinted at payment for
services rendered, the cypher indicated where Florentine products were to
be found. Shipperbolt ruined, his property confiscated, what more likely
than that he should conceal the price of his treason in Gibbet Marsh--a
spot almost as shunned in daylight as in darkness? Curious as the choice
of the parchment for such a purpose might be, the endorsement was
practically a will. He had nothing else to leave.

Pringle was early afoot the next day. Gibbet Marsh has long been drained
and its very name forgotten, but the useful Murray indicated its site
clearly enough for him to identify it; and it was in the middle of a wide
and lonely field, embanked against the
winter inundations, that Pringle commenced to work out the bearings
approximately with a pocket-compass. He soon fixed his starting-point,
the church tower dominating Rye from every point of view; but of
Winchelsea there was nothing to be seen for the trees. Suddenly, just
where the green mass thinned away to the northward, something rose and
caught the sunbeams for a moment, again and still again, and with a
steady gaze he made out the revolving sails of a windmill. This was as
far as he cared to go for the moment; without a good compass and a
sounding-spud it would be a mere waste of time to attempt to fix the
spot. He walked across the field, and was in the very act of mounting the
stile when he noticed a dark object, which seemed to skim in jerky
progression along the top of the embankment. While he looked the thing
enlarged, and as the path behind the bank rose uplifted itself into the
head, shoulders, and finally the entire person of the rector of Logdown.
He had managed to locate Gibbet Marsh, it appeared; but as he stepped
into the field and wandered aimlessly about, Pringle judged that he was
still a long way from penetrating the retreat of the silkworms.

Among the passengers by the last train down from London that night was
Pringle. He carried a cricketing-bag, and when safely inside the studio
he unpacked first a sailor's jersey, peaked cap and trousers, then a
small but powerful spade, a very neat portable pick, a few fathoms of
manilla rope, several short lengths of steel rod (each having a
screw-head, by which they united into a single long one), and finally a
three-inch prismatic compass.

Before sunrise the next morning Pringle started out to commence
operations in deadly earnest, carrying his jointed rods as a
walking-stick, while his coat bulged with the prismatic compass. The
town, a victim to the enervating influence of the visitors, still
slumbered, and he had to unbar the door of the hotel himself. He did not
propose to do more than locate the exact spot of the treasure; indeed, he
felt that to do even that would be a good morning's work.

On the way down in the train he had taken a few experimental bearings
from the carriage window, and felt satisfied with his own dexterity.
Nevertheless, he had a constant dread lest the points given should prove
inaccurate. He felt dissatisfied with the Winchelsea bearing. For aught
he knew, not a single tree that now obscured the view might have been
planted; the present mill, perhaps, had not existed; or even another
might have been visible from the marsh. What might not happen in the
course of nearly a century? He had already made a little calculation, for
a prismatic compass being graduated in degrees (unlike the mariner's,
which has but thirty-two points), it was necessary to reduce the bearings
to degrees, and this had been the
result:--Rye Church spire SE x S = 146° I5'. Winchelsea Mill SW 1/2W =
230° 37'.

When he reached the field not a soul was anywhere to be seen; a few sheep
browsed here and there, and high overhead a lark was singing. At once he
took a bearing from the church spire. He was a little time in getting the
right pointing; he had to move step by step to the right, continuing to
take observations, until at last the church weather-cock bore truly 146°
through the sight-vane of the compass. Turning half round, he took an
observation of the distant mill. He was a long way out this time; so
carefully preserving his relative position to the church, he backed away,
taking alternate observations of either object until both spire and mill
bore in the right directions. The point where the two bearings
intersected was some fifty yards from the brink of the Tillingham, and,
marking the spot with his compass, Pringle began to probe the earth in a
gradually widening circle, first with one section of his rod, then with
another joint screwed to it, and finally with a length of three, so that
the combination reached to a depth of eight feet. He had probed every
square inch of a circle described perhaps twenty feet from the compass,
when he suddenly stumbled upon a loose sod, nearly impaling himself upon
the sounding-rod; and before he could rise his feet, sliding and
slipping, had scraped up quite a large surface of turf, as did his hands,
in each case disclosing the fat, brown alluvium beneath. A curious fact
was that the turf had not been cut in regular strips, as if for removal
to some garden; neatly as it was relaid, it had been lifted in shapeless
patches, some large, some small, while the soil underneath was all soft
and crumbling, as if that too had been recently disturbed. Someone had
been before him! Cramped and crippled by his prolonged stooping, Pringle
stretched himself at length upon the turf. As he lay and listened to the
song that trilled from the tiny speck just visible against a woolly
cloud, he felt that it was useless to search further. That a treasure had
once been hidden thereabouts he felt convinced, for anything but specie
would have been useless at such an unsettled time for commercial credit,
and would doubtless have been declined by Shipperbolt; but whatever form
the treasure had taken, clearly it was no longer present.

The sounds of toil increased around.

Already a barge was on its way up the muddy stream; at any moment he
might be the subject of gaping curiosity. He carefully replaced the
turfs, wondering the while who could have anticipated him, and what find,
if any, had rewarded the searcher. Thinking it best not to return by the
nearest path, he crossed the river some distance up, and taking a wide
sweep halted on Cadborough Hill to enjoy for the hundredth time the sight
of the glowing roofs, huddled tier after tier upon the rock, itself
rising sheer from the plain; and far and beyond, and snowed all over with
grazing flocks, the boundless green of the seaward marsh. Inland, the
view was only less extensive, and with some ill-humour he was eyeing the
scene of his fruitless labour when he observed a figure moving over
Gibbet Marsh. At such a distance it was hard to see exactly what was
taking place, but the action of the figure was so eccentric that, with a
quick suspicion as to its identity, Pringle laid his traps upon the
ground and examined it through his pocket telescope. It was indeed Mr.
Hardgiblet. But the new feature in the case was that the rector appeared
to be taking a bearing with a compass, and although he resumed over and
over again to a particular spot (which Pringle recognised as the same
over which he himself had spent the early morning hours), Mr. Hardgiblet
repeatedly shifted his ground to the right, to the left, and round about,
as if dissatisfied with his observations. There was only one possible
explanation of all this. Cleverer than Pringle had thought him, the
rector must have hit upon the place indicated in the parchment, his hand
must have removed the turf, and he it was who had examined the soil
beneath. Not for the first time in his life, Pringle was disagreeably
reminded of the folly of despising an antagonist, however contemptible he
may appear. But at least he had one consolation: the rector's return and
his continued observations showed that he had been no more successful in
his quest than was Pringle himself. The silkworms were still unearthed.

The road down from Cadborough is long and dusty, and, what with the
stiffness of his limbs and the thought of his wasted morning, Pringle,
when he reached his studio and took the compass from his pocket, almost
felt inclined to fling it through the open window into the "cut." But the
spasm of irritability passed. He began to accuse himself of making some
initial error in the calculations, and carefully went over them again--
with an identical result. Now that Mr. Hardgiblet was clearly innocent of
its removal, he even began to doubt the existence of the treasure. Was it
not incredible, he asked himself, that for nearly a century it should
have remained hidden? As to its secret (a punning endorsement on an old
parchment), was it not just as open to any other investigator in all the
long years that had elapsed? Besides, Shipperbolt might have removed the
treasure himself in alarm for its safety. The thought of Shipperbolt
suggested a new idea. Instruments of precision were unknown in those days--
supposing Shipperbolt's compass had been inaccurate? He took down
Norie's "Navigation," and ran through the chapter on the compass. There
was a section headed "Variation and how to apply it," which he skimmed
through, considering that the question did not arise, when, carelessly
reading on, his attention was suddenly arrested by a table of "Changes in
variation from year to year." Running his eye down this he made the
startling discovery that, whereas the variation at that moment was about
16° 31' west, in 1805 it was no less than 24°. Here was indeed a wide
margin for error. All the time he was searching for the treasure it was
probably lying right at the other side of the field!

At once he started to make a rough calculation, determined that it should
be a correct one this time. As the variation of 1805 and that of the
moment showed a difference of 7° 29', to obtain the true bearing it was
necessary for him to subtract this difference from Shipperbolt's points,
thus: Rye Church spire SE x S = 146° 15', deduct 7° 29' = 138° 46'.
Winchelsea Mill SW 1/2W = 230° 37', deduct 7° 29' = 223° 8'.
The question of the moment concerned his next step. Up to the present Mr.
Hardgiblet appeared unaware of the error. But how long, thought Pringle,
would he remain so? Any work on navigation would set him right, and as he
seemed keenly on the scent of the treasure he was unlikely to submit to a
check of this nature. Like Pringle, too, he seemed to prefer the early
morning hours for his researches. Clearly there was no time to lose.
On his way up to lunch Pringle remarked that the whole town was agog.
Crowds were pouring in from the railway station;
at every corner strangers were inquiring their road; the shops were
either closed or closing; a steam roundabout hooted in the cricket-field.
The holiday aspect of things was marked by the display on all sides of
uncomfortably best clothing, worn with a reckless and determined air of
Pleasure Seeking. Even the artists, the backbone of the place, had shared
the excitement, or else, resenting the invasion of their pitches by the
unaccustomed crowd, were sulking indoors. Anyhow, they had disappeared.
Not until he reached the hotel and read on a poster the programme of the
annual regatta to be held that day, did Pringle realise the meaning of it
all. In the course of lunch--which, owing to the general disorganisation
of things, was a somewhat scrambled meal--it occurred to him that here
was his opportunity. The regatta was evidently the great event of the
year; every idler would be drawn to it, and no worker who could be spared
would be absent. The treasure-field would be even lonelier than in the
days of Brede's gibbet. He would be able to locate the treasure that
afternoon once for all; then, having marked the spot, he could return at
night with his tools and remove it.

When Pringle started out the streets were vacant and quiet as on a
Sunday, and he arrived at the studio to find the quay an idle waste and
the shipping in the "cut" deserted. As to the meadow, when he got there,
it was forsaken even by the sheep. He was soon at work with his prismatic
compass, and after half an hour's steady labour he struck a spot about an
eighth of a mile distant from the scene of his morning's failure. Placing
his compass as before at the point of intersection, he began a systematic
puncturing of the earth around it. It was a wearisome task, and, warned
by his paralysis of the morning, he rose every now and then to stretch
and watch for possible intruders. Hours seemed to have passed, when the
rod encountered something hard. Leaving it in position, he probed all
around with another joint, but there was no resistance even when he
doubled its length, and his sense of touch assured him this hardness was
merely a casual stone. Doggedly he resumed his task until the steel
jammed again with a contact less harsh and unyielding. Once more he left
the rod touching the buried mass, and probed about, still meeting an
obstruction. And then with widening aim he stabbed and stabbed, striking
this new thing until he had roughly mapped a space some twelve by eight
inches. No stone was this, he felt assured; the margins were too abrupt,
the corners too sharp, for aught but a chest. He rose exultingly. Here
beneath his feet were the silkworms of Florence. The secret was his
alone. But it was growing late; the afternoon had almost merged into
evening, and far away across the field stretched his shadow. Leaving his
sounding-rod buried with the cord attached, he walked towards a hurdle on
the river-bank, paying out the cord as he went, and hunted for a large
stone. This found, he tied a knot in the cord to mark where the hurdle
stood, and following it back along the grass pulled up the rod and
pressed the stone upon the loosened earth in its place. Last of all, he
wound the cord upon the rod. His task would be an easy one again. All he
need do was to find the knot, tie the cord at that point to the hurdle,
start off with the rod in hand, and when all the cord had run off search
for the stone to right or left of the spot he would find himself standing
on.

As he re-entered the town groups of people were returning from the
regatta--the sea-faring to end the day in the abounding taverns, the
staider on their way to the open-air concert, the cinematograph, and the
fireworks, which were to brim the cup of their dissipation. Pringle dined
early, and then made his way to the concert-field, and spent a couple of
hours in studying the natural history of the Ryer. The fireworks were
announced for nine, and as the hour approached the excitement grew and
the audience swelled. When a fairly accurate census of Rye might have
been taken in the field, Pringle edged through the crowd and hurried
along the deserted streets to the studio. To change his golf-suit for the
sea-clothing he had brought from town was the work of a very few minutes,
and his port-wine mark never resisted the smart application of a little
spirit. Then, packing the sounding-rod and cord in the cricketing bag,
along with the spade, pick, and rope, he locked the door, and stepped
briskly out along the solitary road. From the little taverns clinging to
the rock opposite came roars of discordant song, for while the losers in
the regatta sought consolation, the winners paid the score, and all grew
steadily drunk together. He lingered a moment on the sluice to watch the
tide as it poured impetuously up from the lower river. A rocket whizzed,
and as it burst high over the town a roar of delight was faintly borne
across the marsh.

Although the night was cloudy and the moon was only revealed at long
intervals, Pringle, with body bent, crept cautiously from bush to bush
along the bank; his progress was slow, and the hurdle had been long in
sight before he made out a black mass in the water below. At first he
took it for the shadow of a bush that stood by, but as he came nearer it
took the unwelcome shape of a boat with its painter fast to the hurdle;
and throwing himself flat in the grass he writhed into the opportune
shade of the bush. It was several minutes before he ventured to raise his
head and peer around, but the night was far too dark for him to see many
yards in any direction--least of all towards the treasure. As he watched
and waited he strove to imagine some reasonable explanation of the boat's
appearance on the scene. At another part of the river he would have taken
slight notice of it; but it was hard to see what anyone could want in the
field at that hour, and the spot chosen for landing was suggestive. What
folly to have located the treasure so carefully! He must have been
watched that afternoon; round the field were scores of places where a spy
might conceal himself. Then, too, who could have taken such deep interest
in his movements? Who but Mr. Hardgiblet, indeed? This set him wondering
how many had landed from the boat; but a glance showed that it carried
only a single pair of sculls, and when he wriggled nearer he saw but
three footprints upon the mud, as of one who had taken just so many steps
across it.

The suspense was becoming intolerable. A crawl of fifty yards or so over
damp grass was not to be lightly undertaken; but he was just on the point
of coming out from the shadow of the bush, when a faint rhythmic sound
arose, to be followed by a thud. He held his breath, but could hear
nothing more. He counted up to a hundred--still silence. He rose to his
knees, when the sound began again, and now it was louder. It ceased;
again there was the thud, and then another interval of silence. Once
more; it seemed quite close, grew louder, louder still, and resolved
itself into the laboured breathing of a man who now came into view. He
was bending under a burden which he suddenly dropped, as if exhausted,
and then, after resting awhile, slowly raised it to his shoulders and
panted onwards, until, staggering beneath his load, he lurched against
the hurdle, his foot slipped, and he rolled with a crash down the muddy
bank. In that moment Pringle recognised the more than usually unctuous
figure of Mr. Hardgiblet, who embraced a small oblong chest. Spluttering
and fuming, the rector scrambled to his feet, and after an unsuccessful
hoist or two, dragged the chest into the boat. Then, taking a pause for
breath, he climbed the bank again and tramped across the field.

Mr. Hardgiblet was scarcely beyond earshot when Pringle, seizing his bag,
jumped down to the water-side. He untied the painter, and shoving off
with his foot, scrambled into the boat as it slid out on the river. With
a paddle of his hand alongside, he turned the head up stream, and then
dropped his bag with all its contents overboard and crouched along the
bottom. A sharp cry rang out behind, and, gently he peeped over the
gunwale. There by the hurdle stood Mr. Hardgiblet, staring thunder-struck
at the vacancy. The next moment he caught sight of the strayed boat, and
started to run after it; and as he ran, with many a trip and stumble of
wearied limbs, he gasped expressions which were not those of resignation
to his mishap. Meantime, Pringle, his face within a few inches of the
little chest, sought for some means of escape. He had calculated on the
current bearing him out of sight long before the rector could return, but
such activity as this discounted all his plans. All at once he lost the
sounds of pursuit, and, raising his head, he saw that Mr. Hardgiblet had
been forced to make a detour round a little plantation which grew to the
water's edge. The next second Pringle had seized the sculls, and with a
couple of long rapid strokes grounded the boat beneath a bush on the
opposite bank. There he tumbled the chest on to the mud, and jumping
after it shoved the boat off again. As it floated free and resumed its
course up stream, Pringle shouldered the chest, climbed up the bank, and
keeping in the shade of a hedge, plodded heavily across the field.

Day was dawning as Pringle extinguished the lamp in his studio, and
setting the shutters ajar allowed the light to fall upon the splinters,
bristling like a cactus-hedge, of what had been an oaken chest. The wood
had proved hard as the iron which clamped and bound it, but scarcely
darker or more begrimed than the heap of metal discs it had just
disgorged. A few of these, fresh from a bath of weak acid, glowed golden
as the sunlight, displaying indifferently a bust with "Bonaparte Premier
Consul" surrounding it, or on the reverse "Republique Francaise, anno XI.
20 francs." Such were the silkworms of Florence.



End of this Project Gutenberg of Australia ebook




Project Gutenberg Australia


