

Project Gutenberg Australia


Title: The Misanthrope
Author: J. D. Beresford
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0603001.txt
Edition: 1
Language: English
Character set encoding: Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted: July 2006
Date most recently updated: July 2006

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au




The Misanthrope
J. D. Beresford

Since I have returned from the rock and discussed the story in all its
bearings, I have begun to wonder if the man made a fool of me. In the
deeps of my consciousness I feel that he did not.

Nevertheless, I cannot resist the effect of all the laughter that has
been evoked by my narrative.

Here on the mainland the whole thing seems unlikely, grotesque,
foolish. On the rock the man's confession carried absolute conviction.
The setting is everything; and I am, perhaps, thankful that my present
circumstances are so beautifully conducive to sanity. No one
appreciates the mystery of life more than I do; but when the mystery
involves such a doubt of oneself, I find it pleasanter to forget.
Naturally, I do not want to believe the story. If I did I should know
myself to be some kind of human horror. And the terror of it all lies
in the fact that I may never know precisely what kind...

Before I went we had eliminated the facile and banal explanation that
the man was mad, and had fallen back upon the two inevitable
alternatives: Crime and Disappointed Love. We were human and romantic,
and we tried desperately hard not to be too obvious.

Once before a man had made the same attempt and had built or tried to
build a house on the Gulland rock; but he had been defeated within a
fortnight, and what was left of his building was taken off the island
and turned into a tin church. It is there still. We all went to
Trevone and ruminated over and round it, perhaps with some faint hope
that one of us might, all-unknowing, have the abilities of a
psychometrist.

Nothing came of that visit but a slight intensification of those
theories that were already becoming a little stale. We compared the
early failure of thirty years ago, the attempt that was baffled, with
the present success. For this new misanthrope had lived on the Gulland
through the whole winter--and still lived. Indeed, the fact of his
presence on that awful lump of rock was now accepted by the country
people; to them he was scarcely a shade madder than the other
visitors; that remunerative, recurrent host that this year broke their
journey to Bedruthan in order to stand on Trevone beach and stare
foolishly at the just visible hut that stuck like a cubical gall on
the landward face of that humped, desolate island.

We all did that; stared at nothing in particular and meditated
enormously; but in what I felt at the time was a wild spirit of
adventure, I went out one night to the point of Gunver Head and saw an
actual light within that distant hut; a patch of golden lichen on the
mother parasite.

Some aspect of humanity I found in that light it was that finally
decided me; that and some quality of sympathy, perhaps with the
hermit--mad, criminal, or lovelorn?--who had found sanctuary from the
pestilent touch of the encroaching crowd. It was, in fact, a wildish
night, and I stayed until the little yellow speck went out, and all I
could see through the murk was an occasional canopy of curving spray
when the elbow of the Trevone Light touched a bare corner of that
black Gulland.

The making of a decision was no difficult matter, but while I waited
for the necessary calm that would permit the occasional boat to land
provisions on the island two miles out from the mainland, I suffered
qualms of doubt and nervousness. And I suffered them alone, for I had
determined that no hint of my adventure should be given to anyone of
our party until the voyage had been made. They might think that I had
gone fishing, an excuse which had all the air of probability given to
it by the coming of the boatman to say that the tide and wind would
serve that morning. I had warned--and bribed--him to give no clue to
my friends of the goal of my proposed excursion.

My nervousness suffered no decrease as we approached the rock and saw
the authentic figure of its single inhabitant awaiting our arrival. I
had some consolation in the thought that he would be in some way
prepared by the sight of our surprisingly passengered boat; but my
mind shuddered at the necessity for using some conventional form of
address if I would make at once my introduction and excuse. The
civilised opening was so hopelessly incapable of expressing my
sympathy, presenting instead so unmistakably, it seemed to me, the
single solution of common curiosity. I wondered that he had not--as
the boatman so clearly assured me was the case--had other prying
visitors before me.

My self-consciousness increased as we came nearer to the single
opening among the spiked rocks, that served as a miniature harbour at
half-tide. I felt that I was being watched by the man who now stood
awaiting us at the water's edge. And suddenly my spirit broke, I
decided that I could not force myself upon him, that I would remain in
the boat while its cargo was delivered, and then return with the
boatmen to Trevone. So resolute was I in this plan that when we had
pulled in to the tiny landing-place, I kept my gaze steadfastly
averted from the man I had come to see, and stared solemnly out at the
humped back of Trevone, seen now in an entirely new aspect.

The sound of the hermit's voice startled me from a perfectly genuine
abstraction.

"Fairly decent weather to-day," he remarked with, I thought, a touch
of nervousness. He had, I remembered, addressed the same remark to the
boatmen, who were now conveying their cargo up to the hut.

I looked up and met his stare. He was, indeed, regarding me with a
curious effect of concentration, as if he were eager to note every
detail of my expression.

"Jolly," I replied. "Been pretty beastly the last day or two. Kept you
rather short, hasn't it?"

"I make allowances for that," he said. "Keep a reserve, you know. Are
you I staying over there?" He nodded towards the bay.

"For a week or two," I told him, and we began to discuss the country
around Harlyn with the eagerness of two strangers who find a common
topic at a dull reception.

"Never been on the Gulland before, I suppose?" he ventured at last,
when the boatmen had discharged their load and were evidently ready to
be off.

"No, no, I haven't," I said, and hesitated. I felt that the invitation
must come from him.

He boggled over it by saying, "Dashed awkward place to get to, and
nothing to see, of course. I don't know if you're at all keen on
fishing?"

"Rather," I said with enthusiasm. "There's deep water on the other
side of the rock," he went on. "In the right weather you get splendid
bass there." He stopped and then added, "It'll be absolutely top hole
for 'em, this afternoon."

"Perhaps I could come back..." I began; but the boatman interrupted
me at once.

"Yew can coom back to-morrow, sure 'nough," he said. "Tide only serves
wance avery twalve hours."

"If you'd care to stay, now..." began the hermit.

"Thanks! it's awfully good of you. I should like to of all things," I
said. I stayed on the clear understanding that the boatmen were to
fetch me the next morning. At first there was really very little that
seemed in any way strange about the man on the Gulland.

His name, he told me, was William Copley, but it appeared that he was
no relation to the Copleys I knew. And if he had shaved he would have
looked a very ordinary type of Englishman roughing it on a holiday.
His age I judged to be between thirty and forty.

Only two things about him struck me as a little queer during our very
successful afternoon's fishing. The first was that intense appraising
stare of his, as if he tried to fathom the very depths of one's being.
The second was an inexplicable devotion to one particular form of
ceremony. As our intimacy grew, he dropped the ordinary formal
politeness of a host; but he insisted always on one observance that I
supposed at first to be the merely conventional business of giving
precedence.

Nothing would induce him to go in front of me. He sent me ahead even
as we explored the little purlieus of his rock--the only level square
yard on the whole island was in the floor of the hut. But presently I
noticed that this peculiarity went still further, and that he would
not turn his back on me for a single moment.

That discovery intrigued one. I still excluded the explanation of
madness--Copley's manner and conversation were so convincingly sane.
But I reverted to and elaborated those other two suggestions that had
been made. I could not avoid the inference that the man must in some
strange way be afraid of me; and I hesitated as to whether he were
flying from some form of justice or from revenge, perhaps a vendetta.
Either theory seemed to account for his intense, ap-praising stare. I
inferred that his longing for companionship had grown so strong that
he had determined to risk the possibility of my being an emissary,
sent by some--to me--exquisitely romantic person or persons who
desired Copley's death. I recalled, and wallowed in, some of the
marvellous imaginings of the novelist. I wondered if I could make
Copley speak by convincing him of my innocent identity. How I thrilled
at the prospect!

But the explanation of it all came without any effort on my part.

He sent me out of the hut while he prepared our supper--quite a
magnificent meal, by the way.

I saw his reason at once; he could not manage all that business of
cooking and laying the table without turning his back on me. One
thing, however, puzzled me a little; he drew down the blind of the
little square window as soon as I had gone outside.

Naturally, I made no demur. I climbed down to the edge of the sea--it
was a glorious evening--and waited until he called me. He stood at the
door of the hut until I was within a few feet of him, and then
retreated into the room and sat down with his back to the wall.

We discussed our afternoon's sport as we had supper, but when we had
finished and our pipes were going, he said, suddenly:

"I don't see why I shouldn't tell you."

Like a fool, I agreed eagerly, when I might so easily have stopped
him...

"It began when I was quite a kid," he said. "My mother found me crying
in the garden; and all I could tell her was that Claude, my elder
brother, looked 'horrid.' I couldn't bear the sight of him for days
afterwards, either; but I was such a perfectly normal child that they
weren't seriously perturbed about this one idiosyncrasy of mine. They
thought that Claude had 'made a face' at me, and frightened me. My
father whacked me for it eventually.

"Perhaps that whacking stuck in my mind. Anyway, I didn't confide my
peculiarity to anyone until I was nearly seventeen. I was ashamed of
it, of course. I am still--in a way.".He stopped and looked down,
pushed his plate away from him, and folded his arms on the table. I
was pining to ask a question, but I was afraid to interrupt. And after
a moment's hesitation he looked up and held my gaze again, but now
without that inquiring look of his.

Rather, he seemed to be looking for sympathy.

"I told my house-master," he said. "He was a splendid chap, and he was
very decent about it; took it all quite seriously and advised me to
consult an oculist, which I did. I went in the holidays with the
pater--I had given him a more reasonable account of my trouble--and he
took me to the best man in London. He was tremendously interested, and
it proves that there must be something in it, that it can't be
imagination, because he really found a defect in my eyes, something
quite new to him, he said. He called it a new form of astigmatism;
but, of course, as he pointed out, no glasses would be any use to me."

"But what...?" I began, unable to keep down my curiosity any
longer.

Copley hesitated, and dropped his eyes. "Astigmatism, you know," he
said, "is a defect--I quote the dictionary, I learned that definition
by heart; I often puzzle over it still--'causing images of lines
having a certain direction to be indistinctly seen, while those of
lines transverse to the former are distinctly seen.' Only mine is
peculiar in the fact that my sight is perfectly normal except when I
look back at anyone over my shoulder." He looked up, almost
pathetically.

I could see that he hoped I might understand without further
explanation.

I had to confess myself utterly mystified. What had this trifling
defect of vision to do with his coming to live on the Gulland, I
wondered.

I frowned my perplexity. "But I don't see..." I said.

He knocked out his pipe and began to scrape the bowl with his pocket-
knife. "Well, mine is a kind of moral astigmatism, too," he said. "At
least, it gives me a kind of moral insight. I'm afraid I must call it
insight. I've proved in some cases that..." He dropped his voice.
He was apparently deeply engrossed in the scraping out of his pipe. He
kept his eyes on it as he continued.

"Normally, you understand, when I look at people straight in the face,
I see them as anybody else sees them. But when I look back at them
over my shoulder I see...oh! I see all their vices and defects.
Their faces remain, in a sense, the same, perfectly recognisable, I
mean, but distorted--beastly...There was my brother Claude--good-
looking chap, he was--but when I saw him...that way...he had a
nose like a parrot, and he looked sort of weakly voracious...and
vicious." He stopped and shuddered slightly, and then added: "And one
knows, now, that he is like that, too. He's just been hammered on the
Stock Exchange. Rotten sort of failure it was..."

"And then Denison, my house-master, you know; such a decent chap. I
never looked at him, that way, until the end of my last term at
school. I had got into the habit, more or less, of never looking over
my shoulder, you see. But I was always getting caught. That was an
instance. I was playing for the School against the Old Boys. Denison
called out, 'Good luck, old chap,' just as I was going in, and I
forgot and looked back at him..."

I waited, breathless, and as he did not go on, I prompted him with
"Was he...'wrong,' too?"

Copley nodded. "Weak, poor devil. His eyes were all right, but they
were fighting his mouth, if you know what I mean. There would have
been an awful scandal at the school there, four years after I left, if
they hadn't hushed it up and got Denison out of the country.

"Then, if you want any more instances, there was the oculist--big,
fine chap, he was. Of course, he made me look at him over my shoulder,
to test me. He asked me what I saw, and I told, more or less. He was
simply livid for a moment. He was a sensualist, you see; and when I
saw him that way he looked like some filthy old hog.

"The thing that really finished me," he went on, after a long
interval, "was the breaking off of my engagement to Helen. We were
frightfully in love with one another, and I told her about my trouble.
She was very sympathetic, and I suppose rather sentimentally romantic,
too. She believed it was some sort of spell that had been put on me. I
think, anyway, she had a theory that if I once saw anybody truly and
ordinarily over my shoulder, I should never have any more trouble--the
spell-would-be-broken sort of thing. And, of course, she wanted to be
the person. I didn't resist her much. I was infatuated, I suppose.
Anyway, I thought she was perfection and that it was simply impossible
that I could find any defect in her. So I agreed, and looked--that
way..."

His voice had fallen to an even note of despondency, as though the
telling of this final tragedy in his life had brought him to the
indifference of despair. "I looked," he continued, "and saw a creature
with no chin and watery, doting eyes; a faithful, slobbery thing--
eugh! I can't...I never spoke to her again...

"That broke me, you know," he said presently. "After that I didn't
care. I used to look at everyone that way, until I had to get away
from humanity. I was living in a world of beasts. Most of them looked
like some beast or bird or other. The strong were vicious and
criminal; and the weak were loathsome. I couldn't stick it. In the
end--I had to come here away from them all."

A thought occurred to me. "Have you ever looked at yourself in the
glass?" I asked.

He nodded. "I'm no better than the rest of them," he said. "That's why
I grew this rotten beard. I hadn't got a looking-glass here."

"And you can't keep a stiff neck, as it were," I asked, "going about
looking humanity straight in the face?"

"The temptation is too strong," Copley said. "And it gets stronger.
Curiosity, partly, I suppose; but partly it's the momentary sense of
superiority it gives you. You see them like that, you know, and forget
how you look yourself. And then after a bit it sickens you."

"You haven't..." I said, and hesitated. I wanted to know and yet
I was horribly afraid. "You haven't," I began again, "er--you
haven't--er--looked at me yet...that way?"

"Not yet," he said.

"Do you suppose..."

"Probably. You look all right, of course. But then so did heaps of the
others."

"You've no idea how I should look to you, that way?"

"Absolutely none. I've been trying to guess, but I can't."

"You wouldn't care...?"

"Not now," he said sharply. "Perhaps, just before you go."

"You feel fairly certain, then...?"

He nodded with disgusting conviction.

I went to bed, wondering whether Helen's theory wasn't a true one; and
if I might not break the spell for poor Copley.

The boatmen came for me soon after eleven next morning.

I had shaken off some of the feeling of superstitious horror that had
held me overnight, and I had not repeated my request to Copley; nor
had he offered to look into the dark places of my soul.

He came down after me to the landing-place and we shook hands warmly,
but he said nothing about my revisiting him.

And then, just as we were putting off, he turned back towards the hut
and looked at me over his shoulder--just one quick glance.

"Wait," I commanded the boatmen, and I stood up and called to him.

"I say, Copley," I shouted.

He turned and looked at me, and I saw that his face was transfigured.
He wore an expression of foolish disgust and loathing. I had seen
something like it on the face of an idiot child who was just going to
be sick.

I dropped down into the boat and turned my back on him.

I wondered then if that was how he had seen himself in the glass.

But since I have only wondered what it was he saw in me...

And I can never go back to ask him.



THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia


