

Project Gutenberg Australia



Title: Atrophy
Author: Edith Wharton
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.:  0200091.txt
Language:   English
Date first posted: February 2002
Date most recently updated: September 2017

This eBook was produced by: Rebecca Trump <r_trump@yahoo.com>
                            Sue Asscher

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to gutenberg.net.au

--------------------------------------------------------------------------



Atrophy
Edith Wharton.




1.

Nora Frenway settled down furtively in her corner of the Pullman and, as
the express plunged out of the Grand Central Station, wondered at herself
for being where she was. The porter came along. "Ticket?" "Westover." She
had instinctively lowered her voice and glanced about her. But neither
the porter nor her nearest neighbours--fortunately none of them known to
her--seemed in the least surprised or interested by the statement that
she was travelling to Westover.

Yet what an earth-shaking announcement it was! Not that she cared, now;
not that anything mattered except the one overwhelming fact which had
convulsed her life, hurled her out of her easy velvet-lined rut, and
flung her thus naked to the public scrutiny.... Cautiously, again, she
glanced about her to make doubly sure that there was no one, absolutely
no one, in the Pullman whom she knew by sight.

Her life had been so carefully guarded, so inwardly conventional in a
world where all the outer conventions were tottering, that no one had
ever known she had a lover. No one--of that she was absolutely sure. All
the circumstances of the case had made it necessary that she should
conceal her real life--her only real life--from everyone about her; from
her half-invalid irascible husband, his prying envious sisters, and the
terrible monumental old chieftainess, her mother-in-law, before whom all
the family quailed and humbugged and fibbed and fawned.

What nonsense to pretend that nowadays, even in big cities, in the
world's greatest social centres, the severe old-fashioned standards had
given place to tolerance, laxity and ease! You took up the morning paper,
and you read of girl bandits, movie-star divorces, "hold-ups" at balls,
murder and suicide and elopement, and a general welter of disjointed
disconnected impulses and appetites; then you turned your eyes onto your
own daily life, and found yourself as cribbed and cabined, as beset by
vigilant family eyes, observant friends, all sorts of embodied standards,
as any white-muslin novel heroine of the 'sixties!

In a different way, of course. To the casual eye Mrs. Frenway herself
might have seemed as free as any of the young married women of her group.
Poker playing, smoking, cocktail drinking, dancing, painting, short
skirts, bobbed hair and the rest--when had these been denied to her? If
by any outward sign she had differed too markedly from her
kind--lengthened her skirts, refused to play for money, let her hair
grow, or ceased to make-up--her husband would have been the first to
notice it, and to say: "Are you ill? What's the matter? How queer you
look! What's the sense of making yourself conspicuous?" For he and his
kind had adopted all the old inhibitions and sanctions, blindly
transferring them to a new ritual, as the receptive Romans did when
strange gods were brought into their temples...

The train had escaped from the ugly fringes of the city, and the soft
spring landscape was gliding past her: glimpses of green lawns, budding
hedges, pretty irregular roofs, and miles and miles of alluring tarred
roads slipping away into mystery. How often she had dreamed of dashing
off down an unknown road with Christopher!

Not that she was a woman to be awed by the conventions. She knew she
wasn't. She had always taken their measure, smiled at them--and
conformed. On account of poor George Frenway, to begin with. Her husband,
in a sense, was a man to be pitied; his weak health, his bad temper, his
unsatisfied vanity, all made him a rather forlornly comic figure. But it
was chiefly on account of the two children that she had always resisted
the temptation to do anything reckless. The least self-betrayal would
have been the end of everything. Too many eyes were watching her, and her
husband's family was so strong, so united--when there was anybody for
them to hate--and at all times so influential, that she would have been
defeated at every point, and her husband would have kept the children.

At the mere thought she felt herself on the brink of an abyss. "The
children are my religion," she had once said to herself; and she had no
other.

Yet here she was on her way to Westover.... Oh, what did it matter now?
That was the worst of it--it was too late for anything between her and
Christopher to matter! She was sure he was dying. The way in which his
cousin, Gladys Brincker, had blurted it out the day before at Kate
Salmer's dance: "You didn't know--poor Kit? Thought you and he were such
pals! Yes, awfully bad, I'm afraid. Return of the old trouble! I know
there've been two consultations--they had Knowlton down. They say there's
not much hope; and nobody but that forlorn frightened Jane mounting
guard..."

Poor Christopher! His sister Jane Aldis, Nora suspected, forlorn and
frightened as she was, had played in his life a part nearly as dominant
as Frenway and the children in Nora's. Loyally, Christopher always
pretended that she didn't; talked of her indulgently as "poor Jenny". But
didn't she, Nora, always think of her husband as "poor George"? Jane
Aldis, of course, was much less self-assertive, less demanding, than
George Frenway; but perhaps for that very reason she would appeal all the
more to a man's compassion. And somehow, under her unobtrusive air, Nora
had--on the rare occasions when they met--imagined that Miss Aldis was
watching and drawing her inferences. But then Nora always felt, where
Christopher was concerned, as if her breast were a pane of glass through
which her trembling palpitating heart could be seen as plainly as holy
viscera in a reliquary. Her sober after-thought was that Jane Aldis was
just a dowdy self-effacing old maid whose life was filled to the brim by
looking over the Westover place for her brother, and seeing that the
fires were lit and the rooms full of flowers when he brought down his
friends for a week-end.

Ah, how often he had said to Nora: "If I could have you to myself for a
week-end at Westover"--quite as if it were the easiest thing imaginable,
as far as his arrangements were concerned! And they had even pretended to
discuss how it could be done. But somehow she fancied he said it because
he knew that the plan, for her, was about as feasible as a week-end in
the moon. And in reality her only visits to Westover had been made in the
company of her husband, and that of other friends, two or three times, at
the beginning.... For after that she wouldn't. It was three years now
since she had been there.

Gladys Brincker, in speaking of Christopher's illness, had looked at Nora
queerly, as though suspecting something. But no--what nonsense! No one
had ever suspected Nora Frenway. Didn't she know what her friends said of
her? "Nora? No more temperament than a lamp-post. Always buried in her
books.... Never very attractive to men, in spite of her looks." Hadn't
she said that of other women, who perhaps, in secret, like herself...?

The train was slowing down as it approached a station. She sat up with a
jerk and looked at her wrist-watch. It was half-past two, the station was
Ockham; the next would be Westover. In less than an hour she would be
under his roof, Jane Aldis would be receiving her in that low panelled
room full of books, and she would be saying--what would she be saying?

She had gone over their conversation so often that she knew not only her
own part in it but Miss Aldis's by heart. The first moments would of
course be painful, difficult; but then a great wave of emotion, breaking
down the barriers between the two anxious women, would fling them
together. She wouldn't have to say much, to explain; Miss Aldis would
just take her by the hand and lead her upstairs to the room.

That room! She shut her eyes, and remembered other rooms where she and he
had been together in their joy and their strength.... No, not that; she
must not think of that now. For the man she had met in those other rooms
was dying; the man she was going to was some one so different from that
other man that is was like a profanation to associate their images....
And yet the man she was going to was her own Christopher, the one who had
lived in her soul; and how his soul must be needing hers, now that it
hung alone on the dark brink! As if anything else mattered at such a
moment! She neither thought nor cared what Jane Aldis might say or
suspect; she wouldn't have cared if the Pullman had been full of prying
acquaintances, or if George and all George's family had got in at that
last station.

She wouldn't have cared a fig for any of them. Yet at the same moment she
remembered having felt glad that her old governess, whom she used to go
and see twice a year, lived at Ockham--so that if George did begin to ask
questions, she could always say: "Yes, I went to see poor old Fraulein;
she's absolutely crippled now. I shall have to get her a Bath chair.
Could you get me a catalogue of prices?" There wasn't a precaution she
hadn't thought of--and now she was ready to scatter them all to the
winds...

Westover--"Junction!"

She started up and pushed her way out of the train. All the people seemed
to be obstructing her, putting bags and suit-cases in her way. And the
express stopped for only two minutes. Suppose she should be carried on to
Albany?

Westover Junction was a growing place, and she was fairly sure there
would be a taxi at the station. There was one--she just managed to get to
it ahead of a travelling man with a sample case and a new straw hat. As
she opened the door a smell of damp hay and bad tobacco greeted her. She
sprang in and gasped: "To Oakfield. You know? Mr. Aldis's place near
Westover."


2.

It began exactly as she had expected. A surprised parlour maid--why
surprised?--showed her into the low panelled room that was so full of his
presence, his books, his pipes, his terrier dozing on the shabby rug. The
parlour maid said she would go and see if Miss Aldis could come down.
Nora wanted to ask if she were with her brother--and how he was. But she
found herself unable to speak the words. She was afraid her voice might
tremble. And why should she question the parlour maid, when in a moment,
she hoped, she was to see Miss Aldis?

The woman moved away with a hushed step--the step which denotes illness
in the house. She did not immediately return, and the interval of waiting
in that room, so strange yet so intimately known, was a new torture to
Nora. It was unlike anything she had imagined. The writing table with his
scattered pens and letters was more than she could bear. His dog looked
at her amicably from the hearth, but made no advances; and though she
longed to stroke him, to let her hand rest where Christopher's had
rested, she dared not for fear he should bark and disturb the peculiar
hush of that dumb watchful house. She stood in the window and looked out
at the budding shrubs and the bulbs pushing up through the swollen earth.

"This way, please."

Her heart gave a plunge. Was the woman actually taking her upstairs to
his room? Her eyes filled, she felt herself swept forward on a great wave
of passion and anguish.... But she was only being led across the hall
into a stiff lifeless drawing-room--the kind that bachelors get an
upholsterer to do for them, and then turn their backs on forever. The
chairs and sofas looked at her with an undisguised hostility, and then
resumed the moping expression common to furniture in unfrequented rooms.
Even the spring sun slanting in through the windows on the pale marquetry
of a useless table seemed to bring no heat or light with it.

The rush of emotion subsided, leaving in Nora a sense of emptiness and
apprehension. Supposing Jane Aldis should look at her with the cold eyes
of this resentful room? She began to wish she had been friendlier and
more cordial to Jane Aldis in the past. In her intense desire to conceal
from everyone the tie between herself and Christopher she had avoided all
show of interest in his family; and perhaps, as she now saw, excited
curiosity by her very affectation of indifference.

No doubt it would have been more politic to establish an intimacy with
Jane Aldis; and today, how much easier and more natural her position
would have been! Instead of groping about--as she was again doing--for an
explanation of her visit, she could have said: "My dear, I came to see if
there was anything in the world I could do to help you."

She heard a hesitating step in the hall--a hushed step like a parlour
maid's--and saw Miss Aldis pause near the half-open door. How old she had
grown since their last meeting! Her hair, untidily pinned up, was gray
and lanky. Her eyelids, always reddish, were swollen and heavy, her face
sallow with anxiety and fatigue. It was odd to have feared so defenseless
an adversary. Nora, for an instant, had the impression that Miss Aldis
had wavered in the hall to catch a glimpse of her, take the measure of
the situation. But perhaps she had only stopped to push back a strand of
hair as she passed in front of a mirror.

"Mrs. Frenway--how good of you!" She spoke in a cool detached voice, as
if her real self were elsewhere and she were simply an automaton wound up
to repeat the familiar forms of hospitality. "Do sit down," she said.

She pushed forward one of the sulky arm-chairs, and Nora seated herself
stiffly, her hand-bag clutched on her knee, in the self-conscious
attitude of a country caller.

"I came----"

"So good of you," Miss Aldis repeated. "I had no idea you were in this
part of the world. Not the slightest."

Was it a lead she was giving? Or did she know everything, and wish to
extend to her visitor the decent shelter of a pretext? Or was she really
so stupid--

"You're staying with the Brinckers, I suppose. Or the Northrups? I
remember the last time you came to lunch here you motored over with Mr.
Frenway from the Northrups'. That must have been two years ago, wasn't
it?" She put the question with an almost sprightly show of interest.

"No--three years," said Nora mechanically.

"Was it? As long ago as that? Yes--you're right. That was the year we
moved the big fern-leaved beech. I remember Mr. Frenway was interested in
tree moving, and I took him out to show him where the tree had come from.
He IS interested in tree moving, isn't he?"

"Oh, yes; very much."

"We had those wonderful experts down to do it. 'Tree doctors,' they call
themselves. They have special appliances, you know. The tree is growing
better than it did before they moved it. But I suppose you've done a
great deal of transplanting on Long Island."

"Yes. My husband does a good deal of transplanting."

"So you've come over from the Northrups'? I didn't even know they were
down at Maybrook yet. I see so few people."

"No; not from the Northrups'."

"Oh--the Brinckers'? Hal Brincker was here yesterday, but he didn't tell
me you were staying there."

Nora hesitated. "No. The fact is, I have an old governess who lives at
Ockham. I go to see her sometimes. And so I came on to Westover----" She
paused, and Miss Aldis interrogated her brightly: "Yes?" as if prompting
her in a lesson she was repeating.

"Because I saw Gladys Brincker the other day, and she told me that your
brother was ill."

"Oh." Miss Aldis gave the syllable its full weight, and set a full stop
after it. Her eyebrows went up, as if in a faint surprise. The silent
room seemed to close in on the two speakers, listening. A resuscitated
fly buzzed against the sunny window pane. "Yes; he's ill," she conceded
at length.

"I'm so sorry; I...he has been...such a friend of ours...so long ..."

"Yes; I've often heard him speak of you and Mr. Frenway." Another full
stop sealed this announcement. ("No, she knows nothing," Nora thought.)
"I remember his telling me that he thought a great deal of Mr. Frenway's
advice about moving trees. But then you see our soil is so different from
yours. I suppose Mr. Frenway has had your soil analyzed?"

"Yes; I think he has."

"Christopher's always been a great gardener."

"I hope he's not--not very ill? Gladys seemed to be afraid----"

"Illness is always something to be afraid of, isn't it?"

"But you're not--I mean, not anxious...not seriously?"

"It's so kind of you to ask. The doctors seem to think there's no
particular change since yesterday."

"And yesterday?"

"Well, yesterday they seemed to think there might be."

"A change, you mean?"

"Well, yes."

"A change--I hope for the better?"

"They said they weren't sure; they couldn't say."

The fly's buzzing had become so insistent in the still room that it
seemed to be going on inside of Nora's head, and in the confusion of
sound she found it more and more difficult to regain a lead in the
conversation. And the minutes were slipping by, and upstairs the man she
loved was lying. It was absurd and lamentable to make a pretense of
keeping up this twaddle. She would cut through it, no matter how.

"I suppose you've had--a consultation?"

"Oh, yes; Dr. Knowlton's been down twice."

"And what does he----"

"Well; he seems to agree with the others."

There was another pause, and then Miss Aldis glanced out of the window.
"Why, who's that driving up?" she enquired. "Oh, it's your taxi, I
suppose, coming up the drive."

"Yes, I got out at the gate." She dared not add: "For fear the noise
might disturb him."

"I hope you had no difficulty in finding a taxi at the Junction?"

"Oh, no; I had no difficulty."

"I think it was so kind of you to come--not even knowing whether you'd
find a carriage to bring you out all this way. And I know how busy you
are. There's always so much going on in town, isn't there, even at this
time of year?"

"Yes; I suppose so. But your brother----"

"Oh, of course my brother won't be up to any sort of gaiety; not for a
long time."

"A long time; no. But you do hope----"

"I think everybody about a sick bed ought to hope, don't you?"

"Yes; but I mean----"

Nora stood up suddenly, her brain whirling. Was it possible that she and
that woman had sat thus facing each other for half an hour, piling up
this conversational rubbish, while upstairs, out of sight, the truth, the
meaning of their two lives hung on the frail thread of one man's
intermittent pulse? She could not imagine why she felt so powerless and
baffled. What had a woman who was young and handsome and beloved to fear
from a dowdy and insignificant old maid? Why, the antagonism that these
very graces and superiorities would create in the other's breast,
especially if she knew they were all spent in charming the being on whom
her life depended. Weak in herself, but powerful from her circumstances,
she stood at bay on the ruins of all that Nora had ever loved. "How she
must hate me--and I never thought of it," mused Nora, who had imagined
that she had thought of everything where her relation to her lover was
concerned. Well, it was too late now to remedy her omission; but at least
she must assert herself, must say something to save the precious minutes
that remained and break through the stifling web of platitudes which her
enemy's tremulous hand was weaving around her.

"Miss Aldis--I must tell you--I came to see----"

"How he was? So very friendly of you. He would appreciate it, I know.
Christopher is so devoted to his friends."

"But you'll--you'll tell him that I----"

"Of course. That you came on purpose to ask about him. As soon as he's a
little bit stronger."

"But I mean--now?"

"Tell him now that you called to enquire? How good of you to think of
that too! Perhaps tomorrow morning, if he's feeling a little bit
brighter...."

Nora felt her lips drying as if a hot wind had parched them. They would
hardly move. "But now--now--today." Her voice sank to a whisper as she
added: "Isn't he conscious?"

"Oh, yes; he's conscious; he's perfectly conscious." Miss Aldis
emphasized this with another of her long pauses. "He shall certainly be
told that you called." Suddenly she too got up from her seat and moved
toward the window. "I must seem dreadfully inhospitable, not even
offering you a cup of tea. But the fact is, perhaps I ought to tell
you--if you're thinking of getting back to Ockham this afternoon there's
only one train that stops at the Junction after three o'clock." She
pulled out an old-fashioned enamelled watch with a wreath of roses about
the dial, and turned almost apologetically to Mrs. Frenway. "You ought to
be at the station by four o'clock at the latest; and with one of those
old Junction taxis.... I'm so sorry; I know I must appear to be driving
you away." A wan smile drew up her pale lips.

Nora knew just how long the drive from Westover Junction had taken, and
understood that she was being delicately dismissed. Dismissed from
life--from hope--even from the dear anguish of filling her eyes for the
last time with the face which was the one face in the world to her! ("But
then she does know everything," she thought.)

"I mustn't make you miss your train, you know."

"Miss Aldis, is he--has he seen any one?" Nora hazarded in a painful
whisper.

"Seen any one? Well, there've been all the doctors--five of them! And
then the nurses. Oh, but you mean friends, of course. Naturally." She
seemed to reflect. "Hal Brincker, yes; he saw our cousin Hal
yesterday--but not for very long."

Hal Brincker! Nora knew what Christopher thought of his Brincker
cousins--blighting bores, one and all of them, he always said. And in the
extremity of his illness the one person privileged to see him had
been--Hal Brincker! Nora's eyes filled; she had to turn them away for a
moment from Miss Aldis's timid inexorable face.

"But today?" she finally brought out.

"No. Today he hasn't seen any one; not yet." The two women stood and
looked at each other; then Miss Aldis glanced uncertainly about the room.
"But couldn't I--Yes, I ought at least to have asked if you won't have a
cup of tea. So stupid of me! There might still be time. I never take tea
myself." Once more she referred anxiously to her watch. "The water is
sure to be boiling, because the nurses' tea is just being taken up. If
you'll excuse me a moment I'll go and see."

"Oh, no, no!" Nora drew in a quick sob. "How can you?... I mean, I don't
want any..."

Miss Aldis looked relieved. "Then I shall be quite sure that you won't
reach the station too late." She waited again, and then held out a long
stony hand. "So kind--I shall never forget your kindness. Coming all this
way, when you might so easily have telephoned from town. Do please tell
Mr. Frenway how I appreciated it. You will remember to tell him, won't
you? He sent me such an interesting collection of pamphlets about tree
moving. I should like him to know how much I feel his kindness in letting
you come." She paused again, and pulled in her lips so that they became a
narrow thread, a mere line drawn across her face by a ruler. "But, no; I
won't trouble you; I'll write to thank him myself." Her hand ran out to
an electric bell on the nearest table. It shrilled through the silence,
and the parlour maid appeared with a stage-like promptness.

"The taxi, please? Mrs. Frenway's taxi."

The room became silent again. Nora thought: "Yes; she knows everything."
Miss Aldis peeped for the third time at her watch, and then uttered a
slight unmeaning laugh. The blue-bottle banged against the window, and
once more it seemed to Nora that is sonorities were reverberating inside
her head. They were deafeningly mingled there with the explosion of the
taxi's reluctant starting-up and its convulsed halt at the front door.
The driver sounded his horn as if to summon her.

"He's afraid too that you'll be late!" Miss Aldis smiled.

The smooth slippery floor of the hall seemed to Nora to extend away in
front of her for miles. At its far end she saw a little tunnel of light,
a miniature maid, a toy taxi. Somehow she managed to travel the distance
that separated her from them, though her bones ached with weariness, and
at every step she seemed to be lifting a leaden weight. The taxi was
close to her now, its door open, she was getting in. The same smell of
damp hay and bad tobacco greeted her. She saw her hostess standing on the
threshold. "To the Junction, driver--back to the Junction," she heard
Miss Aldis say. The taxi began to roll toward the gate. As it moved away
Nora heard Miss Aldis calling: "I'll be sure to write and thank Mr.
Frenway."



The End




Project Gutenberg Australia


