
Project Gutenberg Australia



A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook

Title:      The Adventures of Tommy
Author:     H.G. Wells
eBook No.:  0400841.txt
Edition:    1
Language:   English
Character set encoding:     Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted:          December 2004
Date most recently updated: March 2008


Etext prepared by "Teary Eyes" Anderson

Production Notes:

I've tried to keep the etext and html version of this book as close to the 
book as possible, all words are, as they appear in the book, I've used the 
hand written version as the model, and only added or changed the punctuation 
to help it fit the etext, html and so it can easily be made into a a voice 
speech program like MS Ereader, a free converter for such a program can be 
found at 
http://www.overdrive.com/readerworks/downloads/default.asp?Download=RWSTAN 
and a player can be found at the Microsoft page 
http://www.microsoft.com/reader/downloads/pc.asp you need both the setup and 
the text speech programs to listen to the book on your computer.

My friend has a room mate that is blind and I feel the blind people of the 
world should also be able to enjoy these books.

The next etext project I've been working on is the
Short Stories of H.G. Wells, text for it is complete but I still need to 
spell check it and make it more text speach friendly, so it dosen't say  
"exclamation point" when theres a '!' Hopefuly that'll be avalible soon, 
this is my first etext and that will be my second. Then hopefully Jules 
Verne novels and possibly even some Bram Stoker, I can make into etexts. 
Hope you enjoy!!
  "Teary Eyes" Anderson


Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


Title:      The Adventures of Tommy
Author:     H.G. Wells


The Adventures of Tommy
Written and illustrated by H.G. Wells



Telling all about the Proud Rich Man and about the Present he gave to Tommy.



Respectfully dedicated to

Miss Marjory Hick

by her sincere friend & Admirer
H.G. Wells



There was once a very rich proud man. He was so rich & proud that he wore 
diamonds for buttons & two gold watches jewelled in every hole, and rings-- 
four or five on each finger, & gold lace round his clothes-- he was so rich 
& proud.



And he always went about with a face like this--

Did you ever see such a proud expression?



But pride goeth before a fall,



and one day as he was walking along a cliff, he stepped over & fell into the 
sea--

Splash!

And he would certainly have been drowned, but--



a very nice boy named Tommy (this was not his real name) who happened to be 
fishing for sharks with some bait his grandfather had made for him, saw the 
accident,



& fished him out again & so saved his life.



The rich proud man was very wet and kept sneezing (showing he had caught 
cold) so Tommy (not his real name you know) rowed him home at once & his 
father (who was I fancy a doctor though I am not sure)



hung him over the cloths horse to dry thoroughly and



gave him some nasty medicine & made him all right again.



Now the rich man was very grateful to Tommy for having saved his life, and 
wanted to give him a thousand pounds (£ 1000) he had in his pocket. But 
Tommy had been told never to take money from strangers, and refused this.
"Oh," said the rich man, "I must give you something."

"A good deed is it's own reward." said Tommy.



They talked a long time, and at last Tommy said that if the rich man really 
wanted to make him a present he could get him a pet animal to have for his 
very own. And with that the rich man went away.



But when the rich man went to the animal shop he was much too proud to buy 
Tommy a kitten, or a dog, or a rabbit, or white mice, or a lamb, or pony, or 
a pigeon, or a parrot, or a porcupine, or a gollifer, or a woggle, or any 
ordinary pet animal like that.



He wanted something larger and more expensive. He went to one shop after 
another. One shop was full of monkeys and another of guinea-pigs, but no! 
They were not magnificent enough.
  At one shop was a tiger, but he did not buy that because he doubted if 
Tommy's mother would like him to have such a pet-- mothers are sometimes so 
particular.



And it was only after hunting all day in all the animal shops of London that 
he found at last just the very thing he wanted.
  "Pack it carefully," he said,  "and send it per South Eastern Railway 
carriage paid-- to New Romney, to Master Tommy Bates (This was not his real 
name), enclose my card and send the bill in to me. And before you send him 
off, take him round to the place where they paint letters on people's trunks 
and have a nice large T B painted on both sides of him."

All of which they did accordingly.



They packed the elephant very carefully (you see they have done his trunk 
and tail & feet with straw) and sent him off by South Eastern Express 
delivery as the rich man had ordered. And in less than a month a train 
brought him into New Romney safe and sound; so swift & perfect has the 
railway traffic of our country districts become.



And the proud man got some new feathers for his hat and thought no more of 
the matter.



You may judge how surprised Tommy and his father were when a railway porter 
brought along this beautiful present.



Tommy was delighted and while father signed the porter's book, he unpacked 
the elephant's trunk and gave it some suger & ran for a ladder so that he 
might climb up & pat it.

And he decided, at once that he would call this new pet Augustus, after 
the Roman emperor of that name.



And all that Tommy did with Augustus and all that Augustus did with Tommy 
will perhaps be written someday in another book.



THE END



Project Gutenberg Australia


