

Project Gutenberg Australia



A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook

Title:      Generals Die in Bed (1928)
Author:     Charles Yale Harrison
eBook No.:  0500061.txt
Edition:    1
Language:   English
Character set encoding:     Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted:          January 2005
Date most recently updated: January 2005

This eBook was produced by: Don Lainson dlainson@sympatico.ca

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


Title:      Generals Die in Bed (1928)
Author:     Charles Yale Harrison





To the bewildered youths--British, Australian, Canadian, and German--
who were killed in that wood a few miles beyond Amiens on
August 8, 1918,

I DEDICATE THIS BOOK




Contents

1 Recruits

2 In the Trenches

3 Out on Rest

4 Back to the Round

5 On Rest Again

6 Bombardment

7 Béthune

8 London

9 Over the Top

10 An Interlude

11 Arras

12 Vengeance




Chapter 1

Recruits


It is after midnight on payday.  Some of the recruits are beginning
to dribble into the barracks bunk room after a night's carousal
down the line.

"Down the line" in Montreal is Cadieux Street, St. Elizabeth
Street, La Gauchetière Street, Vitre Street, Craig Street--a square
mile of dilapidated, squalid red brick houses with red lights
shining through the transoms, flooding the sidewalks with an
inviting, warm glow.  The houses are known by their numbers, 169 or
72 or 184.

Some of us are lying in our bunks, uncovered, showing our heavy
grey woolen underwear--regulation Army issue.

The heavy odour of stale booze and women is in the air.  A few
jaundiced electric lights burn here and there in the barn-like bunk
room although it is long after "lights out".

In the bunk next to mine lies Anderson, a middle-aged, slightly
bald man.  He comes from somewhere in the backwoods of northern
Ontario and enlisted a few weeks ago.  He was a Methodist lay
preacher in civilian life.  He is reading his bible.  The
roistering arrivals annoy him.  The conversation is shouted across
the bunk room:

"-- -- 'three bucks?' I says.  'What the hell!  D'yuh know there's
a war on?  I don't wantta buy yuh,' I says, 'I only want yuh for
about twenty minutes.'"

There is a roar of laughter.

"-- -- 'I'm thirsty,' I says.  'Where's the water?'  When she's
gone I dips into her pocketbook and sneaks me two bucks."

A skeptical silence greets this.

"-- -- yeah, that's what you wish had happened."

"Ask Brownie, he heard her bellyachin'--dincha, Brownie?"

A singing, drunken trio bursts through the door of the bunk room
and for a moment drowns out the controversy.

A young lad, not more than seventeen, staggers to the centre of the
room and retches into the slop-can.

Obscene roars from the bunks.

The boy sways.

"Hold it, Billy, hold it."

"Missed it, by God!"

A howl of delight.

The boy staggers back to his bunk.  His face is a greenish yellow
under the dim lights.

In the far corner of the dormitory some of the boys begin to sing a
war song.  They sing with a mock pathos.


     I don't want to die, I don't want to die,
     The bullets they whistle, the cannons they roar,
     I don't want to go up the line any more.
     Take me over the sea, where Heinie he can't get at me;
     Oh, my, I'm too young to die,
     I want to go home.


Catcalls and hootings greet the end of the song.  There is a
silence and then the desultory conversation is resumed.  The
remarks are addressed to no one in particular.  They are hurled
into the centre of the room and he who wills may reply.

"-- -- hey, lissen, fellers, don't none of you go down to 184 any
more; they threw one of our men out tonight."

"Sure, we'll bust her joint up."

I look at Anderson.  His forehead is drawn into furrows.  He
frowns.  Little beads of perspiration stand out on his red face.
The room is fouled with the odours of dissipation.  He waits
cautiously for a lull in the conversation.  With a spring he jumps
into the middle of the room, the seat of the underwear which is too
big for him hanging comically in his rear.  In an evangelical voice
he cries:

"Men, do you know you're sinning in the eyes of the Lord?"

A salvo of oaths greets him.

"Shut up."

"Go to hell."

"Take a jump in the lake."

He is undeterred.  He continues:

"Some of you men would put your bodies where I wouldn't put my
swagger stick."

"Shut up, sky pilot."

"It's good for pimples."

He stands on the bare floor facing the torrent of ribaldry.  His
long face is set.  His voice sounds like an insistent piccolo above
the braying of trombones.

"Well, anyway, God didn't make your bodies for THAT."

He goes back to his bed.

The orderly sergeant crashes through the door and faces us
menacingly.

The room is quiet.

                           * * * *

Our train is to leave Bonaventure Station at eight.  At four the
officers try to get the men in shape.  More than half the battalion
is drunk.  Pails of black coffee are brought around.  Some of the
bad ones have buckets of cold water sluiced over them.

It takes an hour to line the men up for parade outside the
barracks.  Men are hauled out of their bunks and strapped into
their equipment.  They stare vacantly into the faces of those who
jostle them.

Outside in the streets we hear the sounds of celebration.

Fireworks are being exploded in our honour.

The drunks are shoved into position.

The officers take their places.

The band strikes up and we march and stagger from the parade square
into the street.

Outside a mob cheers and roars.

Women wave their handkerchiefs.

When we come to the corner of St. Catherine and Windsor streets a
salvo of fireworks bursts over the marching column.  It letters the
night in red, white, and blue characters.  The pale faces of the
swaying men shine under the sputtering lights.  Those of us who are
sober steady our drunken comrades.

Flowers are tossed into the marching ranks.

Sleek men standing on the broad wide steps of the Windsor Hotel
throw packages of cigarettes at us.  Drunken, spiked heels crush
roses and cigarettes underfoot.

The city has been celebrating the departure of the battalion.  All
day long the military police had been rounding up our men in
saloons, in brothels.  We are heroes, and the women are hysterical
now that we are leaving.  They scream at us:

"Goodbye and good luck, boy-y-y-ys."

They break our ranks and kiss the heavily laden boys.  A befurred
young woman puts her soft arm around my neck and kisses me.  She
smells of perfume.  After the tense excitement of the day it is
delightful.  She turns her face to me and laughs.  Her eyes are
soft.  She has been drinking a little.  Her fair hair shines from
under a black fur toque.  I feel lonely.  I do not want to go to
war.  She marches along by my side.  The battalion is no longer
marching.  It straggles, disorganised, down the street leading to
the station.

I am only eighteen and I have not had any experiences with women
like this.  I like this girl's brazenness.

"Kiss me, honey," she commands.  I obey.  I like all this confusion
now.  War--heroes--music--the fireworks--this girl's kiss.  Nobody
notices us.  I hang on to her soft furry arm.  I cling to it as the
station looms at the bottom of the street.

She is the last link between what I am leaving and the war.  In a
few minutes she will be gone.  I am afraid now.  I forget all my
fine heroic phrases.  I do not want to wear these dreadfully heavy
boots, nor carry this leaden pack.  I want to fling them away and
stay with this fair girl who smells faintly of perfume.  I grip her
arm tightly.  I think I could slip away unseen with her.  We could
run through the crowd, far away somewhere.  I remember the taunting
song, "Oh, my, I'm too young to die."  I am hanging on to her arm.

"Hey, soldier boy, you're hurting my arm."

We are at the station.  We are hustled inside.  We stagger into the
trains.  We drop into seats.  We wait, for hours, it seems.  The
train does not move.  The singing and cheering outside dies down.
In a little while the station is deserted.  Only a few lonely
baggage men and porters move here and there.  At last the train
slowly begins to move . . .

The boys lie like sacks of potatoes in the red plush-covered seats.
Some of us are green under the gills.  White-faced, we reel to the
toilets.  The floor is slimy and wet.



Chapter 2

In the Trenches


We leave the piles of rubble that was once a little Flemish peasant
town and wind our way, in Indian file, up through the muddy
communication trench.  In the dark we stumble against the sides of
the trench and tear our hands and clothing on the bits of embedded
barbed wire that runs through the earth here as though it were a
geological deposit.

Fry, who is suffering with his feet, keeps slipping into holes and
crawling out, all the way up.  I can hear him coughing and panting
behind me.

I hear him slither into a water-filled hole.  It has a green scum
on it.  Brown and I fish him out.

"I can't go any farther," he wheezes.  "Let me lie here, I'll come
on later."

We block the narrow trench and the oncoming men stumble on us,
banging their equipment and mess-tins on the sides of the ditch.
Some trip over us.  They curse under their breaths.

Our captain, Clark, pushes his way through the mess.  He is an
Imperial, an Englishman, and glories in his authority.

"So it's you again," he shouts.  "Come on, get up.  Cold feet, eh,
getting near the line?"

Fry mumbles something indistinctly.  I, too, offer an explanation.
Clark ignores me.

"Get up, you're holding up the line," he says to Fry.

Fry does not move.

"No wonder we're losing the bloody war," Clark says loudly.  The
men standing nearby laugh.  Encouraged by his success, the captain
continues:

"Here, sergeant, stick a bayonet up his behind--that'll make him
move."  A few of us help Fry to his feet, and somehow we manage to
keep him going.

We proceed cautiously, heeding the warnings of those ahead of us.
At last we reach our positions.

                           * * * *

It is midnight when we arrive at our positions.  The men we are
relieving give us a few instructions and leave quickly, glad to get
out.

It is September and the night is warm.  Not a sound disturbs the
quiet.  Somewhere away far to our right we hear the faint sound of
continuous thunder.  The exertion of the trip up the line has made
us sweaty and tired.  We slip most of our accoutrements off and
lean against the parados.  We have been warned that the enemy is
but a few hundred yards off, so we speak in whispers.  It is
perfectly still.  I remember nights like this in the Laurentians.
The harvest moon rides overhead.

Our sergeant, Johnson, appears around the corner of the bay,
stealthily like a ghost.  He gives us instructions:

"One man up on sentry duty!  Keep your gun covered with the rubber
sheet!  No smoking!"

He hurries on to the next bay.  Fry mounts the step and peers into
No Man's Land.  He is rested now and says that if he can only get a
good pair of boots he will be happy.  He has taken his boots off
and stands in his stockinged feet.  He shows us where his heel is
cut.  His boots do not fit.  The sock is wet with blood.  He wants
to take his turn at sentry duty first so that he can rest later on.
We agree.

Cleary and I sit on the firing-step and talk quietly.

"So this is war."

"Quiet."

"Yes, just like the country back home, eh?"

We talk of the trench; how we can make it more comfortable.

We light cigarettes against orders and cup our hands around them to
hide the glow.  We sit thinking.  Fry stands motionless with his
steel helmet shoved down almost over his eyes.  He leans against
the parapet motionless.  There is a quiet dignity about his
posture.  I remember what we were told at the base about falling
asleep on sentry duty.  I nudge his leg.  He grunts.

"Asleep?" I whisper.

"No," he answers, "I'm all right."

"What do you see?"

"Nothing.  Wire and posts."

"Tired?"

"I'm all right."

The sergeant reappears after a while.  We squinch our cigarettes.

"Everything OK here?"

I nod.

"Look out over there.  They got the range on us.  Watch out."

We light another cigarette.  We continue our aimless talk.

"I wonder what St. Catherine Street looks like--"

"Same old thing, I suppose--stores, whores, theatres--"

"Like to be there just the same--"

"Me too."

We sit and puff our fags for half a minute or so.

I try to imagine what Montreal looks like.  The images are murky.
All that is unreality.  The trench, Cleary, Fry, the moon overhead--
this is real.

In his corner of the bay Fry is beginning to move from one foot to
another.  It is time to relieve him.  He steps down and I take his
place.  I look into the wilderness of posts and wire in front of
me.

After a while my eyes begin to water.  I see the whole army of wire
posts begin to move like a silent host towards me.

I blink my eyes and they halt.

I doze a little and come to with a jerk.

So this is war, I say to myself again for the hundredth time.  Down
on the firing-step the boys are sitting like dead men.  The thunder
to the right has died down.  There is absolutely no sound.

I try to imagine how an action would start.  I try to fancy the
preliminary bombardment.  I remember all the precautions one has to
take to protect one's life.  Fall flat on your belly, we had been
told time and time again.  The shriek of the shell, the instructor
in trench warfare said, was no warning because the shell travelled
faster than its sound.  First, he had said, came the explosion of
the shell--then came the shriek and then you hear the firing of the
gun . . .

From the stories I heard from veterans and from newspaper reports I
conjure up a picture of an imaginary action.  I see myself getting
the Lewis gun in position.  I see it spurting darts of flame into
the night.  I hear the roar of battle.  I feel elated.  Then I try
to fancy the horrors of the battle.  I see Cleary, Fry, and Brown
stretched out on the firing-step.  They are stiff and their faces
are white and set in the stillness of death.  Only I remain alive.

An inaudible movement in front of me pulls me out of the dream.  I
look down and see Fry massaging his feet.  All is still.  The moon
sets slowly and everything becomes dark.

The sergeant comes into the bay again and whispers to me:

"Keep your eyes open now--they might come over on a raid now that
it's dark.  The wire's cut over there--"  He points a little to my
right.

I stand staring into the darkness.  Everything moves rapidly again
as I stare.  I look away for a moment and the illusion ceases.

Something leaps towards my face.

I jerk back, afraid.

Instinctively I feel for my rifle in the corner of the bay.

It is a rat.

It is as large as a tomcat.  It is three feet away from my face and
it looks steadily at me with its two staring, beady eyes.  It is
fat.  Its long tapering tail curves away from its padded
hindquarters.  There is still a little light from the stars and
this light shines faintly on its sleek skin.  With a darting
movement it disappears.  I remember with a cold feeling that it was
fat, and why.

Cleary taps my shoulder.  It is time to be relieved.

                           * * * *

Over in the German lines I hear quick, sharp reports.  Then the red-
tailed comets of the minenwerfer sail high in the air, making
parabolas of red light as they come towards us.  They look pretty,
like the fireworks when we left Montreal.  The sergeant rushes into
the bay of the trench, breathless.  "Minnies," he shouts, and
dashes on.

In that instant there is a terrific roar directly behind us.

The night whistles and flashes red.

The trench rocks and sways.

Mud and earth leap into the air, come down upon us in heaps.

We throw ourselves upon our faces, clawing our nails into the soft
earth in the bottom of the trench.

Another!

This one crashes to splinters about twenty feet in front of the
bay.

Part of the parapet caves in.

We try to burrow into the ground like frightened rats.

The shattering explosions splinter the air in a million fragments.
I taste salty liquid on my lips.  My nose is bleeding from the
force of the detonations.

SOS flares go up along our front calling for help from our
artillery.  The signals sail into the air and explode, giving forth
showers of red, white, and blue lights held aloft by a silken
parachute.

The sky is lit by hundreds of fancy fireworks like a night
carnival.

The air shrieks and catcalls.

Still they come.

I am terrified.  I hug the earth, digging my fingers into every
crevice, every hole.

A blinding' flash and an exploding howl a few feet in front of the
trench.

My bowels liquefy.

Acrid smoke bites the throat, parches the mouth.  I am beyond mere
fright.  I am frozen with an insane fear that keeps me cowering in
the bottom of the trench.  I lie flat on my belly, waiting . . .

Suddenly it stops.

The fire lifts and passes over us to the trenches in the rear.

We lie still, unable to move.  Fear has robbed us of the power to
act.  I hear Fry whimpering near me.  I crawl over to him with
great effort.  He is half covered with earth and debris.  We begin
to dig him out.

To our right they have started to shell the front lines.  It is
about half a mile away.  We do not care.  WE are safe.

Without warning it starts again.

The air screams and howls like an insane woman.

We are getting it in earnest now.  Again we throw ourselves face
downward on the bottom of the trench and grovel like savages before
this demoniac frenzy.

The concussion of the explosions batters against us.

I am knocked breathless.

I recover and hear the roar of the bombardment.

It screams and rages and boils like an angry sea.  I feel a prickly
sensation behind my eyeballs.

A shell lands with a monster shriek in the next bay.  The
concussion rolls me over on my back.  I see the stars shining
serenely above us.  Another lands in the same place.  Suddenly the
stars revolve.  I land on my shoulder.  I have been tossed into the
air.

I begin to pray.

"God--God--please . . ."

I remember that I do not believe in God.  Insane thoughts race
through my brain.  I want to catch hold of something, something
that will explain this mad fury, this maniacal congealed hatred
that pours down on our heads.  I can find nothing to console me,
nothing to appease my terror.  I know that hundreds of men are
standing a mile or two from me pulling gun lanyards, blowing us to
smithereens.  I know that and nothing else.

I begin to cough.  The smoke is thick.  It rolls in heavy clouds
over the trench, blurring the stabbing lights of the explosions.

A shell bursts near the parapet.

Fragments smack the sandbags like a merciless shower of steel hail.

A piece of mud flies into my mouth.  It is cool and refreshing.  It
tastes earthy.  Suddenly it stops again.

I bury my face in the cool, damp earth.  I want to weep.  But I am
too weak and shaken for tears.

We lie still, waiting . . .

                           * * * *

We do not know what day it is.  We have lost count.  It makes no
difference whether it is Sunday or Monday.  It is merely another
day--a day on which one may die.

The shelling a few nights ago smashed our section of the trench.
We built it up again and the next night another shell demolishes
it.  We are now exposed to rifle fire on our left flank.  There are
snipers in the woods about half a mile away.  All day long we have
to crawl on our bellies.  Brownie straightened up for a moment when
he was going to the latrine yesterday and a sniper knocked his
helmet off.  He came into the dugout and related his experience to
us:

"God, a man can't even pump ship without being shot at.  Some war!"

                           * * * *

We are supposed to be resting, but rest is impossible; we are being
eaten alive by lice.  We cannot sleep for them.  We sit and talk,
and dig feverishly in our chests, under our arms, between our legs.
Our rambling conversation is interrupted by sharp little cracks as
we crush the vermin between our thumbnails.  A tiny drop of blood
spurts in one's face as they are crushed.

We talk of our experiences with the minenwerfer--the mine-throwing
trench mortars--the other night.  Cleary speaks up:

"I thought I was dead a dozen times.  When that sandbag caught me
on the head I thought I was a goner."

I quote:  "He who lives more lives than one, more deaths than one
must die."

"What's that?"

"A line from one of Wilde's poems."

He looks at me for a moment in silence.

"Aw, crap."

"Who is this guy, Wilde?" Fry asks.

I start to tell him, but the words sound hollow and flat here.  I
stress the scandalous features of the story and repeat an epigram
that once sounded so sparkling in my high-school days.  Fry closes
his eyes and turns his head away.  I begin to feel down the seam of
my trousers for lice.

                           * * * *

Tomorrow we are to be relieved.  We keep talking about it all day.
We are going insane with scratching.  My chest is a raw wound.
When I am awake I scratch as little as possible, but when I sleep I
scratch until I bleed and the pain wakes me up.  Yesterday when I
crawled into the dugout after sentry duty, I heard Brown moaning in
his sleep and scratching under his arms.

The sapper who was helping us repair the trench the other night
said that the Germans brought the lice with them from Germany.

"They are a filthy rice; the bloody swine," he added in a cockney
accent.

I suggested that possibly the dirt and the dead bodies might be the
cause.  He looked at me sharply and said:

"I says they're Heinie lice and I knaow.  They got black stripes on
their backs, 'aven't they?  In Blighty I never saw a louse with
black stripes on them.  They're bloody bosches.  I knaow."

                           * * * *

On the way down to the latrine yesterday I noticed that a shell had
torn a hole into one of the sides of the communication trench.
Some wire stuck out from the hole, some old cans of unopened bully
beef, and the toe of a boot.

It was an officer's boot made of soft brown leather.

I tugged at it until it gave way a little and then it came easily.

It was filled with a decaying foot.  The odour was sickening.  I
dropped it in disgust.

When I came back, Brown limped towards the latrine.  He was gone
quite a while; when he returned he had a pair of soft brown leather
shoes tucked under his arm.

"I found them near the -- -- house," he said.  "They're dirty, but
with a little cleaning they'll be all right.  They're just the
right size.  I tried them on."

He sat down beside me and took his shoe and sock off.  "Look at
this," he said, showing me his foot.  The back of his heel was as
raw as a lump of meat.



Chapter 3

Out on Rest


We are out on rest now for the third time.  We are in a little
peasant village; a score or so of neglected, half-ruined houses and
as many barns, pigsties, sheds.  The officers occupy a deserted
chateau.  My section is quartered in a large barn with a gaping
roof.  Successive battalions have rested here and have used the
planks of the roof as fuel.  We continue the tradition.  In the
yard outside is a towering manure pile, sodden with rich plant-
nourishing, steaming juices which we smell even in our sleep.

Each man has a pile of ancient grey straw on which he makes his
bed.  It is so vermin-infested that if one stands and listens when
it is quiet he can hear the scraping and scurrying of the pests
underneath.

It is late afternoon; we are through with the day's fatigues and
are sitting about digging mud off our boots, shining brass buttons,
cleaning and oiling our rifles, and killing lice in between times.

We have long since learned that the word rest is another military
term meaning something altogether different.  Take artillery duel,
for example.  We are in the line--suddenly the enemy artillery
begins to bombard us.  We cower behind the sandbags, trembling,
white-faced, tight-lipped.  Our own guns reply.  They begin to
hammer the enemy's front line.  The infantrymen on both sides
suffer, are killed, wounded.  This is called an artillery duel.

We are taken from the trenches and march for endless hours to
billets.  The first day out we really rest.  Then begins an
interminable routine of fatigues.  We march, drill, shine buttons,
do guard duty, serve as batmen for the officers, practice grenade-
throwing, machine gunnery, and at night we are taken by lorry
behind the lines to do wiring and trench-digging.  This is called
out on rest.

Clark, our captain, does not make life any too pleasant for us.  He
is tall and blond and takes an insufferable pride in his uniform.
He wears very light, smart buckskin riding breeches in and out of
the trenches.  His leather is brightly polished and his equipment
and insignia gleam malignantly in contrast with our seedy, mud-
stained uniforms.  Yesterday he gave us a stern lecture on
cleanliness and ordered that we must shave every day.  It gives you
greater morale, he said.  How can you expect to kill a German when
you feel like dying yourself? he asked.  It is bitter cold, and
when we shaved this morning in the cold water our faces were blue
for hours afterwards.

                           * * * *

Today Brownie came under Clark's displeasure.  Wherever there is a
stray bit of barbed wire Brown is sure to be hooked onto it.  His
uniform is almost in tatters.  The stuff is shoddy and comes apart
easily.  Before drill this morning Clark hauled him over the coals
for being a disgrace to the company.  Brownie stood erect and
glared.  This infuriated Clark and he ordered Brown's name be taken
for "silent insolence".

Brown is now sitting on his pile of straw muttering imprecations at
his officer.

"I'll kill the bastard--that's what I'll do.  I'm just waiting
until we get into a real scrap.  I'll plug the son of a bitch
between the shoulder blades."

We go on with our scraping and polishing.  We are silent in the
face of the torrent of oaths and complaints which stream from
Brown.

After a while Broadbent, the lance-corporal, begins our favourite
game.  Between the cracking of lice he says:

"If you had a wish what would you wish for?"

Brown is the first wisher.

"I wish that bloody bastard Clark was dead."

"A lot of good that's gonna do you," says Fry.  "That won't put
beans in your belly."

"Just the same, I'd give a month's pay to see him stretched out."

"Clean sheets," a voice says from a darkened corner of the barn.
It is Cleary.  "Great big, white, cool sheets and no lice, and I'm
willing to let White Breeches live."

We all agree.

We are filthy, our bodies are the colour of the earth we have been
living in these past months.  We are alive with vermin and sit
picking at ourselves like baboons.  It is months since we have been
out of our clothes.  We begin to talk of the last time we slept
between sheets.  A flood of reminiscences begins.  Brown forgets
his hatred for Clark for the moment and rhapsodises over his last
night in a real bed.

Brown is a farmer's son.  He came from Prince Edward Island.  He is
tall, awkward, and continually stumbling into things.  He does not
grasp ideas quickly, not even the simple military ones, and this
has made him the butt for the ridicule of his mates and an object
of hatred for Clark.  He is about the same age as most of us--
nineteen or twenty.

He is the only married man in the section.  Two weeks before the
battalion left Montreal a girl whom he knew back home came to the
barracks and they got married.  He obtained permission from the
colonel to live outside.  They took a furnished room somewhere and
for two weeks Brown enjoyed complete and absolute married bliss.

We now know every little detail of that honeymoon.  While waiting
to entrain or lying in dugouts between fatigues, Brown has
gradually pieced together for us the brief few days of his married
life.  He starts to tell us again of his last night with Martha:

"The last night I slept between clean white sheets was with my
wife.  Oh, man!"

He smiles in contemplation.

We urge him to tell us more.  We know the story in all its minute
variations, but we egg him on.

It is one of the many ways we can forget the war for a few moments.
The joking is raw, cruel, and we know it, but continue nevertheless.

We have heard every physical and emotional foible of Martha's.  It
seems as though we are all married to her.  We know, as well as
Brown does, that she has a large mole on her right thigh near her
hip; he has told us of all her reactions to his advances on the
marital night.  We enjoy these confidences like the moujik who,
when he could have no vodka, preferred talking about it.

Anderson, the ex-lay preacher, is with us.  His wish is that the
war would end, but this is against the rules of the game.  The wish
must be specific.  His is ruled out.

"I wish I was home with Martha," says Brown.

The wishing is resumed.  It begins in earnest when someone wishes
for food.

Cleary speaks:

"What's the use of wishing for weeks in bed with a fat wench.  Why,
Brownie, you'd cave in after the first ten minutes.  We haven't had
a decent meal for months.  I mean a meal.  I'd give everything I
own for a big helping of English roast beef, red inside and
tapering off to a crisp brown outside--big brown baked potatoes
split open on top and sprinkled with a little paprika--and a great
hunk of Yorkshire pudding.  Top that off with a bottle of cool
ale."

He sucks his saliva loudly and closes his eyes.  After a while he
adds:  "And by roast beef I mean beef and not horses' meat--it's
gotta be soft, juicy, and red with a little blood oozing out of
it."

"And to think," says Fry, "of all the good meals I turned down in
my life.  Many's the time I passed up a big dish of brown beef stew
with red carrots and yellow turnips floating in it, just to run out
and grab a ham sandwich in a restaurant.  If I ever get out of
this, I'll never refuse a thing my mother sets before me."

"What's the matter with a ham sandwich?" Broadbent asks.

"And to think that I once told the old lady that roast goose was
too rich for me and turkey was too dry.  I can see that goose now,
stuffed with apples and chestnuts and little rivers of fat running
down the sides."

It is Broadbent's turn:

"The best meal I ever had was when I got my five days' leave in
London.  A tart took me to a place in Soho.  Man, I put it away
until I thought I would bust.  You know, I think that soldiering
makes your belly shrink--"

At this we lapse into silence.

We are hungry.

It is four o'clock and it is a full hour before we will get our
hunk of grey war bread dipped in bacon grease and a mess-tin full
of pale unsweetened tea.

                           * * * *

We have learned who our enemies are--the lice, some of our
officers, and Death.

Of the first two we speak continually, the last we rarely refer to.

Strangely, we never refer to the Germans as our enemy.  In the week-
old newspaper which comes up from the base we read of the enemy and
the Hun, but this is newspaper talk and we place no stock in it.
Instead we call him Heinie and Fritz.  The nearest we get to
unfriendliness is when we call him "square-head".  But our
persistent and ever present foe is the louse.

We have been sleeping in our clothes now for months.  It is
impossible to take them off.  It is winter and the barn is cold.
We have rigged up a stove of sorts made of some piping and tin
which we found nearby.  We sit facing the fire and talk in a
rambling fashion.  As we talk we hunt for lice.  Fry suddenly
appears at the door with a flatiron in his hand.

"What's that for?" Broadbent asks.

"The goddamned lice," Fry grunts.

"What are you going to do?  Brain 'em?"

"You just watch."

He takes a board and places his tunic on the board.  We watch
closely.  He heats the iron over the fire and then runs the hot
iron down the seam.  There is a quick series of cracks.  Little
spurts of blood come in a stream from the inside of the seam.  Fry
looks up triumphantly.

"That's the way to kill 'em, by God.  And it kills the eggs, too."

We all take our tunics and trousers off and begin to iron the lice
out of our clothes.

"How about the straw?" Anderson asks.  "It's alive."

We see that this will be an endless game.

"Anyway," says Fry, "we'll sleep tonight for a couple of hours."

Johnson, the sergeant, appears at the door.

"Brown," he says, "orderly room for you."

Brown puts on his tunic and puttees and we look him over to see
that he is properly dressed for his appearance before the colonel.
He goes out.

In the meantime our food comes around--a hunk of bread the size of
a fist, a piece of cheese, a raw onion, and a mess-tin full of
unsweetened tea.

We are smoking after supper and Brown reappears.

"What d'yuh get?" we ask.

"Two hours pack drill," he answers and sits down to eat.  We have
nothing to say, so we sit by quietly as he munches his food.

                           * * * *

In a field beyond the few houses and barns which form the village
is the parade ground.  It is nearly dark.  Out of the twilight
heavily laden forms emerge.  The earth is soft and soggy.  Brown,
like the others, is ready for his pack drill.  He is dressed in his
greatcoat, carries full equipment and pack, rifle, and one hundred
and twenty rounds of ammunition in his pouches.  Johnson, the
sergeant, is in charge.  He inspects each man; there are about ten.

Fry and I stand nearby and watch.

"Squad, ten-shun!"

Twenty heels smack together.

Johnson is not satisfied.

"Now, then, smarter than that!  As you were!"

The men relax.

He repeats the order.

Again and again.

Finally he gives the order to march.  It is growing darker.

"On the double."

The men begin to trot.  Their equipment rattles and bangs.  The men
in the rear begin to lag.

"Get it right now, youse guys in the rear.  We'll stay here all
night if you don't snap into it."

Around and around they trot, clanging and banging.  The mud is
squishy and sticks to the boots of the trotters.

Fry mutters under his breath.  "Come on, let's go.  I can't bear to
see it."

The running, grotesque squad passes us.  We hear their panting and
wheezing.  Even in the half-dark we can see the red, strained
faces, the wide-opened eyes.

We can stand it no longer: we know the agony of the jumping pack,
the banging of the entrenching tools on the buttocks, the leaden
ammunition tugging at aching shoulders.  We walk away towards the
estaminet.

As we walk we hear Johnson shout:  "Come on, make it snappy," and
we hear a slight acceleration of the clanging of the drillers'
equipment.

"That's the hell of it," says Fry.  "Eighteen days in the line, get
the guts shelled out of yuh--and then all the thanks yuh get is
this--"  He jerks his thumb towards the parade ground.

We enter the estaminet.  The warm sour odour of wine fills our
nostrils.  Voices, cheered by wine, call to us.  We sit down at a
table.  The madame, red-faced, mountainous bosom, beady eyes,
serves us with a bottle of vin rouge.

"He'll be too damned tired to come down here after he's done," Fry
says.

The heat, the wine, goes to our heads.  We feel that we ought to do
something for poor Brownie, but we cannot think of anything.

This is war; there is so much misery, heartaches, agony, and
nothing can be done about it.  Better to sit here and drink the
sour, hard wine and try to forget.  The blue haze of tobacco smoke
begins to sway a little.

Better to forget . . .

But it is not easy to forget.  Fry's wine makes him talkative,
moody, bitter.  His face wears an ugly expression of half sneer,
half scowl.

"They take everything from us: our lives, our blood, our hearts;
even the few lousy hours of rest, they take those, too.  Our job is
to give, and theirs is to take . . ."

We order another bottle.



Chapter 4

Back to the Round


Six days in reserve near the light artillery, six days in supports,
six days in the front trenches--and then out to rest.  Five or six
days out on rest and then back again; six days, six days, rest.

Endlessly in and out.  Different sectors, different names of
trenches, different trenches, but always the same trenches, the
same yellow, infested earth, the same screaming shells, the same
comet-tailed "minnies" with their splintering roar.  The same
rats, fat and sleek with their corpse-filled bellies, the same
gleaming gimlet eyes.  The same lice which we carry with us
wherever we go.  In and out, in and out, endlessly, sweating,
endlessly, endlessly . . .  Somewhere it is summer, but here are
the same trenches.  The trees here are skeletons holding stubs of
stark, shell-amputated arms towards the sky.  No flowers grow in
this waste land.

This is our fifth day in the front line, one more day and out we go
back to rest.

For the past few days it has been raining ceaselessly.  We are
soaked and chilled.

It is near dawn.

As the smudge of grey appears in the east, the odours of the
trenches rise in a miasmal mist on all sides of us.  The soaked
earth here is nothing but a thin covering for the putrescence which
lies underneath; it smells like a city garbage dump in mid-August.
We are sunk in that misery which men fall into through utter
hopelessness.

We are in a shallow trench and last night the enemy trench mortars
blew away part of the parapet, so that now we are exposed to
enfilade fire from our left.

We will have to wait until nightfall to repair it.

They are sniping at us.

About two hundred yards from us there is a little wood, and in this
wood there are snipers hidden somewhere among the trees.

The broken parapet does not hide us and we have to crawl around on
our hands and knees because the sniper can shoot DOWN THE LENGTH OF
OUR TRENCH.

We remember what the instructor in trench warfare told us at the
base.  "Enfilade fire is fire directed down the length of a line or
trench.  It is fire coming from the flanks.  Keep low."

But the instructor is at the base, safe and comfortable, and we are
here in this muddy trench.

Six short days in a trench!

It is nothing, it seems; less than a week, but it seems like an
eternity as we wait for night when we shall be relieved.

The dugouts here are filled with water and we live in hastily
constructed funk-holes, holes burrowed into the side of the parapet
or parados.  We are wet to the skin.

Why do we crawl about here?

It would be better, it seems, to dash into No Man's Land and chance
death, or down the communication trench to temporary safety--and a
firing squad.  But we are disciplined.  Months of training on the
rolling Sussex downs, at the base, in the periods of rest, have
stiffened us.  We must carry on, carry on . . .

In a thousand ways this has been drilled into our heads.  The
salute, the shining of our brass buttons, the correct way to twist
a puttee, and so on.  A thousand thundering orders!  A thousand
trivial rules, each with a penalty for an infraction, has made will-
less robots of us all.  All, without exception . . .

Half a mile from our partly exposed trench, hidden in the hollow of
a tree, sits a sniper holding an oiled, perfect rifle.

Every night they bring him his rations, maybe with a little extra
schnapps, for I know our snipers get an extra rum ration.

Sooner or later this German sniper, who keeps us cowering in cold
fear, will be caught in an advance by our troops.

We will fall upon him and bayonet him like a hapless trench rat.
He will crawl out of his hiding place as the first wave swarms
about him menacingly.  He will hold his trembling hands on high and
stammer the international word for compassion and mercy.  He will
say that beautiful word comrade, a word born in suffering and
sorrow, but we will stab him down shouting to one another, "Hey,
look, we found a sniper!"  And our faces will harden, our inflamed
eyes will become slits, and men will stab futilely at his prostrate
body.

But now they bring him his little extra rations.

His rifle is fitted with telescopic sights so that we are brought
quite close to him.  Slowly he elevates his weapon, looks through
the glass, and sees his target as though it is but a few feet away.
Then he pulls the trigger and one of us drops out of sight.

In our shattered trench we move about almost doubled over in two,
much as a man does who is suffering with abdominal pains.
Sometimes to get relief we crawl, like babies, on all fours.

The sniper's rifle cracks and we flop down grovelling in the muddy
bottom of the trench.  Minutes pass before we move.  No one is dead
and slowly we face each other with grey, sheepishly smiling faces.

We lie cowering in the bottom of the trench.

There is nothing to do until rations come up, and we talk in
whispers.

It is greying in the east.

The war sleeps.

No guns.

The machine-gunners are quiet.

We talk.

"You'd think a guy would like to die living a life like this," says
Fry.  "But we flop just the same."

"How do you know you're gonna get killed for sure?" says Brown.

Anderson does not speak, he lies with his cheek glued to the
ground.  His lips move in prayer.  He gives us the creeps.

"Maybe you'd only go blind or go batty or something."

"Yeah, that's it.  How do you know you're gonna get killed?"

We all agree that a swift death would be a pleasant thing.  At the
crack of the distant rifle we cower lower in silent fear.

It is dawn now.

Soon a carrier will bring us our rations, and as soon as it is
divided between us and we have filled our bellies, we will go to
sleep and leave one man on sentry duty.

It is quiet.  The guns are quiet.  Even the sniper is quiet.  It is
half an hour since last his rifle sent us flopping into the mud.

Over the trench a few sparrows squabble and chirp with carefree
energy.  They swoop down on the sandbagged parapet and sit looking
at us with perky heads cocked to one side.

We look at them in amazement.

They startle us with their noisy merriment, these foolish birds who
may live in peaceful fields and forests and who come to look for
food on a barren, waste battlefield.

They fly away suddenly towards the German lines.

"They're lost, I guess," Brown says.

The ration carrier crawls round the corner of the bay of the trench
and dumps a hairy sandbag half filled with grub on the firing-step.
He says nothing and walks away.  He is tired; he has been carrying
food all night.

We take turns in sharing the food among ourselves.  Today it is
Brown's turn.

He spreads his rubber sheet along the firing-step.  He bends low
and empties the food into the sheet; a piece of yellow cheese,
three large Spanish onions, a paper container of Australian jam
labelled strawberry, but made of figs and artificially flavoured
with chemicals which we can taste but do not mind; some tea, sugar,
condensed milk, and a great hunk of grey war bread.

With hungry, grimy fingers he deftly cuts, slices, divides the
food.  We look on with greedy, alert eyes to see that justice is
being done.  From time to time he looks nervously over his shoulder
in the direction of the concealed sniper in the distant woods.  Our
eyes follow his.  His glance catches mine and he smiles faintly.

"Don't want to die before breakfast, eh?" he says.

I smile and nod and look at the food.

Anderson stands up to get a better view of the food.  He leans over
my shoulder.

Broadbent snarls a warning.

We are nervous.

The grub is soon divided into five equal parts.  We each take our
share and stuff it into our haversacks.  We will eat it at leisure
in the funk-hole after stand-down.  The sun will soon rise and the
immediate danger of an attack will be over.

Brown shakes the rubber sheet clean of bread crumbs and bits of
onion skin.

Now he will divide the sugar.  Precious sugar with which we will
sweeten the strong, hot tea that comes up at midnight in large
Thermos cans.  Tea so bitter that it curls one's tongue.  Strong
tea, alive with tannic acid to soothe frayed, trench-shattered
nerves, tea to still a thumping heart.  Sugar to make it palatable.
We watch him in silence.

The rusty spoon for dishing out sugar and such things is stuck
between two sandbags in the parapet over his head.

Glad to straighten himself up for a second, Brown stands up to
reach for it.

He turns to look in the direction of the woods to his left.

In that instant his head snaps back viciously from the impact of
the bullet.

The report of the rifle fills our ears like the sound of a cannon.

He sags to the bottom of the sloppy trench.

His neck is twisted at a foolish, impossible angle.

Between his eyes, a little over the bridge of his nose, is a small
neat hole.  A thin, red stream runs from it.

No one moves.

On the parados to the rear of us a bit of slimy grey matter jiggles
as it sticks to the hairy sacking of the sandbag.

At the crack of the sniper's rifle we crouched lower in the trench
and looked with stupid amazement as Brown's body fell clumsily into
our midst.

We look without resentment towards the woods.  We are animated only
by a biting hunger for safety.  Safety . . .

The sun is rising slowly now, it throws a pink pearly light on the
parados behind us and colours the motionless bit of Brown's brains.

Everything is quiet.

It is stand-down along the whole front.

The sun warms us a little.  We look towards the east, towards the
German lines from whence came the swift bullet that had thrown
Brown's body awkwardly among us; we look towards the east where the
rising sun now slowly begins to climb into the heavens . . .

We pull the heavy, limp body out of the mud.  Its neck is twisted
in such a manner that it seems to be asking a question of us.

We lay it on the firing-step and cover it with a grey woollen,
regulation blanket.  The blanket is short; it hides the head but
reaches only to the ankles.  The muddy boots stick out in V-
formation.

The sugar is not yet divided.  Some of it is spilled and dissolved
in the bottom of the trench.  Broadbent salvages as much of it as
he can.  Dispensing with the spoon, he uses his hands.  He scoops
the remaining sugar into four instead of five parts.

Soon a stretcher-bearer will come and take the body down to company
headquarters.  Broadbent takes the bread and cheese out of Brown's
haversack and shares it with us.

"Anyway," he explains, "he can't eat any more . . ."



Chapter 5

On Rest Again


We are relieved.  Down the long, winding communication trenches and
at last out onto the open field.  It is shortly after midnight, and
we straggle past belching light field artillery and silhouetted,
silent waiting tanks.

We reach a road.

We are ordered to fall in.

Horse- and tractor-drawn guns, monster swaying supply-lorries roar,
chug, and clatter on the cobble-paved road.

The horses strain at their harness.

Chains clank.

The enemy knows that here is a crossroad.

He knows that the road is alive with troops and traffic at this
hour.  He sprays the road with overhead shrapnel.

Whiz-z-z-z.  Cr-r-r-ung.

A long-drawn-out hiss and wail and then a vicious, snarling
explosion overhead.  The dark is stabbed with a burst of red flame.
We duck our heads and hunch our shoulders instinctively.

Instantly there is confusion everywhere.  The drivers yell
furiously at the animals.  The chauffeurs grind their gears into
high speed.

More red stabs into the blackness over our heads.

They come faster and faster.

The air whines.

One bursts directly over us.  The metal balls rattle on the
cobblestones in front of us.

We take to the fields.

But the vehicles must stay on the road.  A lorry gets stuck and
blocks the road.  Whips snap like revolver shots over the heads of
the struggling beasts.  The horses rear on their hind legs, their
mouths drip white flaky foam.  Their eyes are distended like those
of frightened women.  The drivers crack their whips, calling them
foul names.  We ask one another why we must wait here under this
fire.

No one knows.

The rain of steel continues.

A horse is wounded.

We hear the beast's shriek above the howl of the bombardment.  It
is one of the four horses drawing a light field-piece.  The wounded
animal whirls around, dragging his mute, pawing mates with him.
The team careers for a moment and crashes into the stalled lorry.

A shell bursts over the lorry.

The driver is hurled from his seat.

He is wounded.  His cries mingle with the piteous shrieking of the
wounded horses.

Two animals are now prone and the other two tear at the harness and
kick wildly at the cannon.

Two stretcher-bearers appear and try to extricate the lorry-driver,
who is being kicked to death by the frantic horses.

The road is an inferno.

The fire subsides.

We hear the explosions on another road to our left . . .

We are ordered to fall in.  Four men in our company are wounded.
They are carried away to the field dressing station nearby.  We
begin our trek towards billets.

We march for hours.

Down dark shell-torn roads, past ruined, gutted corpses of houses
which once sheltered peaceful peasant families here.  We march at a
quick pace even though we are unutterably tired.  Where are we
going? we wonder.

We have been marching for two hours.  The stately poplars which
line the road here are less scarred.  Here and there we see a
peasant's house which is not destroyed.  We see a faint light
showing from behind the tightly drawn blinds.  People live here!
Our set faces relax.  We look at one another and smile wanly.

At last we come to a narrow-gauge railhead.  It is still dark.  We
are ordered to halt.  The heat of our exhausted bodies loosens the
foul trench odours which cling to us.  We throw ourselves panting
onto the softness of a bordering field.

It is strangely quiet.  Only in the distance do we hear the
rumbling of massed artillery fire.  We never escape this ominous
thunder.  It is the link which binds us to our future.  Out on
rest, miles behind the lines, we hear it.  It is a reminder to us
that the line is still there; that we must return.  We lie
prostrate, still . . .

Nearby the tiny narrow-gauge engine puffs energetically, giving off
little clouds of white feathery steam which float slowly over us.
We look about us with hungry eyes.

Smoke that is not the harbinger of death!

A field which is not the hiding place of thousands of men lurking
in trenches to tear each other apart!

The dark, silent, brooding sky above us which does not pour
shrieking, living steel upon our heads . . . !

Cleary rolls closer to me, he talks.

"Smell it?"

I nod.

We are lying near a field of blossoming beans.  The air is filled
with the heavy fragrance.  We take deep, long inhalations.  Our
bodies are cooling and the foul trench odours cease stirring.  We
hear the buzzing and humming of nocturnal insects.  Here is life.
Fragrant, peaceful life . . .  The scent of the blossoms beats on
us in waves, undulating.

I lie on my back.  I look at the stars.  We talk quietly as though
fearful of disturbing this restful silence.

"What is it?"

"Beans."

"Beans?"

"Yes, beans; they smell like this when they are in blossom."

"Jeez, I thought beans. . ."  He makes a crude joke about beans, an
Army joke.

"It's a shame about Brownie."

"Yes."

"Maybe . . ."

"Yeah, I suppose so--better out of it."

Fry rolls over to where we are lying and joins in the conversation.

"Private?"

"Naw.  Free for all."

"Just sayin' about Brownie."

"Tough."

"Aw, I don't know.  Better out of it."

"D'you smell it, Fry?"

"Yes, what is it?"

"Beans."

"I thought beans only--"  Again the same joke.  A soldier's joke--a
joke born of bitterness and suffering.  A joke to dispel horror.  A
joke to make one weep.

"Yeah, they smell like this when they're in blossom."

"It's a shame about Brownie.  He'd love this.  Always talking about
potatoes and beans and how he hoed 'em.  Remember how he told that
frog farmer how to dig his spuds?"

"Yeah, he came from Prince Edward Island."

"Prince Edward Island potatoes.  Used to see them back home in the
markets."

"Well, now he's pushin' them up."

"He sure liked to talk about farming."

"Remember Martha?"

"Gee, I was sorry I kidded him about her."

"It used to get under his skin."

We speak respectfully of Brown now.  He is dead.  He is not the
awkward, stupid boy we knew.  He is a symbol.  He is a dead farmer.
Martha is a widow now because of his death.

We become silent and lie on our backs waiting for the order to fall
in.

                           * * * *

We clamber into the toylike open cars.  We are jammed tight.  We
wait for hours, it seems, until the train begins to start.

Through wide fields, through sleeping little villages, past dark
woods we go.  We lean against the rattling sides.  We begin to nod
with the monotonous rocking of the train.  On and on!  We know we
are going for a long rest.  On and on we go, racing away from the
front, back towards peace, quiet, human voices . . .  No shells, no
trenches.  The rattling of the wheels takes up the thought.  No
shells, no trenches, no shells, no trenches . . .

We wake up.

The train has come to a stop.

It is dawn.

We stumble out of the cars and line up along the track.  We are
near a large village.  We are detailed off into sections and
marched away to billets.

The guide for our section takes us to a large barn.  We remove our
equipment and fling ourselves down to sleep.

It is afternoon when we wake.  We begin to look for water and the
toilets.  We find out where the cookhouse is.  We start to make the
barn more livable.  Rumours are afloat that we will rest here for
two weeks.

One man says that he heard a captain say to a sergeant that we are
out for a month.

Fry has been up for some time.  He comes into the sunlit entrance
of the barn full of information.

"It's payday.  You can get good cognac here for five francs a
bottle.  We're here for a month.  It's a big village.  I saw three
good-looking tarts."

He utters the information breathlessly.

We pelt him with questions.

We jump up and begin to dress.

We run with our mess-tins to the cookhouse.

On the way we hear all sorts of rumours again.  As we wait in line
before the field kitchens we talk.

". . . two months."

"How d'you know?"

"Sergeant told me."

"Aw . . ."

"Ask him . . ."

"Big scrap.  Gonna fatten us up.  Two months' rest.  See, they're
givin' us real bacon.  Sugar in the coffee."

"Aw, latrine rumours!"

                           * * * *

We line up in alphabetical order before the paymaster.  We present
our little brown pay books, he makes an entry, and gives us a few
crisp notes.  We salute and walk away gleefully.

Pay.  Cognac, eggs and chips, wine, sardines, canned peaches,
biscuits.  Fry said there were some good-looking Janes in this
town.  It is six o'clock.

Fry meets me and we start off towards the estaminet together.

"I'm gonna eat until my belly begins to creak."

"Me, too."

We enter the estaminet.  The familiar odour of warm sour wine
strikes us.  We order six eggs apiece, a mountain of browned potato
chips, a bottle of wine each.  The hefty madame serves us silently.

We fall to without speaking.  We wolf our food.  We swallow glasses
of wine.  The room is full of hungry soldiers.  We wipe the yellow
bottoms of our plates with chunks of bread and sit back contented,
at last.

The wine has warmed our insides.

Fry shouts to the madame.  "Hey, madame, encore, encore . . ."

He points to his empty bottle.  Two more bottles are put before us.
We drink slowly now, rolling the sharp wine under our tongues.

We get up after a while.  We stagger slightly.  In the corner of
the room a crap game is in progress.  We try our luck for a couple
of minutes, and when we have lost ten francs each we go back to our
table.  We order another bottle of wine.

Fry becomes moody.  His voice is thick with wine.  I, too, am a
little groggy.  It is a fine, forgetful feeling.  The fat madame
behind her counter seems more sullen.  She sways a little, it
seems.  The room is a bedlam.  In the corner where the crap game is
going on, the shouts become louder and louder.  Fry puts his hand
in his pocket and counts the money.

"Ten francs.  C'mon, let's get another bottle of rouge."

I agree.

We go to the counter and order a quart of red wine and a bottle of
cognac.  We take the bottles and stagger out into the street.  Men
are roaring down the street.  There is no light save from the moon.
We hear the whirr of an aeroplane motor high over our heads.  Fry
carries the wine, I the cognac.

I suggest that we take the liquor to the barn and that we drink it
there.  We start down the street towards our billets.  Others are
walking in our direction.  A pair of girls walk in front of us.
Fry feels gay and shouts the few French phrases he knows:

"Hey, mam'selle, voulez-vous coucher avec moi ce soir?"

The girls giggle.  They are youngsters about sixteen or so.  They
still wear their hair in plaits down their backs.

They do not quicken their paces.  That's a good sign.

Encouraged, Fry sings to them.  There is a note of bitterness in
his hilarity:


     Après la guerre finis, et les soldats parti,
     Mademoiselle in the family way,
     Après la guerre finis.


The girls turn a corner and run down a side street.

"What the hell would they be wanting with us?" he says, "with all
the damned one-pips* around.  C'mon, let's finish the stuff here."


*Lieutenants.


We walk on a bit until we reach an open field.  We draw the cork of
the bottle of cognac and take long swigs from it.

In between whiles we tell sentimental stories of our lives to each
other.

Gradually we grow incoherent.

The houses nearby begin to spin around.

I lie down in the cool grass . . .

I feel a jab in my back.  I look up.  It is an MP.

"C'mon, c'mon, back to billets."

I am still groggy.  I waken Fry.

We struggle to our feet.

He stares at me stupidly, blinking his eyes like a rooster.  We
start off down the road, back to our billets.  Our unsteady heavy
footsteps echo in the silent street.

Over our shoulders we hear the faint thunder of the line.

                           * * * *

The inhabitants of the town are wretched creatures.  Their houses
are quartered with officers and non-coms.  We sleep in their barns.
Their men are at the front and many fields lie fallow.  There is a
shortage of food and most of the women and girls are thin, scraggy
objects.  The only fleshy person in the whole place is madame of
the estaminet.

It is after drill in the afternoon.  Cleary is sitting beside me
oiling his rifle.

"Get any yet?"

"What?"

"Tarts?"

"Scraggy-looking crew," I reply.

"Any port in a storm."

He leans over towards me and tells me the important secret of the
town.

". . . so I'm walking down past battalion headquarters and there's
a little French tart, a little thin but a bit of all right, just
the same.  Kind of lively eyes, big like.  Vonlez-vous coucher, I
says, and she oui-oui's me.  She takes me down to her mother's
place and we go into a shed.  'Combien,' I says to her as we go in.
'Bully bif,' she says.  Can you imagine that--for a tin of bully
beef.  Man, I'll bet there'll be a run on the quartermaster's
stores."

Anderson has been listening in.  He gives Cleary a withering look.

"Godless swine, these frogs.  No morals.  Small wonder that their
country is laid in ruins."

". . . aw, shut up, Anderson.  Well, anyway, I gives her the
soldier's farewell."

                           * * * *

The afternoons are pleasant.  We walk in twos and threes out into
the woods.  Some of us lie beneath trees smoking, soaking in every
peaceful minute.  The food is good and there is lots of it.  We
have been here ten days now.  Payday is long since past and we have
recovered from our riotous pay night.  There is no money among us
and we smoke the biting ration cigarettes.

A rumour has it that we are to go in the line in a few days.  A
motor car from divisional headquarters was parked in front of
battalion headquarters all morning.  That is bad.

We enjoy the last few days with all our might.  Soon we will go
back in the line and there are persistent rumours of an offensive.

To the north the cannonading has been furious the last few nights.
Last night the walls of the barn shook slightly with the force of
the distant bombardment.

The insistent rumble woke me and I walked out into the open.  Up
towards Belgium the sky flashed like the aurora borealis.  Our food
has been too good.

We are being fattened for the slaughter.

                           * * * *

It is warm and Fry has discovered a little stream about three
kilometres from the village.  We decide to go swimming.  About ten
of us set off across the fields.  It is late afternoon and the sun
slants down upon us as we shout and laugh.

We have nearly lost that aged, harassed look which we wear when we
are in the line.  We are youngsters again.  Most of us are under
twenty.  Anderson is the only matured man among us.  He is forty.

We reach the little river.  It is lined with tall bushes and here
we tear off our uniforms.  Broadbent is the first to undress and
plunges into the water with a loud splash, the kind known to boys
as a bellywopper.  His body is fair and lithe.

During the long winter months in the line, bodies did not exist for
us.  We were men in uniform; clumsy, bundled, heavy uniforms.  It
is amazing now to see that we have slim, hard, graceful bodies.
Our faces are tanned and weather-beaten and that aged look which
the trench gives us still lingers a bit, but our bodies are the
bodies of boys.

We plunge naked into the clear water, splashing about and shouting
to each other.  Only Anderson does not undress fully.  He wears his
heavy grey regulation underwear.  We tease him.  He walks gingerly
to the water's edge and pokes a toe into the stream.  Fry creeps up
behind him and shoves him splash into the water.  We shout and yell
and come to his rescue, dragging him to the bank.  Broadbent starts
to undo his underwear.

"Come on, Anderson, let's see your body.  We know you're a boy," he
says in baby fashion.

Anderson fumes, sputters, and strikes out.  His face is red and he
shouts deadly threats.  We laugh and leap into the water.

We duck one another and throw water into each other's faces.  A few
lads from the village stand on the bank and look at us in silence.
They have the faces of little old men.  We motion to them to join
us but they shake their heads gravely.

Who can describe the few moments of peace and sunshine in a
solder's life?  The animal pleasure in feeling the sun on a naked
body.  The cool, caressing, lapping water.  The feeling of
security, of deep inward happiness . . .

In the distance the rumble of the guns is faint but persistent like
the subdued throbbing of violins in a symphony.  I am still here,
it says.  You may sleep quietly at night in sweet-smelling hay, you
may lie sweating under a tree after drill and marvel at the fine
tracings on a trembling leaf over your head, but I am here and you
must come back to my howling madness, to my senseless volcanic
fury.  I am the link that binds you to your future, it mutters.

But the water is cool and inviting and the afternoon grows older.
The stream gurgles and swishes against the bank on which we stand.
I shake the thought of the guns from my mind.

About a hundred yards up towards the line there is a bend in the
stream.  "Let's race to the bend and back," Fry shouts.  "The last
man back buys the wine tonight."

We dive into the water and start upstream.  Cleary comes to the
surface last but turns and quickly swims towards the bank again.

He stands on the bank and calls us out of the water in a strange
voice.  He points to the water nearby.

We clamber out and crowd near him.  We follow his pointing finger
with our eyes.  There is something dark in the water near the bank.

It is a dead body.  It is wearing the field blue French uniform.
We see the thin red stripe wriggling up the trouser leg.  An
underwater growth has caught a bit of the uniform and the body
sways to and fro, moved by the current.  In the water it looks
bloated and enormous.

Our day is spoiled by this lonely dead soldier, carried to us from
the front by the sparkling, sunlit water of the Somme.

We do not say anything to each other.  We dry ourselves on our
underwear and start to dress.

He is different, this Frenchman, from the hundreds of corpses we
have seen in the line.  We thought we were safe.  We thought we
could forget the horrors of the line for a brief few weeks--and
here this swollen reminder drifts from the battlefield to spoil a
sunny afternoon for us . . .



Chapter 6

Bombardment


We are back in the line.

This is a noisy front.  It is in constant turmoil.  There is no
rest.  The enemy rains an endless storm of fire upon us.  At night
the wire is hammered by the artillery and we live in perpetual fear
of raids.

There is talk of an offensive.

Out on rest we behaved like human beings; here we are merely
soldiers.  We know what soldiering means.  It means saving your own
skin and getting a bellyful as often as possible . . . that and
nothing else.

Camaraderie--esprit de corps--good fellowship--these are words for
journalists to use, not for us.  Here in the line they do not
exist.

We fight among ourselves.

The morning rations come up.  The food is spread out on the rubber
sheet and we start to divide it among ourselves.  Bread, the most
coveted of all the food, is the bone of contention today.  Cleary
is sharing it out.

Broadbent suspects that his piece is smaller than the rest.

An oath is spat out.

Cleary replies.

In a moment they are at each other's throats like hungry, snarling
animals.

They strike at each other with their fists, they kick with their
heavy boots.  We intervene, tear them apart, and push them into
separate corners of the dugout.  Blood streams from Cleary's cheek.
Broadbent is alive with hate, white with passion.

"You bloody rat."

"Aw, shut up, Broadbent.  Leave him be."

"Who's a rat?"

"You."

"Come on, come on, cut it out."

"Any man that'll steal another man's bread . . ."

They rush at each other again.  Again we pull them apart.

Cleary wipes the blood from his face.  He scowls and holds his hunk
of bread in his hands like an animal.  Then slowly he begins to
gnaw at it.

                           * * * *

We never become accustomed to the shellfire.  Its terror for us
increases with each passing day.  The days out on rest ease our
harried nerves, but as soon as we are back in the line again we are
as fearful and jumpy as the newest recruit.  With the first hiss
and roar of a shell we become terror-stricken as of old.

We look at each other with anxious, frightened faces.

Our lips tighten.

Our eyes open wide.

We do not talk.

What is there to say?

                           * * * *

Talk of the coming offensive continues.

The sector becomes more tumultuous.

The guns rage all night.

We "stand to" long before dawn and wait at the parapets expecting
an attack until long after sunrise.

The fatigues are innumerable.

Every night there are wiring parties, sapping parties, carrying
parties.  We come back exhausted from these trips.  We throw
ourselves down in the dugouts for an hour's sleep.

But we do not rest.

There is no time for rest.  We stagger around like drunken,
forsaken men.  Life has become an insane dream.

Sleep, sleep--if only we could sleep.

Our faces become grey.  Each face is a different shade of grey.
Some are chalk-coloured, some with a greenish tint, some yellow.
But all of us are pallid with fear and fatigue.

It is three in the morning.

Our section is just back from a wiring party.

The guns are quiet.

Dawn is a short while off . . .

We sit on the damp floor of the dugout.

We have one candle between us and around this we sit chewing at the
remains of the day's rations.

Suddenly the bombardment begins.

The shells begin to hammer the trench above.

The candlelight flickers.

We look at each other apprehensively.  We try to talk as though the
thing we dread most is not happening.

The sergeant stumbles down the steps and warns us to keep our
battle equipment on.

The dugout is an old German one; it is braced by stout wooden
beams.  We look anxiously at the ceiling of the hole in which we
sit.

The walls of the dugout tremble with each crashing explosion.

The air outside whistles with the rush of the oncoming shells.

The German gunners are "feeling" for our front line.

The crashing of the shells comes closer and closer.  Our ears are
attuned to the nuances of a bombardment.  We have learned to
identify each sound.

They are landing on the parapet and in the trench itself now.

We do not think of the poor sentry, a new arrival, whom we have
left on lookout duty.

We crowd closer to the flickering candle.

Upstairs the trench rings with a gigantic crack as each shell
lands.  An insane god is pounding it with Cyclopean fists, madly,
incessantly.

We sit like prehistoric men within the ring of flickering light
which the candle casts.  We look at each other silently.

A shell shatters itself to fragments near the entrance of the
dugout.

The candle is snuffed out by the concussion.

We are in complete darkness.

Another shell noses its shrieking way into the trench near the
entrance and explodes.  The dugout is lit by a blinding red flash.
Part of the earthen stairway caves in.

SHELLFIRE!

In the blackness the rigging and thudding over our heads sounds
more malignant, more terrible.

We do not speak.

Each of us feels an icy fear gripping at the heart.

With a shaking hand Cleary strikes a match to light the candle.
The small flame begins to spread its yellow light.  Grotesque,
fluttering shadows creep up the trembling walls.

Another crash directly over our heads!

It is dark again.

Fry speaks querulously:

"Gee, you can't even keep the damned thing lit."

At last the flame sputters and flares up.

Broadbent's face is green.

The bombardment swells, howls, roars.

The force of the detonations causes the light of the candle to
become a steady, rapid flicker.  We look like men seen in an
ancient, unsteady motion picture.

The fury of the bombardment makes me ill at the stomach.

Broadbent gets up and staggers into a corner of our underground
room.

He retches.

Fry starts a conversation.

We each say a few words trying to keep the game alive.  But we
speak in broken sentences.  We leave thoughts unfinished.  We can
think of only one thing--will the beams in the dug-out hold?

We lapse into fearful silences.

We clench our teeth.

It seems as though the fire cannot become more intense.  But it
becomes a little more rapid--then more rapid.  The pounding
increases in tempo like a noise in the head of one who is going
under an anesthetic.  Faster.

The explosions seem as though they are taking place in the dugout
itself.  The smoke of the explosives fills the room.

Fry breaks the tension.

"The lousy swine," he says.  "Why don't they come on over, if
they're coming?"

We all speak at once.  We punctuate our talk with vile epithets
belittling the sexual habits of the enemy.  We seem to get relief
in this fashion.

In that instant a shell hurtles near the opening over our heads and
explodes with a snarling roar.  Clods of earth and pieces of the
wooden supports come slithering down the stairway.

It is dark again.  In the darkness we hear Anderson speak in his
singsong voice:

"How do you expect to live through this with all your swearing and
taking the Lord's name in vain?"

For once we do not heap abuse and ribaldry on his head.  We do not
answer.

We sit in the darkness, afraid even to light the candle.  It seems
as though the enemy artillerymen have taken a dislike to our candle
and are intent on blowing it out.

I look up the shattered stairway and see a few stars shining in the
sky.

At least we are not buried alive!

The metallic roar continues.

Fry speaks:  "If I ever live through this, I'll never swear again,
so help me God."

We do not speak, but we feel that we will promise anything to be
spared the horror of being buried alive under tons of earth and
beams which shiver over our heads with each explosion.  Bits of
earth from the ceiling begin to fall . . .

Suddenly, as quickly as it began, the bombardment stops.

We start to clear up the debris from the bottom of the stairs.

To think we could propitiate a senseless god by abstaining from
cursing!

What god is there as mighty as the fury of a bombardment?  More
terrible than lightning, more cruel, more calculating than an
earthquake!

How will we ever be able to go back to peaceful ways again and hear
pallid preachers whimper of their puny little gods who can only
torment sinners with sulphur, we who have seen a hell that no god,
however cruel, would fashion for his most deadly enemies?

Yes, all of us have prayed during the maniac frenzy of a
bombardment.

Who can live through the terror-laden minutes of drumfire and not
feel his reason slipping, his manhood dissolving?

Selfish, fear-stricken prayers--prayers for safety, prayers for
life, prayers for air, for salvation from the death of being buried
alive . . .

Back home they are praying, too--praying for victory--and that
means that we must lie here and rot and tremble forever . . .

We clear away the debris and go to the top of the broken stairs.

It is quiet and cool.

                           * * * *

All night long the artillery to our left up north booms and roars.

A ration carrier comes in with a rumour that the Germans have
broken through up in Belgium.  We are unmoved by this piece of
news.  We only speculate how it will affect our futures.  The enemy
victory does not fill us with either fear or hatred.  We are tired.

We lie in the dugout talking.  Cleary says that the breakthrough
will cause our withdrawal from this sector and that we will be sent
to fill the gap up north.

". . . we're bloody shock troops, that's what we are."

"Yeah."

"Whenever the imperials* cave in, up we go."


* English troops.


"The lousy bastards won't fight unless there's a row of Canadian
bayonets behind 'em."

". . . lookit all the glory yuh get.  Canadians saved the day."

"It's beer we want.  To hell with the glory."

                           * * * *

We talk of when the war will end.  On nights when there is little
doing, this is a good topic of conversation.

"It'll last for at least twenty years."

"They're making sure about reinforcements.  They give the Waacs*
ten days' leave and ten quid for every kid they get."

"War babies."

"It'll all be over by Christmas."

"Like hell.  First they said three months, then six, then a year.
It's two years now and it's only started."

"It won't be over until every officer has an MC."


* Women's Army Auxiliary Corps.


"Why the hell should they want the war to end?  They got lots of
damn fools like us who'll enlist, and when they stop enlisting
they'll drag 'em in."

Anderson speaks up.  He is cleaning his rifle in the corner of the
dugout:

"The war will end on August the first, nineteen seventeen."

"Got it all figured out, eh?"

"No.  But the Lord has figured it out for me.  'And the beast which
I saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a
bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion.'  Now what does that
mean?"

"Well, what does it mean?"

"It's all in the Book of Revelation."

"But what does it mean?  It sounds like Greek to me."

"The leopard is France, the bear is Russia, and the lion is
England."

"Where's Canada in this deal?"

A sleepy voice from the corner of the dugout answers:

"Canada is under the lion's tail."

Anderson continues:

"'And I saw one of his heads wounded to death; and his deadly wound
was healed: and all the world wondered after the beast.'  That was
the first year of the war.  'And power was given unto him to
continue forty and two months.'  Now forty-two months is three and
a half years and that means that the war ends on the first of
August next year."

"Yeah, but do the generals know it, that's what I wanna know."

"Better write 'em a letter about it.  They might forget the date."

Anderson lapses into a martyred silence as he always does when we
jolly him about his biblical revelations.  There is no shellfire
now and he is not taken seriously.

The conversation drifts, lags, and rambles on until it reaches the
ultimate point of all trench conversations--the discussion of
women.

"Well, one night I was with a tart in London and she says--"

                           * * * *

There is a call for volunteers for a brigade raid.  A hundred men
are to go over.  Some of our section offer themselves, I among
them.

There is a rumour that the volunteers will receive ten days' leave
either in Paris or London.

We stand in the dugout which is battalion headquarters.  We feel
quite important.  The colonel is giving us last instructions.

We are to destroy the enemy's trenches and we are to bring back
prisoners.  We are to have a two-minute preliminary bombardment in
order to smash the enemy wire and to keep the sentries' heads down.
We are to rush the trenches as soon as the fire lifts and drop
depth charges into dugouts.  At the end of five minutes red flares
will be lit on our parapets.  This will be the signal that it is
time to return and will show us the direction.

The raid is to take place shortly after midnight.

We are each given a sizeable shot of rum and sent back to company
headquarters.

At midnight we start on the way up to the front line.  We each
carry a pocketful of ammunition, a few Mills grenades, and our
rifles.

All our letters, pay books, and other means of identification are
left behind.

I have left my papers with Cleary.

The rum has made me carefree and reckless.  I feel fine.

                           * * * *

We are lying out in front of our wire, waiting for the signal to
leap up.  It is quiet.  Now and then a white Very light sizzles
into the air and illuminates the field as though it were daytime.

We lie perfectly still.

Over in the German lines we hear voices--they are about fifty yards
from where we now lie.

I look at the phosphorescent lights on the face of my watch.

Two minutes to go.

MacLeod, the officer in charge of the raiding party, crawls over to
where we lie and gives us a last warning.

"Remember," he whispers, "red flares on our parapets is the signal
to come back . . ."

In that instant the sky behind us is stabbed with a thousand
flashes of flame.

The earth shakes.

The air hisses, whistles, screams over our heads.

They are firing right into the trenches in front of us.

Clouds of earth leap into the air.

The barrage lasts a minute and then lifts to cut off the enemy's
front line from his supports.

In that moment we spring up.

We fire as we run.

The enemy has not had time to get back on his firing-steps.  There
is no reply to our fire.

We race on.

Fifty yards--forty yards--thirty yards!

My brain is unnaturally cool.  I think to myself:  This is a raid,
you ought to be excited and nervous.  But I am calm.

Twenty yards!

I can see the neatly piled sandbags on the enemy parapets.

Our guns are still thundering behind us.

Suddenly yellow, blinding bursts of flame shoot up from the ground
in front of us.

Above the howl of the artillery I hear a man scream as he is hit.

HAND GRENADES!

We race on.

We fire our rifles from the hip as we run.

The grenades cease to bark.

Ten yards!

With a yell we plunge towards the parapets and jump, bayonets
first, into the trench.

Two men are in the bay into which we leap.  Half a dozen of our men
fall upon them and stab them down into a corner.

Very lights soar over the trench, lighting the scene for us.

We separate, looking for prisoners and dugouts.

Depth charges are dropped into the underground dwellings and hiding
places.  The trench shakes with hollow, subterranean detonations.

Somewhere nearby a machine gun comes to life and sweeps over our
heads into No Man's Land.

The enemy artillery has sacrificed the front line and is hammering
the terrain between their lines and ours.

Green rockets sail into the black sky.  It is the German call for
help.

The whole front wakes up.

Guns bark, yelp, snarl, roar on all sides of us.

I run down the trench looking for prisoners.  Each man is for
himself.

I am alone.

I turn the corner of a bay.  My bayonet points forward--on guard.

I proceed cautiously.

Something moves in the corner of the bay.  It is a German.  I
recognise the pot-shaped helmet.  In that second he twists and
reaches for his revolver.

I lunge forward, aiming at his stomach.  It is a lightning,
instinctive movement.

The thrust jerks my body.  Something heavy collides with the point
of my weapon.

I become insane.

I want to strike again and again.  But I cannot.  My bayonet does
not come clear.  I pull, tug, jerk.  It does not come out.

I have caught him between his ribs.  The bones grip my blade.  I
cannot withdraw.

Of a sudden I hear him shriek.  It sounds far-off as though heard
in the moment of waking from a dream.

I have a man at the end of my bayonet, I say to myself.

His shrieks become louder and louder.

We are facing each other--four feet of space separates us.

His eyes are distended; they seem all whites, and look as though
they will leap out of their sockets.

There is froth in the corners of his mouth which opens and shuts
like that of a fish out of water.

His hands grasp the barrel of my rifle and he joins me in the
effort to withdraw.  I do not know what to do.

He looks at me piteously.

I put my foot up against his body and try to kick him off.  He
shrieks into my face.

He will not come off.

I kick him again and again.  No use.

His howling unnerves me.  I feel I will go insane if I stay in this
hole much longer . . .

It is too much for me.  Suddenly I drop the butt of my rifle.  He
collapses into the corner of the bay.  His hands still grip the
barrel.  I start to run down the bay.

A few steps and I turn the corner.

I am in the next bay.  I am glad I cannot see him.  I am
bewildered.

Out of the roar of the bombardment I think I hear voices.  In a
flash I remember that I am unarmed.  My rifle--it stands between me
and death--and it is in the body of him who lies there trying to
pull it out.

I am terrified.

If they come here and find me they will stab me just as I stabbed
him--and maybe in the ribs, too.

I run back a few paces but I cannot bring myself to turn the corner
of the bay in which he lies.  I hear his calls for help.  The other
voices sound nearer.

I am back in the bay.

He is propped up against his parados.  The rifle is in such a
position that he cannot move.  His neck is limp and he rolls his
head over his chest until he sees me.

Behind our lines the guns light the sky with monster dull red
flashes.  In this flickering light this German and I enact our
tragedy.

I move to seize the butt of my rifle.  Once more we are face to
face.  He grabs the barrel with a childish movement which seems to
say:  You may not take it, it is mine.  I push his hands away.  I
pull again.

My tugging and pulling works the blade in his insides.

Again those horrible shrieks!

I place the butt of the rifle under my arm and turn away, trying to
drag the blade out.  It will not come.

I think:  I can get it out if I unfasten the bayonet from the
rifle.  But I cannot go through with the plan, for the blade is in
up to the hilt and the wound which I have been clumsily mauling is
now a gaping hole.  I cannot put my hand there.

Suddenly I remember what I must do.

I turn around and pull my breech-lock back.  The click sounds sharp
and clear.

He stops his screaming.  He looks at me, silently now.

He knows what I am going to do.

A white Very light soars over our heads.  His helmet has fallen
from his head.  I see his boyish face.  He looks like a Saxon; he
is fair and under the light I see white down against green cheeks.

I pull my trigger.  There is a loud report.  The blade at the end
of my rifle snaps in two.  He falls into the corner of the bay and
rolls over.  He lies still.

I am free.

But I am only free to continue the raid.  It seems as though I have
been in this trench for hours.  Where are the red flares?  I look
towards our lines and see only the flickering orange gun flashes
leaping into the black sky.

The air is full of the smoke of high explosives.  Through the murk
I see two heads coming out of the ground.  It is an entrance to a
dugout.  The heads are covered with the familiar pot-shaped helmets--
we use a more vulgar term to describe them.  Apparently this was a
dugout our men had overlooked.

I cock my breech-lock and raise the rifle to my shoulder.  The
first one sees me and throws his hands high into the air.

"Kamarad--Kamarad," he shouts.

His mate does likewise.

Suddenly the sky over in the direction of our lines becomes smudged
with a red glow.

The flares!  The signal to return!

"Come with me," I shout into their ears.  I start to drag them with
me.  They resist and hold back.

They stand with their backs glued to the side of the trench and
look at me with big frightened eyes.  They are boys of about
seventeen.  Their uniforms are too big for them and their thin
necks poke up out of enormous collars.

"Nicht schiessen!--bitte--nicht schiessen!" the nearest one shouts,
stupidly shaking his head.

I reassure him.  I search them for weapons and then sling my rifle
over my shoulder as an evidence of good faith.  We start off down
the trench towards a sap which leads out into No Man's Land.

We are back in the bay where he with my bayonet in his ribs lies in
the corner.  I pass him quickly as though I do not know him.

The one nearest to me throws himself on the dead soldier.

I spring upon him.

The red flares colour the sky.  It is the signal to return, and
here this maniac tries to keep me in this trench forever.  I grab
him by the slack of his collar and start to tear him away.

He looks up at me with the eyes of a dog and says:

"Mein Bruder--eine minute--mein Bruder."

The red flares grow brighter in the sky over my shoulder.

The other prisoner looks at me with sad eyes and repeats:

"Ja, ja, das ist sein Bruder."

"Schnell," I shout into the kneeling one's ears.  He nods and takes
a few letters and papers from his brother's pockets and follows me
into the sap.

The earth leaps into the air on all sides of us.  I point towards
our lines and we begin to run.  The field is being swept by machine-
gun fire.

I do not see any of our men.  We are alone.

We run and stumble over stray bits of embedded barbed wire.  We
pick ourselves up and run again.  It is miraculous how we can live,
even for a moment, in this fire.  A shell explodes about twenty
yards from us.  The brother falls.  We pick him up and carry him
into a discarded communication trench that runs from the German
lines to ours.

The fire grows fiercer.  We can distinguish shells of every
calibre.  The air begins to snarl and bark over our heads.  They
are using overhead shrapnel.

We stop and feel in the darkness for a funk-hole or a dugout.  We
find a hole in the side of the trench and wait there while the
storm of living steel rages about us.

It is black inside.  The unhurt prisoner pulls a stub of a candle
out of his tunic pocket.  I light it; it flickers with the force of
the nearby detonations.

The brother hugs his wounded leg and rocks to and fro with pain.
We examine him.  He has been hit in the calf of his right leg.  We
take the emergency dressings from our tunics and pour iodine into
the open hole of his flesh.  He winces and then shrieks as the
stuff eats into his tissue.  I apply a gauze and his mate starts to
bind the wound with bandages.

By signs and with my meagre German I make them understand that we
will wait here until the force of the barrage abates.  I pull out a
package of cigarettes and offer them one each.  We light up from
the candle and sit smoking.

I point to the wounded one's leg and ask him how he feels.  He
shakes his head and moans:

"Ach, ach, mein Bruder!"  He points back towards the German lines.

He begins to weep and talk rapidly at the same time.  I cannot
understand.  I can distinguish only two words--"Bruder" and
"Mutter."  The other prisoner nods his head solemnly, affirming
what his comrade says:

"Ja, ja, das ist wahr--das ist sein Bruder, Karl."

I sit looking at them silently.

There is nothing to say.

How can I say to this boy that something took us both, his brother
and me, and dumped us into a lonely, shrieking hole at night--it
armed us with deadly weapons and threw us against each other.

I imagined that I see the happy face of the mother when she heard
that her two boys were to be together.  She must have written to
the older one, the one that died at the end of my bayonet, to look
after his young brother.  Take care of each other and comfort one
another, she wrote, I am sure.

Who can comfort whom in war?  Who can care for us, we who are set
loose at each other and tear at each other's entrails with silent
gleaming bayonets?

I want to tell these boys what I think, but the gulf of language
separates us.

We sit silently, waiting for the storm of steel to die down.

The wounded one's cigarette goes out.  I move the candle towards
his mouth.  He puts his thin hand to mine to steady it.  The
cigarette is lit.  He looks into my eyes with that same doggish
look and pats my hand in gratitude.

"Du bist ein guter Soldat," he says, his eyes filling with tears.
I pat his shoulder.

With his hand he describes a circle.  The motion takes in his
trenches and ours, the thundering artillery, the funk-hole,
everything.  In a little-boy voice he says:

"Ach, es ist schrecklich--schrecklich . . ."

                           * * * *

The explosions die down.

We decide to move.

I motion to them that we are to go forward.

We crawl out of the dugout.

We support Karl's brother, one on each side of him.

There is no shellfire here.  To the rear they are shelling our
artillery batteries, but here there is only a steady sweep of
machine-gun fire.  As we are in the discarded trench we are in no
danger.

At last we reach the sap that leads to our trenches.

The sentry challenges us and we are allowed to pass.

Clark is waiting, checking off the names of those who return.  He
looks with approval at the two prisoners.

I am ordered to take the prisoners down to battalion headquarters.

In the headquarters' dugout there are about fifty men congregated.
I am greeted with shouts of approval by the officers.  It seems
that mine are the only prisoners brought in.

The colonel slaps me on the back.

I ask that the prisoners be treated nicely.

"Of course--of course," says the colonel in a gruff voice.

They are taken into a corner and given some food and rum--to warm
them up and make them talk.

One of the men in our company comes up to me and whispers:

"They're talking of giving you an MM."*


* Military Medal.


I watch the noisy scene quite calmly.  The officers and men are
flushed with the freely flowing rum.  The colonel honours me by
calling me to his table and offering me his bottle of whisky.  I
take a drink.

I am amazed that I do not tremble and shake after the experiences
of the night.

They are talking of the casualties of the raid.  MacLeod was killed
by a grenade as we leaped into the trenches.  Forty men are missing
out of the hundred who went over.

And over there--?

One of the captains in another company takes the little red and
black striped fatigue cap from the head of the wounded prisoner and
gives it to me.

I refuse to take it.

"Here," he shouts boisterously, "here, take it and send it home to
your mother as a souvenir."

He stuffs the cap into my pocket.

Outside an occasional shell screams over our heads and explodes,
shaking the dugout.

The terrific noise is gone.

The raid is over.

Forty men--a young officer--two prisoners and--Karl.  I think about
this calmly but sadly.

                           * * * *

The raiders are excused from duty for the remainder of the term in
the line.  We are sent back to the reserve dugouts.  They are
spacious.

The effect of the rum begins to wear off.

I try to sleep.

I cannot.

I am proud of myself.  I have been tested and found not wanting.

I lie on my blanket and think of the raid.  I feel quietly sure of
myself.  I went through all that without breaking down.

I feel colder now that the rum no longer acts.

I begin to shiver.  I draw my greatcoat over my head.

I begin to shake.

"Cold," I say to myself, "cold."

My hands shake--my whole body.  I am trembling all over.

"Fool," I say to myself, "fool; why are you trembling?  The raid is
over.  You are safe.  You will get an MM--ten days' leave in London
or Paris."

I try to decide where I shall go, to Paris or to London, but the
thoughts do not stick.

The image of Karl, he who died on my bayonet, seems to stand before
my eyes.

The shaking becomes worse.  The movements are those of one who is
palsied.

I begin to sob.

I am alone.

I am living through the excitement of the raid all over again; but
I cannot relieve myself with action now.

I do not think things now; I feel them.

Who was Karl?  Why did I have to kill him?

Forty men lost--why?  MacLeod killed--why?

I do not want to lie here.  I am frightened at being alone.

I get to my feet and start up the stairs leading to the
communication trench.  An officer comes stumbling down the stairs.
He recognises me.  He sees my frightened eyes.

"Here, here," he says, "what's the matter?--where are you going?"

I mumble something.

He offers me his flask.  It is filled with rum.  I take a long
swig.  It burns my insides.

                           * * * *

I stumble along the trench looking for my section.  It is quite
dark, there are no lights in the sky.  No moon, no stars.

I reach the front line.  I recognise faces.  My name is called.  It
is Fry.  He grasps my hand and shakes it heartily.  His face is
serious.

"You did fine, I hear," he says.  "They're all talking about it.
You're going to get the MM."

"Where's Cleary?" I ask.

"He got it," Fry replies.

"Where?  How?" I ask.

"Right over here."  He points a finger.  "As soon as the barrage
started they sent over a couple of heavies.  A hunk of shell caved
his helmet in.  He's down at the MO's dugout."

I dash off down the trench.  I begin to cry.  Tears stream down my
face.

It begins to rain.

The drops fall on my tin helmet, making a ping-pong noise.  The
water splashes my face.  It trickles down the gaping collar of my
tunic.

The trench becomes muddy and I slip and flounder in the dark.

The front is quiet.  Not a sound rips through the silence.

I see a lone figure looming out of the darkness.  It is a company
runner.  I ask where the medical officer's dugout is.  He directs
me.  I stagger on.

Odour of chemicals.  It is the MO's dugout.  I stumble down the
stairs.

Wounded men are lying all over the earthen floor.  The MO sees me.
He is an elderly man.  He smiles.

"What is it, son?"

"Cleary--Cleary, 'A' company," I stammer.

"Pal?"

I nod my head.

He puts his arm on my shoulder.

"I'm sorry--he won't live."

I stand still.  I say nothing.

"Do you want to see him?"

"Yes," I say at last.

He takes me to a corner and points to a khaki blood-soaked bundle.
It is Cleary.  His head lies on a small pile of hairy sandbags.
His chin rests heavily on his collarbone.  His face is a yellowish
green.  His eyes are closed.  The eyelids flutter slightly.  Over
his right eye, in his forehead, there is a gaping wound out of
which thick red blood flows.  Part of the jaw is ripped off.  He is
breathing heavily--half snoring.  His face is twisted.

I turn to the doctor.

"Is he conscious?"

He shakes his head.

"No, he's out of it.  Knocked out.  Bad fracture of the skull.
He'll soon pass out."

As we talk Cleary gives aloud snort.  His legs and arms convulse
and jerk spasmodically.

Then he lies still.

"He's dead."

I explain to the MO that there are some of my papers in the tunic
of the corpse.  I ask permission to take them.  He nods assent.

I stuff the papers in my pockets and run out into the slippery
trench.

I walk back to the dugouts reserved for the survivors of the
raiding party.  I throw myself down on the blanket.  I cannot
sleep.  I am calm now.  It is quiet.  I think:

Why was I so terrified when I thought of Karl, the prisoner's
brother?  Why did I stand frozen as the MO told me that Cleary was
dying?  Why did tears choke me as I looked at his oozing wound in
his head, at his jaw which was half torn away?

Why?

The questions press on my brain--cry aloud for an answer.  I toss
and turn in my searching.  It does not come.

It is better, I say to myself, not to seek for answers.  It is
better to live like an unreasoning animal.

Ask me no questions--I'll tell you no lies.

At the base a sergeant once told me that all a soldier needed was a
strong back and a weak mind.

Better not to ask questions.  Better not to . . .

Well . . .  Cleary is dead.  Dead with a hole in his head . . .
with his jaw shot away . . .

Maybe he was better off.  No more war for him--no more fatigues--no
more Clark . . .

But why did you feel as though your insides were being forced up
through your throat as you saw him die? I say to myself.

No answer.

I had seen other men die.  Hundreds, thousands, maybe . . .

He was a clerk in an office back home.  Maybe if he hadn't died
here--like this--he would have married a stenographer in the office
in which he worked.  He would have had children and maybe he would
have been run over by a taxicab.

Or maybe he would have contracted a venereal disease in a Cadieux
Street dive and died of paresis.  Maybe.

And Karl . . . ?

Maybe he was a farmer or a mechanic.  Who knows?--he could have
died in a hundred ways in civilian life.

What is so terrible about the death of one of these boys--about the
death of one of us?

I guess it is because we do not want to die--because we hang on so
pitifully to life as it slips away.  Our lives are stolen--taken
from us unawares.

Back home our lives were more or less our own--more or less, there
we were factors in what we were doing.  But here we are no more
factors than was the stripling Isaac whom the hoary, senile Abraham
led to the sacrificial block . . .

But it is better not to think . . .

I pull my coat over my head.  I feel warm and drowsy.

At last sleep comes, mercifully . . .



Chapter 7

Béthune


Béthune.

A dirty, squat, coal-smudged city.

The black north of France.  In the days of peace black with the
soot of coal, now blackened with the smoke of war.

On the outskirts of the town is a huge slag heap.  The adjacent
coal mine is idle--but intact.  The city is within range of heavy
artillery fire.  The countryside around the city is pockmarked with
shells.  But the mine stands intact.  It is a miracle.

Béthune.  A few miles behind the Canadian front!  A haven of rest
for the Canadians--tired and trench-weary.

Béthune with its narrow, grimy streets.  Its undersized mining
population which walks down the streets with that peculiar stunted
walk of human moles.  Wine shops, stores, egg and chip joints!

No shells scream into the town.

Aeroplanes fly harmlessly over it.

The mine building with its shower-baths!

The tolerated brothel!

Yes, Béthune is a haven--a soldiers' haven.

                           * * * *

We march towards the city singing our smutty marching songs.  Songs
laden with humour--gallows humour, the Germans call it.  There is
something terrifying in the eagerness with which we sing these
songs.

A song to forget the horror of the trenches!

A song to forget our dead!

A song to forget the unforgettable!

Our bellies are full.  We have rested for a night.  It is late
afternoon and now we are marching towards Béthune with its wine
shops, gambling dives, its safe streets--its bordels.

Let the thunder of the artillery boom behind us.  We are marching
away from it.

Seven hundred men, hard, tough, and war-bitten.

Our feet beat the rhythm for the songs.


     Oh, madam, have you a daughter fine, parley voo.
     Oh, madam, have you a daughter fine, parley voo.
     Oh, madam, have you a daughter fine,
     Fit for a soldier up the line,
     Hincky, dincky, parley voo.


And then the answer:


     Oh, yes, I have a daughter fine,
     Fit for a soldier up the line,
     Hincky, dincky, parley voo.


Mile after mile the verses are roared out with a half-terrified,
half-Rabelaisian boisterousness.  Then the concluding verses.


     So the little black bastard he grew and he grew, parley voo.
     The little black bastard he grew and he grew, parley voo.
     The little black bastard he grew and he grew,
     And he learned to love the ladies too,
     Hincky, dincky, parley voo.


And a word for the generals:


     Oh, the generals have a bloody good time
     Fifty miles behind the line.
     Hincky, dincky, parley voo.


Left, right, left, right, roar the dirty marching songs:


     Oh, wash me in the water
     That you washed your dirty daughter,
     And I shall be whiter
     Than the whitewash on the wall . . .


Left, right, left--roar the dirty marching songs.  Tomorrow we may
be dead.  The world is shot to pieces.  Nothing matters.  There are
no ten commandments.  Let 'er go!

                           * * * *

Anderson complains to the chaplain of the battalion.

"Suppose we were bombed or something.  Imagine them going to meet
their God with a dirty marching song on their lips!"

But we continue to sing our songs--shouting and singing down the
terror that grips each heart:


     Mad'mselle from Armentières, parley voo.
     Oh, mad'mselle from Armentières, parley voo.
     Mad'mselle from Armentières,
     Hadn't been ----ed for forty years.
     Hincky, dincky, parley voo.

                           * * * *

We are billeted on the outskirts of the town.  We are to be
inspected by the Chief of Staff and we are busy polishing our green
brass buttons and oiling our rifles.

We march for a few kilometres out to a large field south of the
town.  An army of little French boys stand on the side-lines,
watching us as we are drawn up for inspection.

We wait for hours.

No generals.

We shift from foot to foot.

At last a convoy of automobiles comes streaming down the road
leading to the field.

The company commanders shout orders.

We draw ourselves up stiffly.

A car swerves onto the parade ground.  It comes to a stop.

An orderly dashes out and swings the door open.

A little grey-haired man steps out.  His uniform is bedecked with
gold and red facings.

"Battalion--present arms!"

Seven hundred rifles are smacked into vertical positions before our
staring faces.

Behind us the band bursts into two lines of the national anthem:


     Oh, Canada, oh, Canada,
     Oh, Canada, we stand on guard for thee . . .


The general lifts a tired hand to the visor of his gold-braided
cap.

Behind him stands a group of young aides.  They languidly survey us
as we stand at the salute.

The general starts to walk down the ranks.  He is followed by his
staff.

We are standing as rigid as though ramrods were shoved up our
spines.

We are motionless.

A louse comes to life in one of my armpits.  The itch is
unbearable.  I want to drop my rifle and scratch.  I try not to
think of it, but the biting of the beast is an inescapable fact.
Mind over matter does not work here.  To move would mean the
orderly room and a few days' loss of pay.  I stand still.

The inspection takes but a few minutes.  The general gets into his
car and drives off.

We are marched back to our billets.  On the way back we talk:

". . . a little runt, ain't he?"

"Got a cushy job, too."

"Bet he's got a hundred batmen to shine his leather."

"He's got fifty medals . . ."

"Yeah, but he'll never die in a lousy trench like Brownie and them
did."

"God, no.  Generals die in bed."

"Well, that's a pretty good place to die."

Anderson speaks up:

"Where would we be without generals--"

"Yeah--where?"

Clark shouts an order:

"March at ease!"

That means we may sing:


     Oh, the generals have a bloody good time
     Fifty miles behind the line.
     Hincky, dincky, parley voo.

                           * * * *

We are marched over for our quarterly bath.  There are shower-baths
in the mine buildings.  It is three months since we have been under
hot water.  Now we will bathe our lousy, scratched bodies.

But even here water is scarce.  We strip and stand waiting for the
water to be turned on.  Fifteen seconds under the steaming water
and then out.  We soap ourselves, covering our bodies with a thick
lather.  Fifteen seconds under the water again for rinsing.

We go naked into another room for our fumigated underwear.  In the
seams and crotches of the fresh underclothing we see lurking pale
lice as large as rice grains.

                           * * * *

It is dusk on payday.

In the centre of the town, in a red-brick house, is the brothel.
The house has six girls on duty all of the time--three for the
privates and three for the officers.  The officers have a private
entrance.  But inside, it is said, the girls do not recognise this
distinction of military rank.

There are no lights in the town.  In the dusk the queue extends for
two streets.  Three hundred men stand waiting.

The children of the town pass the line silently.  Women and their
men pass by.

The boys in line joke:

"Hell, you gotta wait in line for everything in war."

The younger soldiers grumble impatiently at the delay, but older
ones wait stolidly.

As the night grows darker the queue becomes a long silent line of
avid men who stare hungrily at the brightly lit door of the house
as it opens every now and then and emits a khaki-clad figure which
hurries off into the dark.

The line moves up one pace . . .

                           * * * *

There are no fatigues for a few days.  I walk down the roads at
night.  It is good to get away from the company for a few hours.
Sometimes I sit in a civilian estaminet and drink wine and listen
to the natives talking.  It sounds pleasant to hear words which one
does not comprehend.  In these native estaminets the price of wine
is cheaper than in the ones frequented by the soldiers.  The French
here think that every Canadian soldier is a millionaire.  They do
not understand why we throw our money away so freely.

It is early evening.  The sun has set.  The men are sleeping after
supper or sitting in the wet canteens, drinking beer.  I fill a
large pouch with tobacco which has been sent to me from home.  I
stuff the bowl of my pipe and light up, and set off down one of the
roads which lead away from the town.

I walk along puffing at my pipe.  Nearby I hear the sound of fowl
clucking as they are disturbed in their sleep.  A pig grunts
somewhere in the twilight.

I pass a peasant cottage.  An old man sits at the door.  He greets
me.  I stop.  He speaks a little English.  We talk.

He sniffs hungrily at the smoke which curls from the bowl of my
pipe.  Tobacco is scarce with the natives.  There is a government
monopoly, and most of it is sent to the French soldiers at the
front.  The natives smoke horrible black stuff, expensive and hard
to get.

He holds out a gnarled, brown hand.  It is twisted into the
pathetic begging gesture.

"Tabac?" he asks.

I hesitate.  One is not generous in war.

His eyes beseech me.  I give him my pouch.  He takes a blackened
pipe from his pocket and eagerly fills his bowl.

We smoke in silence.

He takes a deep inhalation of the fragrant Virginia tobacco and
exhales with deep sighs of satisfaction.

After a while we talk again.

He asks if I like Béthune.

"Yes," I say.  "They don't shell it, do they?"

"Do you know, m'sieu, why the Boches do not bombard the city?  It
is a fortified town.  You must surely know?"

I ask why.

"That mine there"--he points towards the slag heap which towers
over the fields--"it is owned"--he lowers his voice for no apparent
reason--"it is owned by the Germans--so they do not shell it.  But
my barn here"--he points to a demolished wood barn--"it was shelled
last month.  Cr-r-r-ung! and a year's work was done in.  Their own
coal mines they will not destroy, but--"

He breaks off.

"It is better not to talk of such things, eh, m'sieu?  It is even
better not to think of them?"

He asks me into the house.

Inside we sit and talk.  He gives me a glass of white table wine
and I offer him half a franc.  He takes it.

Presently a girl of about eighteen or so comes into the house.
Apparently she has been doing some light chores.  She smiles at me.
She is dark, like so many of these northerners, and has olive,
ruddy cheeks.  Her hair is shiny black.  As she smiles her eyes
wrinkle up and seem to disappear behind her high cheekbones; at the
same time the bridge of her nose creases, giving her a tomboyish
air.

I ask if they have a spare bed.  I do not relish the idea of
sleeping in billets tonight.  I offer to pay.  Her father consents.

I undo my puttees and make myself comfortable.  I fill my pipe and
sit near the door smoking and talking to the girl.  Presently she
goes into the corner of the room and talks with her father.  I hear
them whispering.

I sit and look over the silhouette of the slag heap in the
direction of the line.  The rumble of the artillery fills the air
and the gun flashes colour the early night sky.  It is nice to sit
here and watch it . . .

A hand is on my shoulder.  It is the girl.

"You please give fader tabac?  Canadien have many."

The skin on her nose creases again and her eyes twinkle.  She runs
her hand up the back of my head.

I cannot refuse her.  I give her half the contents of my pouch.
She runs to her father with the treasure.  He nods to me gratefully
from his corner.

I continue to sit and think, watching the flashes in the distant
sky.

It grows darker and darker.

It is black.

The lights disappear altogether from the sky.

The rumble ceases.

The night's bombardment is over.

I knock the ashes from my bowl.

The old man is standing beside me.

"Come," he says, "I will show you where to sleep."  He leads me up
a narrow stairway and down a little hall.  The house is dark and
quiet.  No lights are permitted.

He opens a door.  It is black inside the room.

"You sleep here," he says.

I walk in.  He closes the door.

I fumble in the dark and find a chair.  I start to undress.  I am
tired and the thought of a night in a bed hastens my movements.  At
last I am undressed.  I feel in the darkness for the bed.

I throw myself onto it.

In the dark my hand feels a warm, hard woman's body.  I smell
peasant odours--earth, manure, sweat . . .  Her hot breath beats
into my face.  We do not speak . . .

                           * * * *

In the morning I sleep late.  I dress in a hurry and get into
billets late for breakfast.  Fry and Broadbent tell me that I am
wanted at company headquarters.

My leave has come through!

I rush back to my billets.  I hastily pack and get ready to go.  I
draw my pay.  In the evening I start down the line.

There are about twenty-five of us in the cattle car which halts and
bumps its way down towards the base.  The train creaks and comes to
a halt every few miles.  It is night but we cannot sleep.  We talk
and smoke.

"I'm gonna walk into the best restaurant in London and I'm gonna
say to the waiter, 'Bring me everything on the menu.'"

"Yeah, you think you can eat a lot.  Well, let me tell you that
your belly is all shrunk up.  Last time I was on leave I got sick
that way."

"I'm gonna sleep the whole ten days."

"God, another day and we'll be sleeping in clean sheets . . ."

                           * * * *

Dawn.

We are still in the cattle car.  We pass an encampment for war
prisoners.  The emaciated-looking Germans stand looking, as silent
and motionless as owls.  One of them waves his hand at us as we
ride past.  We wave back at them.  We throw them cigarettes and
cans of bully beef.

At last we arrive at the base.  We wait in line for our soup and
later are assigned to motor lorries which will take us to the
Channel port.



Chapter 8

London


London.

It is three o'clock in the morning.

We are weary with the long hours of travel.  I walk out of the soot-
coloured ugly Waterloo Station and hail a cab.  I give the driver
the name of a little hotel.

I am taken up to a room.  I ask where the bathroom is.  In a few
minutes I am scrubbing myself vigorously.

It is five o'clock when I turn in.  I stretch myself royally
between the cool white sheets.  Outside I hear the rumble of early
morning traffic.  I listen hungrily.

The hollow, echoing sound of horses' hoof beats.  The roll of
wheels on the macadam.  The growl of an omnibus as it passes my
window.

I snuggle contentedly under the sheets and fall asleep.

                           * * * *

It is late afternoon when I awake.

I dress leisurely, soaking in each quiet moment.  The room is
peaceful.  It is years since I have been alone like this.  I polish
my boots, shine my buttons, and leave the hotel.

On the steps I light a cigarette and look around me.  Nobody
notices me.  The traffic of the city flows on all sides of me.

It is dusk and the few lights permitted are shaded so as not to be
visible from the air.  I walk to the corner.  A woman passes me and
whispers:

"Hello, Canada."

Too early for that.

First I must get a drink and then a bellyful of food.

I walk into a restaurant on Shaftesbury Avenue.  I order a meal and
a bottle of wine.  After the first few mouthfuls I notice that I am
not very hungry.  That man on the leave train was right.  I drink a
glass of wine and light a cigarette.

Well, I am happy, anyhow.

The waiter sees the insignia on my shoulders.  He is a tall, pale
cockney.  He hovers over me.

"'Ow is it over there?"

I do not feel like talking.

"Lousy," I reply.

A pretty girl sits opposite me.  She leans across the table and
asks for a match.

I give her a light.

We walk out of the restaurant together.

Her name is Gladys.  We walk along the streets talking and
laughing.  She is an excellent companion for a soldier on leave.
She does not mention the war.

We are in the Strand near Fleet Street.

"Let's have a drink," she says.

"Sure."

"Don't say 'sure'," she says, "it sounds American.  Say 'of
course'."

"But I am an American."

"I don't like Americans."

"All right, then I'm a Canadian."

We walk into the family entrance to a pub and order two
doubleheaders of Scotch.  We sit and drink and talk.

"Where shall we go tonight?"

"Anywhere you say."

"Do you want to go to the Hippodrome?"

"Yes."

We order another drink.  I feel flushed.

We walk out of the public house and into the humming streets.

She puts her arm in mine and we walk up the street.  Her body is
close to mine.  I feel its contours, its firmness.  There is an
odour of perfume.

"Love me?"

She looks at me with wide-open eyes.

"Yes.  I love all the boys."  She squeezes my arm.  I do not like
her answer.

I frown.

She hastens to explain:

"I have enough for you all, poor lads."

My frown breaks a little.

"Now, then, let's not talk of things like that," she says.

The whisky is racing through my veins.  I feel boisterous.  I
swagger.  The thought of the trenches does not intrude itself now.

I buy the tickets for the theatre.  Inside, the performance has
started.

On the stage a vulgar-faced comic is prancing up and down the apron
of the stage singing.  Behind him about fifty girls dressed in
gauzy khaki stage uniforms, who look like lewd female Tommies,
dance to the tune of the music.  Their breasts bob up and down as
they dance and sing:


     Oh, it's a lovely war.
     What do we care for eggs and ham
     When we have plum and apple jam?
     Quick march, right turn.
     What do we do with the money we earn?
     Oh, oh, oh, it's a lovely war.


The tempo is quick, the orchestra crashes, the trombones slide, the
comic pulls impossible faces.

The audience shrieks with laughter.  Gladys laughs until tears roll
down her face.

The chorus marches into the wings.  A Union Jack comes down at the
back of the stage.  The audience applauds and cheers.

I feel miserable.

The fat comic--the half-undressed actresses--somehow make me think
of the line.  I look about me.  There are very few men on leave in
the theatre.  The place is full of smooth-faced civilians.  I feel
they have no right to laugh at jokes about the war.

I hear Gladys's voice.

"Don't you like it, boy?"

"No, these people have no right to laugh."

"But, silly, they are trying to forget."

"They have no business to forget.  They should be made to
remember."

The comic on the stage has cracked a joke.  The audience goes into
spasms of laughter.  My voice is drowned out.

Gladys pats my arm.

A jolly-faced rotund civilian in evening dress sitting near me
says:

"I say, he's funny, isn't he?"

I stare at him.

He turns to his female companion.  I hear him whisper:

"Shell-shocked."

I cannot formulate my hatred of these people.  My head is fuzzy but
I feel that people should not be sitting laughing at jokes about
plum and apple jam when boys are dying out in France.  They sit
here in stiff shirts, their faces and jowls are smooth with daily
shaving and dainty cosmetics, their bellies are full, and out there
we are being eaten by lice, we are sitting trembling in shivering
dugouts . . .

Intermission.

I feel blue.  The effect of the Scotch has worn off.

"Come on, let's have a drink," Gladys says.

We go to the back of the auditorium and order two drinks.  It is a
long wait and we have several drinks before the curtain goes up
again.

Finally the show ends and we go out into the street.

Swarms of well-dressed men and women stand about in the lobby
smoking and talking, waiting for their motor cars.  There are many
uniforms but they are not uniforms of the line.  I see the insignia
of the non-combatant units--Ordnance Corps, Army Service Corps,
Paymasters.  I feel out of place in all this glitter.

"Come on," I say to Gladys, "let's get out of here."

She is angry with me as we walk down the street.

"You're spoiling your leave.  Can't you forget the front for the
few days you have before you?"

We are back in the pub.

More drinks.

She tells me amusing little bits of her life and I listen.

". . . so when he left me I decided I'd stay on in London.  I
didn't know what to do so I took rooms in Baker Street and made a
living that way.  But I'm not like other girls . . ."

SO!

                           * * * *

Inside of her room a fire burns in the grate.

It is warm and cheery.

She takes off her hat and gloves, and prepares to make tea.  The
room is furnished with the taste of a woman of her profession.  Ah,
but it is welcome after two years in the line!  I sit on a dainty
settee facing the fire.

She comes back with tea and a small bottle of rum.

"Shall I lace it for you?"

I nod.  She pours a little rum into the hot tea.  We sit back and
drink.  She nestles up against me and with her free hand she takes
off her shoes, then she slips off a stocking.  As we talk she
slowly undresses.  Finally she stands up in only a gauzy slip.

The rum is tingling in every nerve.  The fire throws a red glow
over her white skin.

She sits on my lap and then jumps up.

"My, but your uniform is rough."

I take a roll of pound notes out of my pocket.  I put them on the
table close at hand.

"Listen," I say.  "I like you.  Let me stay here for my ten days."

"I was going to say that to you, but I was afraid you might
misunderstand me.  Most of my boys spend their whole leave with me.
I don't like them running off in the morning.  It's a little
insulting--"  She ends with a little laugh.

The fire crackles on the hearth.  The rum sings in my head.  The
heat of the fire beats on my face.  Her slim white body entices me.

Bang!  An explosion in the street.

I leap to my feet.

My heart thumps.

She laughs.

"Silly.  That's only a motorcycle backfiring.  You poor thing!
Your face is white."

She puts her hands on my face and looks anxiously at me.

I try to laugh.

                           * * * *

We lie in bed.  From a neighbouring clock the hour strikes.  It is
three o'clock.

One day gone!

Gladys's head lies in the crook of my arm.

"Happy?"

Her body makes a friendly, conscious movement.  It is one of the
many ways that lovers speak without words.

"Yes," I say in a whisper.

A tear comes to life and rolls down my face.  She puts her hands to
my eyes and wipes them.

"Then what are you crying about?"

I do not answer.

"You won't be cross if I tell you something?"

I shake my head.

"Promise?"

"I promise."

"I always feel sad when the boys cry in my bed.  It makes me feel
that it is my fault in some way."

Silence.  Then:

"You're not angry because I have mentioned the other ones?"

I shake my head.

Cool hands on my face.

Her silken hair brushes against my cheek.

"Now, now--go to sleep, boy."

The clock booms the quarter-hour.  I close my eyes.

                           * * * *

I wake with the odour of grilled bacon in my nostrils.  The
curtains in the room are drawn.  I do not know what time it is but
I am rested.  Rested and famished.  In another room I hear the
sizzling sound of cooking.

Gladys comes into the room.  She is dressed in a calico housedress.
She smiles at me and says:

"Tea?"

She brings a cup of tea to me and we talk of the plans for the day.

I dress and come into the other room which is a combination dining
and sitting room and parlour.

There is a glorious breakfast on the table, grilled bacon, crisp
and brown, two fried eggs, a pot of marmalade, a mound of toast,
golden yellow and brown, and tea.  I fall to.

Gladys looks on approvingly.  How well this woman understands what
a lonely soldier on leave requires.

"Eat, boy," she says.

She does not call me by name but uses "boy" instead.  I like it.
In a dozen different ways she makes me happy: a pat on the arm, a
run of her hand through my hair.

She is that delightful combination of wife, mother, and courtesan--
and I, a common soldier on leave, have her!

I slip into my tunic which by some mystery is now cleaned and
pressed, and we go out into the street and walk towards the Park.

                           * * * *

The days slip by.

It is a week since I have been here with Gladys.

We are at table.  She is a capable cook, and delights in showing me
that her domestic virtues are as great as her amorous ones.  I do
not gainsay either.

We are drinking tea and discussing the plans for the evening.  I do
not like a moment to slip by without doing something.  I am
restlessly happy.

"I should like to go to Whitechapel this evening," I say.

She looks at me with surprise.

"Why?"

"I've heard so much about it.  I want to see it."

"It's not nice there."

"I know, but I want to see more of London than just its music
halls, Hyde Park, and its very wonderful pubs."

"But very low people live there, criminals and such things--you
will be robbed."

"Well, I don't mind.  I am a criminal.  Did I ever tell you that I
committed murder?"

She looks up with a jerk.  Her eyes look at me with suspicion.

"It was some time ago.  I came into a place where an enemy of mine
was and I stabbed him and ran off," I explain.

Her eyes are wide open.  She is horrified.  She does not speak.

I laugh and relate that the murder took place in a trench and that
my enemy wore a pot-shaped helmet.

Her face glows with a smile.

"You silly boy.  I thought you had really murdered someone."

                           * * * *

Westminster Abbey.

Brown--musty--royal sepulcher.

I am alone.

I walk past statues of dead kings.

I yawn.

As I walk out in the bright sunlit street I heave a sigh of relief.
Well, I have been to Westminster Abbey.  It is a duty.

As I come out, an Anglican curate sees my listless face.

It is wartime and no introductions are necessary.

"Hello."

"Hello."

"You look tired."

"Yes."

"On leave?"

"Yes.  Going back tomorrow."

"Itching to get back, I'll wager."

"I'll be itching after I get back."

He laughs.  He is the type known as a fighting parson--very
athletic and boisterous.

"Ha, ha, that IS a good one--you'll be itching AFTER you get back.
I must remember that one."

He asks if I will have tea with him at a nearby tea room.  The
mustiness of the Abbey has dulled my wits and I can think of no
ready excuse, so I accept.

We are seated at the table.  He asks me innumerable questions about
the war.

Isn't the spirit of the men simply splendid?  Sobered every one up.
West End nuts who never took a single thing seriously leading their
men into machine-gun fire armed only with walking sticks.

I remark that this is bad military procedure and add that it sounds
like a newspaper story.

"Absolutely authentic, dear boy; a friend of mine came back and
told me he saw it with his own eyes.  Here, have a cigarette."  I
take one.  I sit and smoke and listen to his views on the war.  I
am ill at ease and want to get back to Gladys.

He talks on.

". . . but the best thing about the war, to my way of thinking, is
that it has brought out the most heroic qualities in the common
people, positively noble qualities . . ."

He goes on and on.

I feel that it would be useless to tell him of Brownie, of how Karl
died, of the snarling fighting among our own men over a crust of
bread . . .

I offer to pay for the tea.  He protests.

"No, no, by Jove, nothing too good for a soldier on leave--this is
mine."

We part at the corner of the street.

"Goodbye."

"Goodbye, good luck, and God bless you, old man."

I hurry back to Gladys.  Tonight is our last night together.

                           * * * *

Morning.

The last day.

I am to leave Waterloo Station at noon.  I have slept late.  Gladys
and I eat breakfast in silence.  She is sad that I must go, of that
there is no doubt.  As I pack my things she brings a parcel to me
which contains food, a bottle of whisky, and cigarettes.  I kiss
her lightly as a gesture of thanks; she clings to me and hides her
face from me.

Well, these things come to an end sooner or later . . .

We are at the station.  The waiting room is crowded with soldiers
coming to London on leave.  I envy them.

I say goodbye to Gladys.  She puts her arms around me.  I feel her
body being jerked by sobs.  I kiss her passionately.  She is all
the things I have longed for in the long months in the trenches--
and now I must go.

Her eyes are red and wet with tears.  Her nose is red.

She looks up to me pathetically with weepy eyes.

"Have you been happy, boy?"

I think of the beautiful hours we have spent together and I nod.

Crowds mill on both sides of us.  We are jostled.

I do not know how to go.  I decide to be abrupt.

"Well, I think I'll have to be going."

Once more we embrace.  She holds me tightly.  I feel tears
springing to my eyes.  I lift her face to mine and kiss her wet
eyes.

I run through the gate.

I look back.

She waves a crumpled handkerchief at me.

I wave my hand.

I climb into the carriage.

The train begins to move . . .



Chapter 9

Over the Top


Back at the front.

I find the battalion a few miles behind the reserve lines.  They
have just had a short rest.  We are getting ready to move.  There
is intense excitement everywhere and of course innumerable rumours.
We are going to the south of France, to a quiet front for a real
rest--we are going north to Belgium--there is to be a terrific
offensive, we are to be shock troops--and so on.  The air is thick
with these rumours--latrine rumours we call them.

A batch of unused recruits have come up, which gives us reason to
believe that we are not going out on rest.  The recruits look with
amazement at the feverish preparations, they get in our way, ask
foolish questions, and make nuisances of themselves generally.

The artillery roar up front swells as night falls.

It is dark when the battalion is ready.  We fall in outside of our
billets and march out of the little deserted, shell-torn village.

We march all night.  Ten minutes' rest every hour.  The road is
jammed with clanging artillery.  There is a steady stream going our
way.

Yes, we are going into action; of that there can be no doubt.  The
rumours of an offensive these past months have not been idle ones.

It is autumn.  We are wearing our greatcoats and the hours of
marching leave us wet with sweat.  We cease talking among
ourselves.  Breath is valuable.  The packs tug at our shoulders.
The accoutrements bang and clank against each other.

Men begin to fall out of the ranks.

The road becomes rougher.  Shell holes everywhere.  Gaps in the
marching column grow wider.  Clark runs up and down his company
shouting orders.

"Close up those goddamned gaps."

We run, painfully breaking the rhythm of the march.

It is dark.  Up ahead of us we see white lights shooting above the
horizon.  Very lights!  We are getting nearer to the line.

We pass through a charred, ruined village.  Guns come to life on
both sides of the road.  Heavy artillery.  From behind skeletons of
houses the mouths of the guns shoot tongues of red flame into the
night.  The detonations startle us with their suddenness.  We march
on.

Renaud, an undersized French Canadian recruit, marches by my side.
He came up on the train with me when I returned from leave and has
attached himself to me.  He complains that he has a pain in his
side.  It is a miracle how he can stagger along under his load.  I
do not know how he ever passed the doctor.

His knees sag.  In the dark I see his pale face, it is twisted with
pain.

"It hurts me here," he says, putting his hand to his left side near
the groin.

"If it gets worse, fall out," I say.

It is long after midnight.  We have been marching for nearly six
hours.  We lie alongside the road for our ten-minute rest.

Up ahead of us a bombardment is going on.  A road is being shelled
with overhead shrapnel.  We see the red bursts in the air.  We do
not speak to each other.

Renaud whimpers.

"I cannot go on.  I have a pain here."

Clark passes us as we rest.

"I will have to fall out, sir," the recruit says.

Clark turns on him with a cold smile.

"Cold feet, eh," he says, and he walks on.

It is time to fall in.  Renaud cannot get to his feet.  Clark walks
over to him.

"Fall in there, you," he orders.

The recruit begins to cry.  The company is drawn up, waiting.
Renaud does not move.  He lies by the edge of the road with his
hand pressed to his side.  Clark stands over the prostrate recruit.

"Get up!"

The recruit does not move.  The officer takes him by the scruff of
the neck and hauls him to his feet.

"You yellow-livered little bastard.  Fall in."

Renaud hobbles to his place.  We begin our march . . .

                           * * * *

All night long the guns blaze and storm.  We sit in the damp
dugouts and wait for the order to move forward.  The recruits are
frightened.  They sit among themselves and talk in whispers.

We have been told that we are going over the top in a few days.
There are no fatigues.  We wait and sleep.

I am lying in a corner half asleep on a pile of sandbags.  I feel
someone tugging at my left breast pocket.  I push the intruder away
with a sleepy movement of my hand.  I doze again.  Once more he
tugs.  I wake up fully.

It is a rat gnawing at my pocket in which I have some biscuits.  I
sit up and it retreats a little.  I look at it and it bares its
teeth.  I reach for my rifle.  It dashes into a hole.

                           * * * *

In the front line.

It is midnight.

We are to go over at five.

It is jet black.

The enemy is nervous tonight.

He keeps hammering at our line with heavy artillery.

The rum comes up and our lieutenant rations it out.

We stand in the trenches receiving last-minute orders.  Zero hour
is five o'clock sharp.  We synchronise our watches.

The hours drag.

Suddenly our guns in the rear open up.

The German line becomes alive with red shell bursts.

The fury of our cannons grows wilder and wilder.

Firework signals leap into the air behind the German trenches.

The guns maul each other's lines.

Machine guns sweep No Man's Land.

We crouch in the corner of the bay waiting . . .

The bombardment swells and seethes.  The air overhead whistles,
drones, and shrieks.

We are smashing their lines and batteries.  The reply is weak.
Their guns are nearly silenced.

As far as one can see to the left and right the night flickers with
gun flashes.

Renaud comes to my side.  His face is white.  He asks a question:

"When do we go over?"  His voice is trembling.

I look at my watch.

"Ten minutes," I say.  I am sorry for him.  I ask him to stay with
me during the attack.  He moves closer to me.

Fry, Broadbent, and Anderson are in the one bay with us.  We prop
the jumping-off ladder against the parapet.

Five minutes!

The intensity of the bombardment seems to have reached its peak.
The trench shivers with the force of the blasting.

Fry comes to my side.  He holds his hand out.

"So long," he says.  "I won't come out of this."

"Don't be crazy."

"Yes, I'm going to get it this time."  His lips are stretched tight
over his teeth.  "And I don't care, either.  I'm fed up."

He holds the Lewis gun ready to throw it up over the parapet.

Suddenly No Man's Land becomes a curtain of fire.  A million shells
seem to explode out there.  Smoke curls heavenwards.  The fierce
flicker is blinding.

BARRAGE!

We are to advance behind the sheet of seething flame.

I look at Renaud.  His eyes are wide open.  He keeps licking his
parched lips.  I shout a few last warnings into his ear.  "Don't
run.  Keep well behind the barrage.  If you run into it you'll be
torn to pieces."

Clark comes into the bay.  He looks at his watch.  He shouts
something.  We do not hear what he shouts but we know it is the
order to go over.

We clamber up the ladder and out onto the field.

All along the line men are advancing with their rifles on guard.

We walk slowly.  The curtain of fire moves on, methodically.

Out of the smoke behind us tanks crawl like huge beetles spitting
fire.  They pass us.  From one of the holes a hand waves to us.

On and on!

We walk behind the raging curtain of flame.  The earth trembles and
shakes as though it was tortured by an earthquake.  Our steps are
unsteady.

We have advanced about a hundred yards.

There is no enemy fire.

It is nearly dawn.  A blue-grey light appears.

Renaud walks by my side.  His face is red with excitement now.  To
my left Anderson and Fry walk together.

We reach the German front line.

It is pulverised.

Legs and arms in grey rags lie here and there.  The trenches are
almost flattened.

In the smoke-murk I step on something.  It is soft.  I look down.
It is the ripped-open stomach of a German.

We walk on.  The shield of fire advances.

Through the haze of smoke we see a wood about a hundred yards ahead
of us.  The barrage leaps upon it.  Torn trunks of trees fly into
the air.  Large branches fall near us.  We dodge them.

We are in the wood.

We advance cautiously for fear of snipers.

There is a movement in one of the trees which has remained
standing.  Broadbent raises his rifle to his shoulder and shoots
into the shattered branches.

A rifle drops--and then the man.  He holds his shoulder from whence
comes a thin trickle of blood.  The rifle is fitted with telescopic
sights.

A SNIPER!

Some of our boys rush to him and cover him with their rifles.  The
wounded sniper crawls on his knees towards us.  He is middle-aged
and has a grey walrus mustache--fatherly-looking.  His hands are
folded in the gesture which pleads for pity.

"Drei Kinder--three children," he shrieks.

We are on top of him.

Broadbent runs his bayonet into the kneeling one's throat.  The
body collapses.

Some of us kick at the prostrate body as we pass it.  It quivers a
little with each kick.

It begins to rain.

It pours.  Sheets of it.

Up in the sky we see flashes of lightning, but we cannot hear the
thunder for the roar of the artillery.

The earth is pulverised from the heavy bombardment and this mixes
with the rain, soon making a thin half-liquid mud.  It is ankle-
deep.  We flounder and slip and fall as we walk.

The barrage lifts.

We run through the mud slowly.  It holds our boots.  We slip and
stagger.  We are covered with mud.  We can hear the thunder now; it
is tame after the barrage.

Machine guns hammer at us.

Men begin to fall.

Shells explode out in front, showering us with slime.

We are held up.

The field has become a sea of mud.

Our light artillery is coming up behind us.  The drivers are
lashing at the horses.  The mud is almost knee-deep.  The wheels
stick.  The rain pours down upon us ceaselessly.

Near me a driver dismounts and grabs hold of the reins and tries to
pull his horses out of the mud.  The beasts struggle and hold back.
He strikes the animal nearest to him with the stock of his whip.
He beats its face.  Blood spurts from the animal's nose.  It
screams.  The heavy steel guns sink lower into the mud.

Each step is agony.  The mud sucks us down.  But we keep going
nevertheless.

Grenades land in the mud and do not explode.

We are near their trenches.  With a superhuman effort we run
towards them.  We can see the enemy leaving his positions and
fleeing to the rear.  We slide out of the mud of the field into the
half-water-filled trenches.

We have gained our objective.

We start to bail the water out of the trench.  We repair the
parapets.  Our saturated clothes hang on us like leaden garments.

I look at my watch.  It is six o'clock.

One hour to cross that field!

                           * * * *

The rain stops.  It is quiet.

We open our haversacks and start to eat.

At noon they begin to shell our line.  The fire is weak.  It lasts
about ten minutes.

Suddenly it stops.

COUNTERATTACK!

We put the Lewis gun on the parapet.  Broadbent works it while
Anderson stands by feeding him ammunition.

The Germans run slowly across the muddy field towards us.  There
are swarms of them.  I fire my rifle point-blank into the slow-
moving ranks.

They keep coming.

To my right the Lewis gun leaps and tugs as though it were a living
thing.

When they are about fifty yards from us they break and run back to
their lines again.  We continue to fire until we cannot see them
any longer.

It is quiet save for the swishing sound of the rain which has
started again.

In front of our lines we can hear their wounded calling for help.
They moan and howl.

We settle down to rest.

Suddenly machine-gun fire opens up.  We jump to the parapets.

They are coming again!

They advance in waves, in close formation .We stand on the firing-
step and shoot into the closely packed ranks.

Every shot tells.  My rifle is hot.  On all sides of us machine
guns hammer at the attacking ranks.

They are insane, it seems.

We cannot miss them.

On and on they come.

Above the clatter of the Lewis guns I can hear snatches of song.
They are singing.

They are close to us.  I fire carefully.

They are close enough to throw grenades.

I see their ranks waver for a moment and then they start to run
slowly towards us.  Our line is a line of flame.  Every gun is in
action.

The singing is quite distinct now.

I can see faces clearly.

Each burst of Broadbent's gun cuts a swath in the front ranks of
the attacking troops.

They are close to our trenches.  Their singing has become a shriek
which we hear above the hammering of our rifles and guns.

I am filled with a frenzied hatred for these men.  They want to
kill me but I will stay here and shoot at them until I am either
shot or stabbed down.  I grit my teeth.  We are snarling, savage
beasts.

Their dead and wounded are piled up about four deep.

They climb over them as they advance.

Suddenly they break and retreat.

We have repulsed them again.  Their wounded crawl towards our
trenches.  We shoot at them.

The shrieking and howling out in front of us sounds like a madhouse
in turmoil.

We sink down to the bottom of our trenches exhausted.

It is quiet once more.

Out in front the wounded men still howl.  One of them crawls into
our trench and falls near us.  Half of his face is shot away.

His breath smells of ether!  No wonder they attacked like madmen!

Fry has a flesh wound in his right arm.  We dress the wound.  It is
not serious and we advise him to go back as soon as it is dark.

Out in front the cries of the wounded are worse than ever.  We look
at each other with drawn, frightened faces.

                           * * * *

The afternoon wears on.  We busy ourselves with repairing the
trench.  We dig it deeper and sandbag our parapets.  Behind the
German lines we hear them preparing for another attack.  We hear
voices, commands.

It is nearly dusk.

They begin to shell our trench.  They have not got the correct
range and the shells fall short in No Man's Land.  The shells leap
among the bodies of the wounded and dead.  The lashing of the
bombardment starts them shrieking again.  It hurls torn limbs and
entrails into our trench.

                           * * * *

We are lost.

Our ammunition is short.

Fry comes into our bay.  His arm is stiff, he cannot move it.

We talk of retreating.  We work out a plan for falling back.

Anderson begins to pray in a subdued, scared voice:

"O Lord, look down upon me.  Search me out in Thine infinite
pity . . ."

Broadbent turns on him in disgust.

"For the Lord's sake, Anderson, don't tell God where you are or
we'll all get killed.  Stop whining."

The shells come closer and closer.

We decide to fall back if the coming counterattack threatens to be
successful.

The fire lifts.

We "stand to".

We place the Lewis gun on the parapet and begin to sweep the field.
Anderson is working the gun.  Broadbent supplies him with freshly
filled pans of ammunition.

Across the field we see them climbing out of their trenches.  At
last our artillery comes to life.  Overhead shrapnel hisses over
our heads and cracks to fragments in the face of the attacking
Germans.

Still they come.  The field is full of them.  We see their officers
out in front of them.  Bullets whiz past our heads and smack
against the parados in the rear.  The firing grows fiercer.

They are about a hundred yards from us.  At a given moment they
fling themselves down.  In that moment their artillery begins to
hammer at our trench.  They have the range now.  The shells scream
and whistle and crash into the trenches, on the parapets, behind
us, on all sides of us.

We cower down.  We cannot face the fire.

The trench begins to cave in.

Sandbags are blown into the air.

The trench is nearly flattened.

The shelling lifts and passes to the rear.

Out in front we hear a maddened howl.

THEY ARE COMING!

We look behind us.  They have laid down a barrage to cut us off.

We are doomed.

Anderson jumps from his gun and lies grovelling in the bottom of
the shallow trench.  I tell Renaud to keep firing his rifle from
the corner of the bay.  Broadbent takes the gun and I stand by
feeding him with what ammunition we have left.

They are close to us now.

They are hurling hand grenades.

Broadbent sweeps his gun but still they come.

The field in front is smothered with grey smoke.

I hear a long-drawn-out hiss.

Ssss-s-sss!

I look to my right from where the sound comes.  A stream of flame
is shooting into the trench.

Flamenwerfer!  Flame-throwers!

In the front rank of the attackers a man is carrying a square tank
strapped to his back.  A jet of flame comes from a nozzle which he
holds in his hand.  There is an odour of chemicals.

Broadbent shrieks in my ear:

"Get that bastard with the flame."

I take my rifle and start to fire.  Broadbent sweeps the gun in the
direction of the flame-thrower also.  Anderson looks nervously to
the rear.

"Grenades," I shout to him.

He starts to hurl bombs into the ranks of the storm troops.

Odour of burning flesh.  It does not smell unpleasant.

I hear a shriek to my right but I cannot turn to see who it is.

We continue to fire towards the flame-thrower.  Broadbent puts a
fresh pan on the gun.  He pulls the trigger.  The gun spurts flame.
He sprays the flame-thrower.  A bullet strikes the tank on his
back.  There is a hissing explosion.  The man disappears in a cloud
of flame and smoke.

To my right the shrieking becomes louder.

It is Renaud.

He has been hit by the flame-thrower.

Flame sputters on his clothing.  Out of one of his eyes tongues of
blue flame flicker.  His shrieks are unbearable.

He throws himself into the bottom of the trench and rolls around
trying to extinguish the fire.  As I look at him his clothing
bursts into a sheet of flame.  Out of the hissing ball of fire we
still hear him screaming.

Broadbent looks at me and then draws his revolver and fires three
shots into the flaming head of the recruit.

The advance is held up for a while.  The attackers are lying down
taking advantage of whatever cover they can find.  They are firing
at us with machine guns.

We decide to retreat.

I motion to Fry to jump up over the parados.  At that moment Clark
crawls into the bay.  He motions to Fry who is about to crawl over
the top of the trench to come down.  Fry points to his arm.

"Get the hell down here," Clark shouts.

Fry does not obey but still points to his arm.

Clark draws his revolver.  Broadbent steps up to intervene.  Clark
turns.  Fry reaches into his holster with his left hand.  He fires
at the officer's back.  Clark sags to the bottom of the trench with
a look of wonder in his face.

It is nearly dark.

Out in front the firing increases.  Broadbent goes to the gun and
throws a last pan on it.  He sweeps across the field.  We hop up
over the parados and start to run to the rear.

The shells burst all around us.

We are ankle-deep in mud.

On all sides of us men are running back.

Behind us we hear the Germans shriek as they make the final rush
for the abandoned trench.

We run slowly.  The rain starts to drizzle again.  We pass the
cadavers of artillery horses.  A shower of shells explodes in front
of us.  We are near the woods again.  There we will find shelter
from the sledgehammer strokes of the bombardment.

Fry and Anderson run in front, Broadbent and I to the rear.

Behind us the enemy is sweeping at us with his machine guns.  With
our remaining energy we make a spurt towards the stumps of trees
behind which we will find shelter.

A shell lands in front of us.

Fry's legs from the knees down are torn from under him.

He runs a few paces on his gushing stumps and collapses.

As I pass him he entwines my legs with his hands.

"Save me," he screams into my face.  "Don't leave me here alone."

I shake him off and run towards the woods with Broadbent.

We run past the mutilated trees and at last find ourselves near our
old trench again.  An officer calls us into a bay.  Other men of
our company are there.  Broadbent is detailed for sentry duty.  I
crawl into a dugout and go to sleep.

                           * * * *

The sector is a sea of mud.  From the rear they have built a
"duckboard" road--strips of wood nailed together and laid across a
roadway of sandbags.

Down one of these roads what is left of the battalion dribbles down
towards the rear.  We pass corpses stuck in the mud--walking
wounded who became dizzy and fell into the thin black ooze and were
drowned.

At last we reach a cobblestone road.  It feels good to have
something solid under one's feet.  We find a refreshment dugout and
pile in for cocoa and bread and butter.  In the light of the oil
lamp we look haggard and worn.  Our faces are black with the mud
through which the stubble of beards protrudes.  We are a ghastly-
looking crew.

Our officer, a lieutenant from Company "D" is in charge of us.  He
calls the roll.  Broadbent and I are the only survivors of our
section.  Anderson got lost somewhere in the woods.

We climb into waiting lorries outside of the shelter.  Gears grind.
We begin our ride back to rest.



Chapter 10

An Interlude


The lorries stop.  We get out.  In the dark we fall in and start to
march somewhere.  We are far from the line.  It is nearly dawn.

My boots are twisted and hard after being wet.  They cut into my
feet.  Every step I take shoots a pain up my leg.  I limp as I
march.  The sun comes up and still we keep going.

We pass houses without gaping holes in them.  Children peep out
from behind half-opened doors and stare at us as we straggle past.
Finally we come to a halt in a neat village.  The inhabitants rush
out to look at us.

There is no shortage of billets.  Broadbent and I are quartered
together in a real house.  No barns or pigsties this time.

The house is occupied by an old woman about seventy, her husband,
and two young women.

I limp into the dining room of the cottage.  I sink into a chair.
I untwist my puttees and take my boots and socks off.  The sock
sticks to my bloody foot.  It is as raw-looking as an uncooked
hamburger steak.  The old woman kneels down by my side and takes my
foot in her hand.

"My poor one . . . my poor one," she says in French.

She gives hurried orders to her gnarled husband and to her
daughters.  They bring hot water and a basin of olive oil.

She takes my bruised foot and bathes it in the hot water.  I wince
as she immerses it.  It stings.  She pours the oil over the raw
wound.  It is soothing.  She wraps my feet in makeshift bandages.
In between whiles she tells me that she has two sons in the war.
She takes two soiled photographs from a pocket-book and points
sadly to the likenesses.

The daughters help me upstairs to a room which the old lady has set
aside for me.  As I go up the stairs Broadbent grins at me and
says:  "You sure get all the luck."

The mail for the battalion comes up.  Most of the boys to whom
packages are addressed are either wounded or killed.  We share them
among ourselves.  Rations are plentiful too.  There are no fatigues
and wine is cheap here.  Madame with whom we are billeted is like a
mother to us.  We begin to put on flesh.

In the evening we sit listening to her telling us stories of her
two boys.  The old man sits by and nods his head in agreement.  We
are becoming quite domesticated.

                           * * * *

Recruits come up from the base.  The battalion is being filled up.
New officers are assigned to us.  Discipline tightens.

We are taken out every morning now for two hours' drill.  Broadbent
is made a sergeant and I am given two chevrons.  He jokes with me
about my promotion:

"You know what a corporal is?"

"What?"

"A batman for the privates.  You get hell from the officers and no
rest from your men."

There are new faces on all sides of us.  Broadbent and I stick
together.  We have many things in common . . .

We have been in this village more than a month now.  At last the
order comes that we are to move on.  The villagers stand in their
doorways and look silently at us as we are drawn up.  One of the
girls comes out and puts a parcel of food into my hands.

"Company, by the right, quick--march!"

The old lady runs along by the side of my section for a few steps.

She puts her face up to mine and kisses me.

"Remember," she says, "take good care of your feet . . ."

The girls and women wave their hands to us.  A company of little
boys--those serious-faced little boys of northern France--escort us
to the outskirts of the village.  We turn to the right and swing up
towards the line.



Chapter 11

Arras


April, 1918.

We are in reserves on a quiet front up north close to the Belgian
border.  Reports of a German breakthrough reach us.  We hear that
the enemy is close to Paris.  To the south we hear continuous
artillery thunder.  Our officers give us talks on the need for
determination and courage.  They tell us that we are not to become
panic-stricken.  There is no danger.

That night we are relieved and marched towards the rear.

The next morning we are drawn up for parade and addressed by the
commander of the division.  He tells us that the commander-in-chief
has chosen the Canadian corps to act as shock troops to break the
German offensive.  We are to be a flying column, and wherever the
line weakens we are to be rushed in to fill the gap.

"I hope," he concludes, "that you will conduct yourselves to the
greater glory of Canadian arms."

The term "Canadian arms" sounds strange to us.  Most of us are
clerks, students, farmers, and mechanics--but staff officers have a
way of speaking like that.  To us this business of military glory
and arms means carrying parties, wiring fatigues, wet clothes, and
cowering in a trench under shell-fire.  We stand rigid and listen
to the harangue.

We are marched to a road on which an endless line of motor lorries
stands.  They are enormous five-ton affairs.  We pile on.  We are
crowded in--twenty to a truck.  We start towards the south.

We ride all day.  As far as we can see the line of black lorries
stretches before us.  We dash through villages, past forests and
lonely farmhouses without a stop.  Occasionally we change our
direction.

In the afternoon we stop while the lorries are refuelled.  We look
about for the field kitchens.  There are none.  We are hungry.

The men begin to grumble.

"Hey, when do we eat?"

"How about some grub?"

We are told we will get our rations when we arrive at our
destination the next morning.  Talk becomes mutinous.

A voice shouts:

"Are we downhearted?"

There is a medley of replies:

"You're goddamned right; we are."

"T'hell with the war."

"We want grub."

We climb into the lorries and the tiresome ride begins again.

Night.

We are still riding.  The bumping and bouncing of the lorries has
tired us out completely.

The road becomes rougher.  There must have been a battle in this
vicinity, for the roads are full of fresh, yellow shell holes.  It
is impossible to lie down to rest; there is little room and the
jolting of the truck is almost unbearable.  We recline against the
fenced sides of the lorry.  We have not stopped for hours.

We defecate from between the bars at the side of the bouncing truck--
a difficult and unpleasant task.

We stand, sit, or recline in attitudes of hopeless despair.  We are
hungry, thirsty--we have smoked our last few cigarettes.  A light
drizzle begins to fall; there is no tarpaulin covering over the top
of the truck.

To the left, up towards the line a mile or two away, we see an
ammunition dump blowing itself up in sporadic explosions.  It must
have been hit by a stray shell.  In the blackness of the night it
looks as though a boy had thrown a match among a giant heap of
fireworks.  We have seen these things before--they keep on going
off for weeks--open-air enormous storage places for ammunition
supplies, sometimes a mile square in area.

We crowd to the side of the truck to watch the sight.  We talk
among ourselves about it.

"They say those 'coalbox' shells cost five thousand dollars each."

"Can you imagine what a little barrage costs, then?"

We lapse into silence as we try to calculate the possible cost of a
preliminary bombardment.  After a while someone says in an awed
voice:

"Millions, I guess."

"Then what must a scrap like Passchendaele cost?  They were
hammering away there for months.  First the Belgians tried to take
it, then the Imperials, then the Anzacs, and then we did.  They
must've fired millions of shells . . ."

This problem in mathematics is too much for us.  If one twelve-inch
shell costs five thousand dollars, then a major battle must cost--
it is too much . . .

"I bet that dump going up over there must cost a billion dollars."

"And I'll bet somebody is making a profit on those shells whether
they are fired at the Germans or whether they just blow up . . ."

"Sure they do."

A surprised voice from a corner says:

"Just think of all the people that's getting a big hunk of swag out
of it.  Shoes, grub, uniforms, bully beef . . ."

He breaks off.

We all join in enumerating the various materials of war on which
someone may be making a profit.

". . . and big profits, too."

The lorry hits the side of a shell hole and knocks the breath out
of us for a while.

We continue the conversation.

"Sure, and I'll bet that THOSE people don't want the war to end in
a hurry."

'"Course not."

"At Étaples when I was goin' on my leave I heard a madame in an
estaminet say she hoped the war never ended--with her gettin' five
francs for a bottle of vinegar what she called vin blanc.  Why
should she?"

"All of us wish the war was over, but believe me, there's plenty
that don't."

". . . there's those that make the shells, the clothes; them that
sell the food, rifles, socks, underwear, ships, boots . . ."

Others break in:

"Flags, aeroplanes, artillery . . ."

"Officers with cushy jobs in Blighty . . ."

"Paymasters in Millbank . . ."

"Society dames playing the Florence Nightingale with wounded
officers . . ."

". . . these men who are making money on the war have wives and
daughters and women . . ."

". . . there must be millions of them . . . !"

". . . and in every country, too.  In Germany and France and
America . . . !"

". . . and they're all praying to God tonight for the war to last
forever while we're riding in this goddamned lorry . . ."

". . . and God must be listening to them.  Look how long it's been
going on."

The thought of people benefiting from our misery throws us into a
melancholy silence.

Broadbent has abstained from joining the conversation.  It is a
little mutinous in tone and as a sergeant he did not take part.
After a while he answers the last speaker.

"Maybe they're making money out of it, but they don't really want
it to go on.  They don't think of it the way we do.  To them, I
suppose, it's just--a war."

But the mutinous grumbler will not be downed.

"Yeah, that's it.  To them it's only a war but we have to fight
it."

From out of the corner of the lorry, a voice--we are strangers to
each other since so many recruits have come up--we do not recognise
each other's voices--this voice says:

"There's two kinds of people in this world--there's those that like
wars and those that fight 'em, pal."

There is a sudden downpour of rain.  We are soaked to the skin.
The lorry rumbles and bounces on.  We are tossed about like
quarters of beef on the way to market.  We try to rest . . .

                           * * * *

It is still raining in the morning when the lorries come to a stop.
We scramble out, eager to stretch our legs.  We are stiff with the
cold and the wet.  We are famished.  We look about anxiously for
the cook wagons.  There are none.  The officers explain that our
rations did not catch up with us and that we will eat as soon as
they arrive.

We are in a deserted village.  There is no food to be found
anywhere.  We are assigned to billets and sit miserably listening
to the rain beating down on the roof of the barn in which we are
quartered.  We search under the straw for food.  We find a piece of
hard, moldy bread--we share it among ourselves and eat it.

Later in the morning we pile into the lorries again.  We start back
up north again.  We do not try to understand why we are going back.
We are simply going.

The day passes without event.  We stop several times but still
there is no food.  Our officers are ashamed to face us and in truth
they are little better off than we are.

Night comes.

Still the line of lorries races into the night over shell-pocked
roads.

We scrape the linings of our pockets for shreds and crumbs of
tobacco, and with this we roll cigarettes in coarse paper.  We pass
the soggy makeshift cigarettes around from mouth to mouth.

Up towards the front we hear the thunder of the artillery, it rises
and falls but never fully subsides.  Now and then from various
points it breaks out into a rapid tempo.

We stop during the night in a gutted village.  Straggling, haggard
English troops pour into the streets from the road leading down
from the line.  They are pale, like us, from the lack of sleep.
Many of them are walking wounded.

"How is it up there?" we ask.

"'Orrible.  'Einie 'as come through and no mistake."

We try to cadge some cigarettes, but there are none to be had.

Into the lorries again.

We ride all through the night.

The roads are becoming smoother.  Apparently we are going further
behind the lines.

We are so exhausted that we begin to doze and nod a little.  Feet,
legs, arms, rifles, and equipment are jumbled together in the
cramped quarters.  Every now and then there is a shakeup as someone
tries to make himself more comfortable.

"Hey," cries a drowsy voice, "take your foot off my face."

"Aw, take your face off my foot," comes the answer.

                           * * * *

There is a greenish blur in the sky in the east.  It is not quite
dawn.

The lorries come to a halt.

Sleepy faces look up to see where we are.  We climb down and look
about with groggy eyes.  My tongue is almost hardened for the want
of water.  If only we had cigarettes--

No food.  Promises.  We are doubtful but we have no alternative but
to wait.

We line up.  The roll is called.  The command is given and we march
up a gravel road towards the line.  Our stomachs are flat through
hunger, and our packs tug painfully at our shoulders.  Our clothes
are still wet with the rain.

The fields on the sides of the road on which we march are freshly
plowed, but we do not see a single inhabitant nor any sign of life
from the houses which we pass.  No smoke from the chimneys.  Farm
implements stand idle in the fields.

As we march, houses appear more numerous.  Soon they line the road.
Still no sign of life in any of them.  It seems as though a
pestilence had swept over this part of the country.  We do not see
any signs of fighting, not even a solitary shell hole.

Soon we are in cobble-paved streets.  We see shops.

No shopkeepers.  We look at the signs over the entrances of the
stores.

We are in the city of Arras.

It is a large city for northern France.  There are hotels,
churches, stores, wine shops.  It is broad daylight now, but there
is not a single soul in sight other than the marching troops.  Our
heavy footsteps echo down the empty streets.

There is an old-world quaintness about the buildings.  We pass a
soft brown Gothic cathedral, and in a few minutes are marching past
the enormous rococo Hôtel de Ville.  We look at the signs at the
street corners.  We read: Grande Place.  The square is flanked by
Flemish houses which are built with their upper stories projecting
over the footways and supported by columns so as to form an arcade.
Not a civilian soul can be seen.

We halt.  We are in one of the main streets.  On both sides of the
street are stores--grocery stores, tobacco shops, clothing stores,
wine shops.  In the windows we see displays of food and cigarettes
temptingly set out--tins of lobster, glass jars of caviar, tinsel-
capped magnums of champagne.  I look through a glass window and
read: Veuve Cliquot--the bottle looks important and inviting.  In
another window I read: Smoke De Reszke cigarettes.

We ask our captain--a fidgety, middle-aged man by the name of Penny--
why the town is deserted.  He explains that the Germans dropped a
few long-range shells into the city a few days ago, and the
inhabitants, thinking that Heinie was about to enter, fled, leaving
the city as we now see it.

We rest on the curb of the street, looking hungrily at the food and
cigarettes behind the thin glass partitions.  Little knots of
soldiers gather and talk among themselves.

As I stand talking to Broadbent a man in the company ahead of us
idly kicks a cobblestone loose from its bed.  He picks it up and
crashes it through a wide gleaming shop window.  The crash and the
sound of the splintering, falling glass stills the hum of
conversation.  The soldier steps through the window and comes out
with a basket full of cigarettes.  He tosses packages to his
comrades.

Another crash!

More men stream through the gaping windows.

Officers run here and there trying to pacify the men.

As far as I can see, men are hurling stones through windows and
clambering in for supplies.

The street is a mass of scurrying soldiers.

Discipline has disappeared.

I step through an open, splintered window and soon come out laden
with tins of peas, lobster, caviar, bottles of wine.  Broadbent and
I visit many shops.  In each are crowds of soldiers ransacking
shelves, cupboards, cellars.  Some of them are chewing food as they
pillage.

When we have filled our bags with food, drink, and cigarettes we
make off to look for a place to rest.

We climb through a window of a pretentious-looking dwelling.  It is
deserted.  We prowl through the house.  In the dining room the
table is set for the next meal.  There is no sign of disorder--the
inhabitants must have fled without preparation of any sort.

We dump our sacks down in the centre of the room and begin to
prepare the food.  In a little while we are tackling lobster salad,
small French peas, bread and butter, and washing it down with great
gulps of Sauternes.  We do not speak, but simply devour the food
with wolfish greed.

At last we are sated.  We search in the sacks and find tins of
choice Turkish cigarettes.  We light up, putting our dirty feet on
the table, and smoke in luxury.

We hunt through the house and find the owner's room.  Water is
boiled and soon we are shaved and powdered with the late owners
razor and talcum.  We throw ourselves on the valanced beds and fall
asleep.

                           * * * *

We are wakened by the sound of crashing noises downstairs.  We
descend.  A party is going on in the drawing room.  Some of our men
have found the house.  They are drunk.  Some sprawl on the old-
fashioned brocaded gilt furniture.  Some dance with each other.

More men arrive.

One of the recruits, a machine-gunner, draws his revolver from his
holster and takes potshots at a row of china plates which line a
shelf over the mantelpiece.

His companions upbraid him:

"Hey, cut out that bloody shooting; you're filling the damned room
with smoke."

The conversation is boastful and rowdy.

"Some of the men bust into the church and took all the gold and
silver ornaments . . ."

". . . I looked in at headquarters, the officers are havin' a great
time too.  Oh, it's a lovely war . . ."

". . . There's wine cellars in this town as big as a house.
They'll never get the outfit out of here . . ."

"They'll send for the MPs . . ."

"We'll give 'em what for when they come, don't worry . . ."

Broadbent and I go out into the street.  It is nearly dark.  Men
stagger about burdened with bags of loot.  They are tipsy.  The
officers are nowhere to be seen.  Up towards the line the sky is
beginning to be lit with the early evening's gun flashes.

Over to the south side of the town a red glow colours the sky.
Some of our men must have set fire to some houses.  As we look we
see flames and a shower of sparks leap into the air.

We look at each other in amazement.

"Do you know that this is looting a town?" Broadbent says.

"Of course it is."

"There will be merry hell to pay for this."

We turn into the Grande Place.  Men lie drunk in the gutters.
Others run down the street howling, blind drunk.

There is nothing to do, so we walk into a wine shop.  We find a
bottle of cognac and drink it between us.  We go out again.

The streets are bedlams.

From the houses come sounds of pianos as though they were being
played by madmen.  Men laugh, sing, brawl.

We find an officer and ask where we are to report.  He is a little
drunk too.  He does not know and staggers on.

The flames of the fire to the south leap higher and higher.

Overhead we hear the whirr of motors.  Planes are reporting that
the city is occupied.  Shells begin to scream into the city.  The
detonations sound louder in the echoing streets.

Falling masonry and bricks make it dangerous to stay out of doors.

The shells come faster and faster.

Bodies begin to litter the streets.

The explosions swell into the steady roar of a bombardment.

The streets are lit with the flashes of the shell bursts.

Buildings take fire.

Men run to shelter.  The revelry turns into nightmare.

Broadbent and I find a deep cellar.  Over our heads the rafters
shiver with the force of the shell bursts.

Other men come streaming down the stairs.  The bombardment has
sobered them.

Sacks of food and drink are piled into the corners of the cellar.

After a while we fall asleep . . .

                           * * * *

In the morning we awake with champagne hangovers.  We feel groggy
and thirsty.  We go out into the streets.  Soldiers are scurrying
about carrying sacks of looted provisions.

By noon most of the men are drunk again.  Men stagger through the
streets waving empty wine bottles.  Some of them have found a
French quartermaster storehouse where some French officer uniforms
were stored.  They cut ludicrous figures in the ill-fitting blue
tunics.

News of the looting has spread to Army headquarters.

A detachment of mounted English Military Police approach the town.

The police are our traditional enemies.

We organise a volunteer defense corps.

We post ourselves on the roofs of houses which overlook the road
which leads into the city.  We are armed with rifles, machine guns,
hand grenades.

As the police canter close to the town they are met with a burst of
rifle fire.

Two horses are hit and rear madly into the air.  The MPs draw rein
and about-face.

This is our first victory over the police.  The retreat is greeted
with cheers.

We celebrate the event by going back into the main streets and
drinking more wine.

Comrades meet and relate incidents of the day.

". . . the officers are as drunk as we are . . ."

". . . two guys got into a cellar that had one of those big
vats . . . they turned on the faucet and started to drink out of
their mess-tins . . . got so drunk that they forgot to turn it
off after a while . . . when we looked through the trap door this
morning they were floating in about five feet of wine . . ."

". . . God, who would've thought that plain gravel-crushers like us
would ever get rich pickins like this. . ."

". . . the soldier's dream come true, all right, all right . . ."

". . . hey, the frogs is supposed to be our allies . . ."

"What, with vin rouge at five francs a bottle?"

"Well, why the hell didn't they bring the grub up . . . ?"

                           * * * *

Later in the afternoon the officers appear.

Men are rounded up.

We have had our fill.

Companies are reorganised.

MPs patrol the streets.

Our company is taken to a huge chalk pit on the outskirts of the
town.

We get ready to go up the line.

Night comes and we start our trek up towards the front trenches.
In our packs we carry tinned goods, bottles of wine, pieces of
cheap jewellery.  We have discarded our blankets and extra pair of
shoes to make way for the loot.

We are bleary-eyed and groggy . . .

                           * * * *

The enemy offensive stopped just outside of Arras.

The front is quiet.

We lie in the newly built dugouts and recover from the after-
effects of the looting.  Many of the men have terrific pains in the
stomach.  We have eaten too many tins of lobster and other dubious
canned ware.  There are some cases of ptomaine poisoning.  We have
no money and we play poker with cans of food, bottles of wine,
stolen trinkets as stakes.

There is nothing to do but lie in the dugouts and talk.  Once in a
while a heavy shell drones on its way to the rear.

". . . it's about time this goddamned war ended."

Grunts of approval.

". . . first we take one of their lousy trenches and then they take
it back.  It's a bloody game of see-saw.  They ought to call the
goddamned thing a draw."

". . . what the hell are we fightin' for, anyhow . . . ?"

"Search me . . ."

"Do we wanna fight . . . ?"

"Quit bellyachin' . . ."

"Well, I'm askin' yuh."

"Naw, 'course not.  Ast me somethin' easy."

". . . and Heinie don't wanna fight either, does he?"

". . . and most of the officers don't either . . ."

"Sure."

". . . and the frogs . . ."

"Sure."

"Well, then what the hell do we fight for?"

One of the men begins to sing:


     "I wanna go home, I wanna go home,
     The bullets they whistle, the cannons they roar--"


"Well, what're you gonna do about it?"

"I say the gravel-crushers on both sides ought to say 't'hell with
it,' and start to walk down the communication trenches . . ."

Silence greets this unusual proposition.  We sit thinking and
smoking.  After a while someone speaks up:

"Yeah, and what would happen then, eh?"

Another silence.  A voice from one of the corners is heard:

"Why, you goddamned fool, the bloody war would be over; that's what
would happen."

Broadbent feels that the conversation has gone too far.  He feels
the responsibility of his three stripes.  He intervenes:

"C'mon, there--cut it out--cut it out.  This kind of talk ain't
gonna get you anywhere.  It only makes you feel lousy."

"Listen, pal, we can't feel any lousier than we feel right now."

"Well, it won't do you any good."

We lapse into another silence.  Presently the same voice from the
corner says:

"God!  Imagine all the gravel-crushers on both sides walking down
the line.  Can yuh see the faces on the MPs?"

He laughs out loud and then:

"Fat chance.  If we had any bloody brains we wouldn't be here in
the first place."

Like most serious trench conversations, the talk seems fruitless,
so we speak of more trivial things . . .

                           * * * *

It is the night of the third day.  We are being relieved.

An American battalion comes up.  This is their first trip into the
line.  They talk loudly and light cigarettes.  The night is quiet.
They call to each other as though no enemy lay in hiding a few
hundred yards off.

"Hey, when does the war start?" they shout towards the German
lines.

"Oh, boy, wait until Fritzie hears we're here."

We plead with them to speak quietly.

"Aw, t'hell . . ."

"Let's get goin'."

"Can the Kaiser."

"For the love of God keep quiet until we get out and then make all
the goddamned noise you want to . . ."

Flickering matches appear here and there.  The shouting continues.
We turn our posts over to them and file down the communication
trenches.  We walk rapidly for we know what will happen if the
noise continues.

Overhead we hear the hum of planes.

Finally we reach the road leading to the rear.

"They'll get all the war they want soon enough . . ."

Suddenly we hear the roar of bombardment.  The front lines are
being shelled.

We continue our trek towards the rear.

Stretcher-bearers pass us on the way up to the line.



Chapter 12

Vengeance


Midsummer, 1918.

We are far behind the lines.  No threat of death reaches us here.
The countryside blooms.  We have been out on rest now for nearly a
month.  The battalion is built up to battle strength.  We drill
every morning under the merciless sun.

We hear rumours of battles.  The idea persists among us that the
Germans will win the war.

We are too far from the line to hear the rumble of the artillery
fire.

We start "going over the tapes."  White tapes are laid on the
ground representing trenches that we will later have to assault.
We practice the assault again and again.

We have adopted a new technique of attack.  We no longer charge in
waves, instead we make short rushes by sections in Indian file.  In
this fashion each section of six or eight men offers less target to
the enemy, only the man in front is visible to the enemy.  The
section springs to its feet, rushes a few yards, and flings itself
down while another section on the flank makes its rush.  This is
called "infiltration."  It is a German tactic.  Under the midday
sun we leap to our feet again and again and dash towards the
imaginary trenches and throw ourselves into the brush or onto the
stones and brambles.

                           * * * *

The company is drawn up ready to be dismissed.  Our captain reads
an official report on the American attack on Château-Thierry.

". . . all ranks are warned of the danger of 'bunching' during an
attack.  At Château-Thierry our allies, the Americans, advanced
towards the enemy lines, and at the first show of resistance,
huddled together in groups which offered superb targets for the
German artillery.  This resulted in unnecessary loss of life
altogether out of proportion to the gains made . . ."

Discipline becomes more severe.  The official automaton salute is
insisted upon.  After three years in the line we are taken out and
taught to salute properly.

We go over the tapes more often.

We go on long route marches.

The food becomes poor.

We are being hardened.

                           * * * *

It is the first week in August.  We are marched over to a
neighbouring village occupied by brigade headquarters.  It is a
stifling day.  The earth is baked.  As we march we kick up clouds
of fine dust.  Our uniforms are powdered with it.  It mixes with
our sweat and we streak it across our faces with our hands.  When
we spit, the spittle drops like little balls of mud.  Someone
attempts to start a song, but we are too parched.

We rest for a few minutes before entering the village.  The usual
crowd of little boys is waiting to escort us down the main street.

We fall in and tighten our equipment.  The battalion band strikes
up and we swing down the cobblestone road past the brigade
headquarters.  The general stands by the side of the road.  "Eyes--
right!"

We snap our heads in his direction.  The officers salute by hand.
From other parts of the village we hear more bands playing.

Finally we draw up, soaked in sweat, in the parade ground on the
outskirts of the village.  Our faces are as red as the poppies of
which the war poets are writing back home.  We are burdened down by
our packs.  Our hot woolen uniforms stick to us and chafe the skin
wherever they touch.  We form a brigade square--one battalion on
each side.  We stand erect as though we were driven into the ground
like so many fence posts.

The brigadier-general comes into the square.  The bugles sound the
general's salute.

We present arms.  Our bayonets flash in the sunlight.  The general
acknowledges the salute.  We stand at ease.

An aide hands the brigadier-general a paper and he reads to us:

". . . and after the Llandovery Castle was torpedoed, not a
helping hand was offered to our wounded comrades . . . no instance
of barbarism in the world's history can equal the sinking of
this hospital ship . . . think of it, more than three hundred
wounded Canadians struggling in the choppy waters of the English
Channel . . ."

The white morning sun shimmers on the general's brass and polished
leather as he reads us the report.  He speaks calmly and
dispassionately, which lends weight and authenticity to his
remarks.

". . . the lifeboats were sprayed by machine-gun fire as the
nurses appealed in vain to the laughing men on the U-boat . . .
the amputation cases went to the bottom instantly . . . they
couldn't swim, poor chaps . . . the salt water added to their dying
agony . . ."

Well, we had seen the frenzy of the attackers when they came over
reeking with ether.  It is easy to believe this story.

The general continues:

". . . men, we are going into action in a few days, and we will
be given an opportunity to avenge the lives of our murdered
comrades . . . an enemy like the German--no, I will not call him
German--an enemy like the Hun does not merit humane treatment in
war . . . very well, if they choose to suspend the accepted rules
for conducting civilised warfare, by God, two can play at that
game . . ."

The hard faces of the men harden still more as the story continues.

Other staff officers address us:

". . . history will recall that the gallant Canadians did not allow
this wanton act of barbarism to go unavenged . . ."

A man shuffles uneasily here and there in the ranks.

". . . the battle in which we will soon be engaged will be
remembered by generations still unborn as the Battle of Llandovery
Castle . . ."

More men shuffle in the ranks.  A non-com spits out an order to
stand still.

Our colonel speaks out.  We like him.  He has risen from the ranks.

". . . I'm not saying for you not to take prisoners.  That's
against international rules.  All that I'm saying is that if you
take any we'll have to feed 'em out of our rations . . ."

Some of us laugh at this.  Most of us are silent, however.

We march back through that cloud of rolling dust.

                           * * * *

We move closer to the front.  We march by night, footsore and
smelling sour of sweat, and sleep like dead men during the
blistering August days.

All night long we tramp up the poplar-lined roads.  Every now and
then we are forced off the gravel onto the fields to make way for
the tanks, tractors, and heavy artillery which rolls in a metallic
stream towards the trenches.

We are now within range of heavy shellfire.  We can see the flashes
of the guns up yonder.

At dawn we take refuge in woods or in unused reserve trenches.  As
the sun rises all life, it seems, is suspended.  Neither man nor
beast stirs.  We are utterly exhausted.  The tanks and heavy guns
sprawl like sleeping dinosaurs covered with camouflage tarpaulin.

The month of drill and training has made us nervous.  We are
irritable like overtrained prizefighters.  We squabble with each
other.

The area behind the lines swarms with troops and artillery.  What
havoc the enemy could play, if he only knew!

We lie in a wood right behind the heavy artillery lines.  It is
midday.  We are jumpy.  Near us a few birds chirp gaily as though
no war was in progress.  In our maniac fear we think that the birds
will give our position away.  We curse them:

"Get the hell away from here, you bloody bastards . . ."

We sit up bleary-eyed and angry.

We throw stones at them.

They fly away, frightened.

We go back to sleep.

                           * * * *

Amiens.

It is night.

We are to go into action tomorrow morning.

We are to take no prisoners.  We say this on all sides.  It has
become an unofficial order.  It is an understood thing.

Rumours spread.  We are all to have ten days' leave in Paris after
the scrap.  This is to be the last battle in the war.  After this--
then home!  General Foch is personally taking charge of the
advance.  And so on.

We hear reports of the artillery preparation which is to precede
our attack.  There are five lines of artillery on the twenty-mile
front standing hub to hub.  Shells will explode every second in
every three-foot area within Heinie's lines.  One man figures out
that a louse will not be able to live through a fire of such
intensity.

We sit in the dugout.  We cannot sleep.

We talk aimlessly:

"What's the best way of not taking prisoners?" asks a recruit.

There are conflicting opinions.

One is for the use of the bayonet.

"Anyone that would do what those bastards did to the hospital ship
ought to get a bayonet.  It'd give me plenty of satisfaction,
believe me."

"Grenades are good . . ."

"Yeah, that's right.  Pat him on the back and then slip a bomb in
his pocket when he ain't lookin' and say, ''Raus mit ihm, Heinie!'
He runs about twenty yards and up he goes.  I did that to a Fritz
at Vimy.  He just came apart . . ."

"The bayonet makes a messy job of it," Broadbent says.  "The guts
stick to the blade when you withdraw . . ."

A recruit screws his face up, sickened.

"It's the suction that does that," the sergeant explains.

". . . a rifle makes a neat job.  The bullet is hot when it hits.
It sterilises as it goes through."

One of the latest arrivals, a First Contingent man, speaks up.  He
has been silent so far.

"Why shouldn't we kill the bastards?  Sure, we ought to kill 'em.
At Ypres in 1915 I saw one of our officers crucified to a barn
door . . ."

We look at him with respect.  He has a yellow, elongated face and
deep hollow eyes.  He looks like a man who has seen terrible
things.

". . . he had a Heinie bayonet through each hand and one through
his feet.  Crucified, by God."

The colonel comes into the dugout.  He mixes freely with us and
jokes:

"Well, boys, we'll have lots of souvenirs tomorrow, eh?"

                           * * * *

It is an hour before dawn.  It is warm.  There is not a sound to
hint that this is a battlefield.  Nocturnal insects buzz and hum.
Birds chirp and sing.  We lie hidden in an abandoned field of
ripening wheat.  We are waiting for zero hour.  It is unusually
quiet.

From behind the German lines we hear the indistinct, far-away
voices of men calling to one another.  Hitherto this has been a
quiet front and the enemy is unsuspecting.

Far, far behind our lines we hear the dull boom of a twelve-inch
gun.  Boom!

Half a minute later we hear another hollow report.  Boom!  These
are the signals heralding the approach of the moment of attack.

The third detonation!

Instantaneously the whole world becomes a flickering inferno of
howling steel.  The roar of the barrage is unbearable.  My eardrums
ache.

We spring to our feet and advance slowly behind the pulverising
curtain of fire which dances before us.  A veritable whining canopy
of steel arches over our heads.

Behind us a wave of tanks advance.  They soon pass us.  We are
literally advancing behind a wall of steel.

The air is thick with the pale yellow smoke of high explosives--the
colour of boarding-house tea.

I feel a warm trickle on the sides of my neck.  My ears are
bleeding from the force and fury of the detonations.

We advance slowly; sections in Indian file.  We walk at a snail-
like even gait.  Penny advances in front of his company and directs
the pace.  Sometimes we halt waiting for the barrage to move on out
of the range of danger to us.  A wave of Penny's hand and we move
on.

We reach the front line.  It is deserted.  The enemy must have
anticipated the attack and withdrawn in advance.

The second line is reached and still no resistance.  We walk on
calmly.  The barrage has annihilated everything in its iron-shod
march.  The trenches are flattened.

The fire lifts.

Out in front we hear the tanks blazing away at the enemy's lines.

The air clears a little.

Out of the thin smoke hazy, silhouetted figures emerge.

"Here they come . . ." we shout to each other.

We bring our rifles to our hips, half on guard.

The figures run with funny jerky steps towards us, holding their
hands high above their heads.

We open rifle fire as we advance.  The silhouettes begin to topple
over.  It is just like target practice.

We advance.

They come closer.

There are hundreds of them.  They are unarmed.  They open their
mouths wide as though they are shouting something of great
importance.  The rifle fire drowns out their words.  Doubtless they
are asking for mercy.  We do not heed.  We are avenging the sinking
of the hospital ship.  We continue to fire.

Everything is indistinct in the smoke and it is not easy to pick
them off.

They are nearly on top of us.  There is a look of amazement in
their faces as we shoot.  We are firing point-blank now.

The grey figures continue to fall, one by one, until only a handful
is left.

They realise they are doomed and they scream.  We can hear them now
even above the rifle fire, we are so close.

"Bitte--bitte (please--please)."

Their voices are shrill.  They are mostly youngsters.

They throw themselves into the crater of a shell hole.  They cower
there.  Some of our men walk to the lip of the hole and shoot into
the huddled mass of Germans.  Clasped hands are held up from out of
the funnel-shaped grave.  The hands shake eloquently asking for
pity.  There is none.  Our men shoot into the crater.  In a few
seconds only a squirming mass is left.  As I pass the hole I see
the lips of a few moving.  I turn away.

We continue to advance.  Still there is no resistance.

Suddenly the earth in front of us begins to shoot up little
fountains of dirt.  Rifle fire.

We begin to run.  In front of us there is an incline and beyond a
ridge.

We run faster.

Penny falls.

We run still faster.

The fire becomes hotter.

Men begin to fall.

Machine guns hammer in front of us.  My section throws itself into
a shell hole.  We wait for the fire to subside.  The tanks are out
in front of us.  We will wait . . .

                           * * * *

Our colonel crawls into the hole.

"What the hell are you doing here--get out," he shouts, pointing to
the ridge ahead of us.

We share the pans of ammunition between us.  I carry the Lewis gun.
We are dead tired and start to run towards the ridge.  On all sides
of us men are running with slow, clumsy movements.  The machine gun
bounces on my shoulder.  The ammunition pans clatter against the
backs of those who carry them.  Each step becomes agony.

At last we reach the foot of the hill.

We start up.  It is hard to breathe.  It is hot and we drip with
sweat.  Behind and on top of the hill the machine guns spurt and
sweep.

The blood rushes through my head like a thundering torrent.  My
body is a hammering cauldron of sound.  My ears ring, my head
buzzes.  My heart knocks like a faulty racing-motor piston.

Overhead an occasional shell crashes into fragments, but this is
not what holds our eyes glued ahead of us in hypnotic terror.  On
the top of the ridge little spurts of yellow earth leap up!  They
have withdrawn from the ridge and are now sweeping it with machine-
gun fire.  We quicken our pace.

On and on!

Mess-tins and entrenching tools strapped to our backs clang and
bang against our buttocks.

Halfway up the hill we slow down.  We are weighted down by our
burdens.  Our movements are like those of one pursued in a
nightmare.

On and up!

We are near the top.  A few more steps and we will fling ourselves
down on the crest of the ridge and get the gun into action.  A few
more steps!

Our lungs and throats whistle.  Our faces are reddish blue with
exertion.  The veins on our necks stand out like black twisted
cords.

On the flanks the ridge is taken.  Shells explode everywhere.

The little spurts of yellow earth continue to leap up in front of
us as though mischievous boys were throwing stones from behind the
hill.  But from behind the hill comes the noise as though a
thousand riveting machines had gone mad.

We are on top of the ridge.  A few more steps to the other side!

I stumble and fall.  I jump to my feet and run a few steps.  I fall
again.  I try to get on my feet but my right leg gives way.

My right foot feels numb.  I look at it; it is spurting a ruby
fountain.  The top of the bubbling stream glistens in the sun.

I feel empty inside, nauseous.

I am frightened.

As though speaking to a stranger, I say:

"My God, I am wounded."  I look at the blood with surprise.

I roll into a shell hole for safety.

Our guns are hammering into the valley below.  They begin to move
forward.  I lie where I am.  The sound of the fighting moves away
from me, farther, farther . . .  The enemy is falling back.

I look at my foot.  It is still spurting blood--an artery must be
cut.  Something must be done.  I make my handkerchief into a
tourniquet and tie it tightly above my ankle.  I twist it until my
foot feels cold.  The blood ceases to spurt and drips now; drip,
drip . . .

I am weak.  My mouth is dry and my throat cries for water.  I look
into my water bottle--it is empty.  I remember that I emptied it
coming through the biting smoke of the barrage.

I lean against the side of the cone-shaped shell hole and watch the
dark red blood ooze out of the hole in my boot onto the yellow
earth and sink in.

The noise of the battle sounds fainter and fainter . . .

I am alone in this hole.  Nearby I hear men groaning and howling--I
forgot all about the others when I saw the blood leaping from my
heavy, dirty boot.

An hour passes.  The boot is covered with nearly black hardened
blood.  I am wearing a boot of congealed blood, it seems.

Wounded, I say to myself again and again.  Wounded--home--no more
war now--no more lice--a bed.

I am glad.  I look gratefully at the torn boot, at the blood-soaked
piece of earth on which it limply rests.  I am glad--glad--soon I
will see lights coming from houses and hear the voices of women and
feel their cool hands on my face.

Yes . . . I am happy.

I begin to cry.

A sharp pain shoots up my leg.

I feel in my pockets for a cigarette.  Fortunately I have one.  I
light up and fill my lungs with the soothing smoke.  I exhale with
a sigh of happy relief.  My pain seems less . . .

                           * * * *

I am thirsty.  My mouth is gummy for the lack of saliva.  I crawl
out of the shell hole, dragging my wounded foot after me.  I will
find one of the killed and take his water bottle.

I slide into a large shell crater.  A man lies huddled at the
bottom.

It is Broadbent.

One of his legs hangs by a mere strip of skin and flesh to his
thigh.  He opens his eyes and smiles weakly.  His face is bathed in
sweat and pain.  His lips move slightly.  He is speaking.  I put my
head close to his and listen.

"I can't look at it--tell me is it off?" he whispers.

I lift his head up and give him a drink of the water I have found.
It is lukewarm.  He drinks.

At the bottom of the hole there is a wide black pool of blood.  His
partly amputated leg is twisted at a grotesque angle--suddenly the
strip of skin and flesh breaks.  The leg moves a little.

"Tell me is it off?"

I cannot answer him.

The pool of blood grows as though it were fed by a subterranean
spring.  It fills the narrow, conical bottom of the hole.  He lies
with his face twisted so that he does not see his leg.

". . . all the time--you know, in the night when I'd think--this is
the thing I was scared of most . . ."  He moans.

His face is a dirty white--it is turning green.  His eyes are half
closed.  His breathing becomes heavier.  The deep whistling intakes
sound above all the other sounds of the field.

I move to alter my position.  His eyes follow me, beseeching me not
to forsake him.  I reassure him.

"Is it off--all of it, I mean?" he asks.

"Rest quiet," I say, avoiding his question. "The stretcher-bearers
will soon be here."

He looks at my foot and smiles faintly.

"You're lucky.  A Blighty.  No more fatigues--"

Time passes.

The heavy blistering August sun drags itself higher into the sky.
The noise of the battle is a dull rumble now.  Midday insects drone
sleepily.  In the side of the shell hole there is an opening of an
anthill.  I watch the beady insects scurrying in and out.  Two of
them struggle to carry a little ball of ordure uphill.  Again and
again it topples them over.  They try again, others come to their
aid, and finally it is taken into the dark little hole.

After a long while he speaks again.

"I know it isn't off--I can feel my toe when I wriggle it--it can't
be off."

But the leg lies motionless near the pool of blood.  He does not
look to see, however.

His breath comes faster.  He looks up to the globe of fire which
seems to hang motionless in the sky.  Tears roll down his dirty
green cheeks.

"I know it--I'm dying--God--and I'm glad.  I don't want to go back--
like this. . ."  He moves his hand listlessly towards his thigh.
His face glistens in the sun.  "Mother," he whimpers like a child,
"mother . . ."

Like the hundreds of other men I had seen die, Broadbent dies like
a little boy too--weeping, calling for his mother.

Tears cease to stream down his face.  He lies perfectly still.

In the rear I hear the stretcher-bearers calling to each other.

                           * * * *

The hospital train moves slowly towards Boulogne.  It stops here
and there to pick up more cargo.

We come to a halt and a bright-faced cockney girl comes into our
car.  She wears the uniform of a Waac.  In one of the berths a man
has died during the journey, but this does not deter us from joking
with the newcomer.  We shout our greetings to the girl.

". . . what's the matter with you?"

"I'm sick . . . goin' 'ome to Blighty."

"You don't look sick."

"But I am."

"What are you sick of?"

"I've got mumps under the waistcoat."

"Mumps under the . . . ?"

"I'm goin't' 'ave a bybie . . . ten quid and a long leave."

She smiles.

                           * * * *

We stop at a junction near an officers' hospital.  The door of the
car is swung open and a man is carried aboard.  The orderlies rest
the stretcher in the aisle of the car and look for a berth for the
newcomer.

He is a young German subaltern.  He is pallid with pain.  He looks
at us coldly as we greet him and does not answer.  He turns to one
of the orderlies.  He speaks perfect English.

"If this is occupied by privates, I ask that I be removed to
another car."

The men in the berths hoot and shout:

"Throw the bastard off."

"We don't want the damned swine . . ."

"Too good for us, eh, square-head?"

The officer maintains a frozen composure under the barrage of oaths
and taunts which assail him.  Finally he turns to one of the
orderlies.

"Well, are you going to take me to an officers' van?"

The orderly hesitates and says:

"Orders were to bring you in here"--he hesitates and adds--"sir."

The subaltern looks beyond him as though he were an automaton and
says:

"I wish to see the commanding officer of the train."

The orderly leaves to find the medical officer in charge.

There is a tense silence in the van.  The subaltern lies on his
stretcher unconcerned.

In a little while the orderly returns and the German is carried
into another van.

From one of the upper berths a voice, choked with hatred, says:

"God--seems like only their bloody privates is Huns--their officers
is"--he spits the last word out with disgust--"gentlemen."  After a
moment he adds:  "And we're--we're--"  He cannot find the word and
lapses into silence.

Another voice says:

"What the hell did you think this was--a privates' war?  Listen,
brother, all we gotta do is fight it.  That's all."

                           * * * *

We are lying on our stretchers on the quay at Boulogne, waiting to
be carried onto the hospital ship.

We wait for hours.

It is nearly evening.

A light drizzle begins to fall.  Under the lights the fine drops of
rain sparkle on the grey regulation blankets.

The wound in my foot begins to ache as though it were being probed.

An orderly passes.  I ask him for a cigarette.  He stops for a
moment to talk with me.

"Is it dangerous crossing?" I ask.  "They say they torpedo them
once in a while--like the Llandovery Castle!"

"The Llandovery Castle?"  He laughs contemptuously.  "That was
bloody murder, brother.  Our officers oughta be shot for that.  She
was carryin' supplies and war material--it's a goddamned shame,
that's what I say."

He looks over his shoulder at the looming black outlines of the
waiting ship.

"You're lucky," he says, "this one is only carryin' wounded . . ."

The Llandovery Castle--carrying supplies--war material--I see the
general reading us the report of the sinking just before the battle
of Amiens--I see the bright sun shimmering on his brass--I hear his
cold, dispassionate voice--"couldn't swim, poor chaps--wanton act--
must not go unavenged . . ."

I remember the funny jerky steps of the prisoners as they came
running towards us with their hands held high above their heads--I
see the clasped hands lifted over the lip of the shell hole as we
fired into it--clasped hands silently asking for pity . . .

The orderly's voice breaks in:

"Well--give my regards to Blighty--have one for me."

I am carried up the gangplank.



End of this Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook
Generals Die in Bed by Charles Yale Harrison




Project Gutenberg Australia


