

Project Gutenberg Australia



Title:      Sydney in 1848
Author:     Joseph Fowles
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.:  0600151.txt
Edition:    1
Language:   English
Character set encoding:     Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted:          January 2006
Date most recently updated: January 2006

This eBook was produced by: Col Choat

Production notes:

1. [Page numbers have been retained in this ebook, within braces ({}).
For example, search for page 79 using the string {page 79}.
Page numbers with letters as a suffix refer to plates which, naturally,
are not included in this ebook. Refer to the HTML version of this ebook
available from http://gutenberg.net.au, to view plates.]
2. Italicised words in the book are enclosed in underscores in this ebook.


Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


Title:      Sydney in 1848
Author:     Joseph Fowles





SYDNEY IN 1848:
ILLUSTRATED BY COPPER-PLATE ENGRAVINGS
OF THE
PRINCIPAL STREETS, PUBLIC BUILDINGS,
CHURCHES, CHAPELS, ETC.,
from Drawings by
JOSEPH FOWLES.

PRINTED BY D. WALL, 76 YORK STREET,
AND PUBLISHED BY J. FOWLES, 5 HARRINGTON STREET.






INTRODUCTION

The principal object of this Work is to remove the erroneous and
discreditable notions current in England concerning this City, in common
with every thing else connected with the Colony. We shall endeavour to
represent Sydney as it really is--to exhibit its spacious Gas-lit
Streets, crowded by an active and thriving Population--its Public
Edifices, and its sumptuous Shops, which boldly claim a comparison with
those of London itself: and to shew that the Colonists have not been
inattentive to matters of higher import, we shall display to our Readers
the beautiful and commodious Buildings raised by piety and industry for
the use of Religion. It is true, all are not yet in a state of
completion; but, be it remembered, that what was done gradually in
England, in the course of many ceuturies, has been here effected in the
comparatively short period of sixty years. Our object, in setting forth
this Work, is one of no mean moment; and we trust that every Australian,
whether this be his native or adopted country, will heartily bid us "God
speed!"

Sydney, July 14, 1848.




DEDICATION.
TO
HIS EXCELLENCY SIR CHARLES AUGUSTUS FITZROY, K.G.H,
_Captain General and Governor-in-Chief of New South Wales
and its Dependencies, etc. etc. etc._


SIR,

When I reflect what a warm friend you have ever shewn yourself to this
Colony and its Institutions,--and how generous a Patron of the Fine
Arts--till Your Excellency's arrival, unnoticed and neglected; I may,
without suspicion of flattery, confess myself proud in being permitted to
inscribe to you this Work: the first whose sole object has been to
delineate Sydney as it really is, and not as some of our friends in
England evidently imagine it to be. And though I sincerely wish that its
merit could be such as might fairly claim the encouragement and support
with which Your Excellency has favoured me, I am not yet without hopes,
that in accuracy and execution it will not suffer by a comparison with
any similar work in the Mother Country; especially when the peculiar
disadvantages under which we labor are taken into consideration.
Nevertheless, so general is the apathy evinced at the bare mention of
publishing in Australia, that I should scarcely have ventured on so
perilous an experiment without the sanction of Your Excellency's name, in
itself an unquestionable recommendation, enshrined as it is in the
unexampled affection and respect of an intelligent people.

And that we may long continue to rejoice under the superintending care of
one who participates in our hopes, and sighs over our difficulties and
sorrows, is the hearty and unceasing prayer of

SIR,
Your very faithful Servant,
JOSEPH FOWLES.

LIST OF PLATES
--------------

LIST OF PLATES
==============

** BUILDINGS

Government House, Frontspiece
St Phillps Church, 10B
Australian Library, 14A
St Patricks Church, 18A
The Post Office, 24A
St James Church, 28A
Royal Victoria Theatre (interior), 32A
The Free Presbyterian Church Pitt Street, 36A
The Congregational Church Pitt Street, 38A
The Union Bank of australia, 42A
The Royal Hotel, 50A
The Police office, 56B
St Andrews Scots Church, 58A
Wesleyan Centenary Chapel, 62A
The Jews Synagogue, 64A
St Mary's Cathederal, 72A
Supreme Court, 74A
Hyde Park Barracks, 76B
Legislative and Executive Council Chambers, 76B
Museum, 82A
National School, 86A


** STREET PLATES

George Street and Charlotte Place, 10A
George Street and Bridge Street, 12A
Lower George Street, 16A
George Street and Hunter Street, 20A
George Street, 22A
King Street, 26A
Pitt Street, 30A
Pitt Street, 34A
Pitt Street and Hunter Street, 40A
Pitt Street,40B
George Street, 54A
George Street, 56A
King Street and York Street, 60A
York Street, 64B
York Street, 66A
Hyde Park and Elizabeth Street, 68A
Hyde Park and Lyon's Terrace and Burdekin's terrace, 70A
Elizabeth Street, 76A
Macquarie Street, 80A
Harrington Street and Jamieson Street, 84A



KEY TO THE STREET PLATES
========================

Each plate is given the number of the preceding text page, plus a letter,
as 40A, 40B.

There are four lines of drawings on most pages. Number each line
consecutively, taking the word SYDNEY as the top of the page. These
numbers are given in parentheses after the page numbers, as 40A(1).

'Left to right' or 'right to left' is the direction in which the
particular line of drawing should be read to follow the course of the
street. The book should be turned round if necessary to bring the line
of drawing upright.

['Letterpress' refers to the pages which have commentary on the plates.]


BRIDGE STREET

(northern side--left to right)
George to Pitt Street 12A (3)
(southern side--right to left)
George to Pitt Street 12A (4)
Letterpress p. 13


CHARLOTTE PLACE

(northern side--right to left)
George Street to Church Hill 10A (4)
(southern side--left to right)
George Street to Church Hill 10A (3)
Letterpress p. 11


COLLEGE STREET

(designated 'Hyde Park')
(eastern side--left to right)
Between Stanley Street and Liverpool Street 70A (2)
Letterpress p. 70


ELIZABETH STREET

(western side--right to left)
Hunter to King Street 76A (3 and 1)
King to Liverpool Street 68A (4, 3, 2, and 1)
(eastern side--left to right)
Hunter to King Street 76A (4 and 2)
Letterpress p. 77.


GEORGE STREET

(eastern side--left to right)
Queen's Wharf to Queen's Place 12A (2), 16A (2 and 4)
Bridge to Hunter Street 10A (2), 20A (1)
Hunter to King Street 22A (4, 3, and 1)
King to Market Street 54A (1 and 3)
Market to Park Street 56A (1 and 3)
(western side--right to left)
Queen's Wharf to Essex Street 16A (1 and 3)
Essex Street to Charlotte Place 12A (1)
Charlotte Place to Jamieson Street 10A (1)
Jamieson Street to Barrack Wall 20A (2)
Barrack to King Street 22A (2)
King to Market Street 54A (2 and 4)
Market to Druitt Street 56A (2 and 4)
Letterpress pp. 10, 12, 13, 16, 21, 23, 54, 66


GROSVENOR STREET

(See Charlotte Place)


HARRINGTON STREET

(northerly from Charlotte Place)
Eastern side 84A (2)
Western side 84A (1)


HUNTER STREET

(northern side--left to right)
George to Pitt Street 20A (3)
O'Connell to Bligh Street 40A (4)
(southern side--right to left)
George to Pitt Street 20A (4)
Pitt to Castlereagh Street 40A (3)
Letterpress pp. 21, 44


HYDE PARK

(See Liverpool Street, College Street)


JAMIESON (NOW JAMISON) STREET

(westerly from George Street)
Northern side--right to left 84A (4)
Southern side--left to right 84A (3)


KING STREET

(northern side--left to right)
York to George Street 60A (2)
George to Pitt Street 26A (1)
Pitt to Castlereagh Street 26A (3)
(southern side--right to left)
York to George Street 60A (1)
George to Pitt Street 26A (2)
Pitt to Castlereagh Street 26A (4)
Letterpress p. 28


LIVERPOOL STREET

(designated 'Hyde Park')
(southern side--right to left)
Elizabeth to Oxford Street 68A (1)
Elizabeth to Oxford Street 70A (1)


MACQUARIE STREET

(western side--right to left)
Near Bridge Street to Bent Street 80A (4)
Bent to Hunter Street 80A (3)
Hunter to King Street 80A (2 and 1)
Letterpress p. 79


PITT STREET

(eastern side--left to right)
Hunter to King Street 40A (1)
Hunter to King Street 40B (3 and 1)
King to Market Street 30A (2 and 4)
Market to Park Street 34A (2 and 4)
(western side--right to left)
Hunter to King Street 40A (2)
Hunter to King Street 40B (4 and 2)
King to Market Street 30A (1 and 3)
Market to Park Street 34A (1 and 3)
Letterpress pp. 31, 35, 41


YORK STREET

(eastern side--left to right)
Barrack to King Street 60A (3)
King to Market Street 66A (1 and 3)
Market to Druitt Street 64B (3 and 1)
(western side--right to left)
Barrack to King Street 60A (4)
King to Market Street 66A (2 and 4)
Market to Druitt Street 64B (and 2)
Letterpress pp. 60, 66

* * * * *

{page 5}




SYDNEY.



CHAPTER I.


SITUATION--EXTENT--POPULATION--AND GENERAL DESCRIPTION.

Sydney, the capital of New South Wales and Metropolis of Australasia, is
situated on the southern shore of Port Jackson, at the distance of seven
miles from the Pacific Ocean, in lat. 33° 55' S. and long. 151° 25' E. It
is built at the head of the far-famed "Cove;" and, with Darling Harbour
as its general boundary to the west, extends, in an unbroken succession
of houses, for more than two miles in a southerly direction. As a
maritime city its site is unrivalled, possessing at least three miles of
water frontage, at any part of which vessels of the heaviest burden can
safely approach the wharves. The stratum on which it stands is chiefly
sandstone; and, as it enjoys a considerable elevation, it is remarkably
healthy and dry. The principal thoroughfares run north and south,
parallel to Darling Harbour, and are crossed at right angles by shorter
streets. This, at first, gives the place an air of unpleasing sameness
and formality, to those accustomed to the winding and romantic streets of
an ancient English town; but the eye soon becomes reconciled to the
change, and you cease to regret the absence of what is in so many
respects undesirable.

Sydney occupies a space of more than two thousand acres; but from this
must be deducted fifty-six acres, reserved for recreation and exercise,
and known as Hyde Park or the Race Course. By the Census taken in 1846,
the number of houses in the city was seven thousand one hundred; there
are now, at least, two hundred more. But, independently of the city
itself, the suburbs have, during the last few years, steadily increased
{page 6} in size and importance. To the eastward is Wooloomooloo; to the
southeast, Paddington and Surry Hills; to the south, Redfern and
Chippendale; to the south-west, Camperdown, Newtown, and the Glebe; to
the west (across Darling Harbour), Balmain; and, to the north, the
township of St. Leonard's. All these, except the two last, are more or
less connected by streets with the parent city; and, in 1846, contained
one thousand seven hundred and fifteen houses: they now probably number
two thousand.

Sydney is divided into four Parishes--St. Philip's, St. James', St.
Andrew's, and St. Lawrence's; and was, in 1842, incorporated by Act of,
Council, and municipally divided into six Wards: viz. Gipps Ward, Bourke
Ward, Brisbane Ward, Macquarie Ward, Cook Ward, and Phillip Ward. Each of
these divisions is represented by four Councilmen and an Alderman, of
whom one retires annually by rotation. The Mayor is chosen from their own
number, by the Aldermen and Council.

The Population of the city, in 1846, was 38,358; and, adding the average
annual increase, taken from the five years previous to that year, must
now be 41,712. The suburbs also, in 1846, returned as 6832, from their
very rapid extension may be safely stated at 7500--making a total of
49,212.

The Public Institutions are numerous and flourishing; but as we purpose
to describe them at length, as opportunity offers in the course of this
Work, we shall content ourselves with briefly enumerating them in the
present chapter. There are four Banks of Issue--the Bank of New South
Wales, and the Commercial Bank, both _Colonial_; and the Union Bank
of Australia, and the Bank of Australasia, _Anglo-Australian_.
Besides these, there are--the Savings' Bank, the Royal Bank of Australia,
the British Colonial Bank and Trust Company, the Scottish Australian
Investment Company, the Bank of Australia, and the Loan Company. We have
also an Australian Gas Light Company, an Australian Sugar Company, a
Sydney Fire Insurance Company, and a Sydney Marine Insurance Company.
{Page 7} The Literary and Scientific Institutions are--the Australian
Subscription Library, the Mechanics' School of Arts, the Australian
Museum, the Society for the Promotion of the Fine Arts, and the Floral
and Horticultural Society. In connexion with the last-named Institution,
it may not be irrelavent to allude to the Botanical Gardens, which are
subject to the management of the Government, and are kept up at the
public expense. Besides these, there are numerous Lodges of Free Masons
and Odd Fellows, and several Religious, Social, and Benefit Societies.

Education, though not regarded with all the attention it demands, is
nevertheless not wholly neglected; for we have, in Sydney, a very fair
proportion of well frequented Academies, although the majority are of a
private nature. Those considered as _public_, are--the Sydney and
Australian Colleges (each a School under the control of a Committee), the
Anglican College at Lyndhurst, the St. James' Grammar School, the
Archiepiscopal Seminary at St. Mary's, and the Normal Institution. Of
Schools, of somewhat humbler pretensions, such are known as Parochial, we
have--six Anglican, seven Presbyterian, six Roman Catholic, and one
Wesleyan: all of these are assisted by Government. The Independents and
Baptists have also their corresponding Schools; but, from conscientious
motives, decline any assistance from the State.



CHAPTER II.


EARLY HISTORY--GOVERNMENT HOUSE--GEORGE STREET.

It became necessary, after the rebellion of those Colonies now known as
the United States, for Britain to send her convicts elsewhere; and the
wide, distant, and almost totally unknown regions of Australia, were
adjudged most suitable for the purpose. Accordingly, eleven ships, since
{Page 8} known in Colonial History as the "First Fleet," sailed for New
Holland on the 15th of May, 1787, under the command of Captain Arthur
Phillip, and arrived in Botany Bay on the 20th day of January in the
following year. Finding the spot in many respects unfit for an infant
settlement, and but scantily supplied with water, Captain Phillip
determined to explore the coast; and proceeded northward, with a few
officers and marines, in three open boats. After passing along a rocky
and barren line of shore for several miles, they entered Port Jackson,
which they supposed to be of no great dimensions, it having been marked
in the chart of Captain Cook as a boat harbour. Their astonishment may be
easily imagined when they found its waters gradually expand, and the full
proportions of that magnificent harbour (capable of containing the whole
navy of Britain) burst upon their view. The site of the intended
settlement was no longer a matter of doubt; and, after first landing at
Manly Beach (so named on account of the behaviour of the natives), they
eventually selected a spot on the banks of a small stream of fresh water,
falling into a Cove on the southern side of the estuary. Having returned
to Botany Bay with the news of their discovery, the whole fleet was soon
anchored in this creek, which, in compliment to the Secretary of State,
they named Sydney Cove. On the 26th of January (a sufficient space for
the military and convicts to encamp upon having been previously cleared)
they were all landed, near where the Obelisk now stands, and the National
Flag was hoisted. The succeeding days were, of course, spent in active
employment; and the woods, soon to be replaced by a large and flourishing
city, everywhere resounded to the woodman's axe. Some were clearing the
ground for cultivation, some busily erecting the tents and huts, and some
engaged in landing the necessary supplies.

The Canvas House of the Governor (Captain Phillip), and the tents of the
Officers, were placed on the east of the Tank Stream above-mentioned,
with the flag-staff in front of them; and near them were planted the
various {page 9} fruit trees procured for this purpose at Rio and the
Cape. The marines, and the convicts under their charge, were on the west
side of the Cove, on a spot which may now be described as between
George-street and Harrington-street, south of the site of the old Gaol;
and the hospital for the sick was yet another collection of huts, where
the old Custom-house now stands. Such was Sydney in the first year of its
existence, sixty years ago.

To detail the hardships and privations of the founders of this Colony,
though a task not unworthy of an historian, is not consistent with our
present intention. But neither the sterility of the soil, the intense
heat, nor drenching rains, could damp the ardour of Captain Phillip and
his friends, though these disadvantages temporarily protracted their
success. As an instance of what they had to contend against, we may
remark that, for the six months after their landing, only four of the
Officers had wooden huts; and, when the rest could be provided for, was
uncertain. The hard wood of the gum trees blunted the tools of the
convicts; and the cabbage palm, they had first availed themselves of, was
no longer plentiful.

In July, 1788, the first civil cause was tried, and the Town planned out,
and, in the September following, on a census being made, the population
was found to consist of 933 persons, of whom a very large proportion were
males.

Building went on very slowly, partly for want of mechanics and partly for
want of lime, which they could only procure by burning shells. For two
years the scarcity of provisions almost amounted to an actual famine, and
but for the strict discipline maintained and opportune arrivals from
England, the most serious consequences might have supervened. In spite of
all difficulties, however, a large brick store was at length built, and
the foundation of a Government House laid with all due formality. Though
rambling and irregular, the latter was not an unpleasing building, and,
with various additions and improvements, served as the Viceregal
residence for nearly forty years. It was commenced on the 15th of May,
1788, and {page 10} pulled down on the completion of the present splendid
mansion, which is much better adapted to the purposes of its less
ambitious predecessor.

Government House (with a view of which we present our readers) is an
elegant stone edifice, in the style usually termed Elizabethean or Tudor
Gothic. It was designed by E. Blore, Esq., of London, and erected under
the careful superintendence of Mr. Lewis, the Colonial Architect. It is
about 170 feet long and 40½ feet high, with a large addition at the
northern end containing apartments for the domestics. The Halls and State
Rooms are spacious and lofty, and of these the Ball Room alone measures
150 feet in length and 28 in width, exclusive of the orchestra. The
staircase is formed of highly wrought Australian cedar, and the chimney
pieces of Colonial marble. Altogether, it is one of the most imposing
buildings we have; and whether viewed from the adjacent Domain, the
Harbour, or the City, its tall chimnies of elaborately carved stone,
white turrets and numerous windows, render it a conspicuous ornament to
our metropolis.

It is interesting to contrast such a building as the above with the poor
sheds which appear in Collins' Plates as the nucleus of Sydney. They were
chiefly formed of rough boards nailed to a few upright posts, shabbily
covered with bark; and are, now, everywhere replaced by unbroken lines of
well built houses. In our first engraving of the _Streets_, we have
given an accurate idea of both sides of George Street, from Mr. Lyons'
Mart to the entrance of Jamison Street; and the same, also, of Charlotte
Place. In this range of buildings, the Bank of Australasia, and the
Auction Mart above-mentioned, are equally deserving of notice. The former
is a plain but commodious edifice, and consists of two wings and a
centre; having fifteen windows and three doorways facing the street.
There are six Branch Banks in Australia in connection with this
Establishment, which is under the control of a Superintendent, Manager,
and Board of Directors. It was incorporated by Royal Charter in 1835, and
possesses a capital of one million sterling.

{page 11}

For a long time (as late as 1828) this part of George Street formed the
general boundary line of a large garden, which reached back to the summit
of the hill;--and on the opposite side, as far down as the Tank Stream,
was the Lumber Yard, which was not sold in separate allotments until the
year 1830. Charlotte Place was originally the Parade Ground, and the
Guard House stood on the site of the present splendid dwelling-house of
Mr. Cleeve.



CHAPTER III.


EARLY HISTORY--ST. PHILIP'S CHURCH--GEORGE STREET.

In the early days of the Colony, Divine Service was performed in the open
air, soon after sun-rise, wherever a shady tree could be found. Great
irregularity was the consequence, and notwithstanding the punishments by
which the attendance of the prisoners was enforced, the congregations
appear to have been very thin. Those who obstinately persisted in their
recusancy were deprived of a portion of their rations. This state of
affairs continued until 1793, when a temporary Church was erected at the
back of the huts on the east side of the Cove, near to what is now the
corner of Hunter and Castlereagh Streets. It was built at the expense of
the Chaplain--the Rev. Mr. Johnson--of strong posts, wattles, and
plaster, and was finished August 25th, 1793,--enjoying an honourable
distinction as the _first_ Christian Church in this portion of the
globe. In 1798 it was burnt down--apparently by some incendiary, probably
one of those who had been compelled to attend, and who thus hoped to
escape the infliction for the future. Such hopes, however, were vain; for
the brick store above-mentioned had just been completed, and was
immediately fitted up {page 12} as a Church. This building, which appears
to have been the first house in the Colony, stood a little behind the
site of the present Bank of Australasia. On the completion of the Orphan
School (founded October 1st, 1800), the fittings were taken thither, and
that building continued to be used for the performance of Divine Service
until the removal of Governor Bligh. One consequence of that event was,
an entire suspension of Public Worship from January, 1808, until August,
1809.

That part of St. Philip's first built was the clock tower, which was of
brick, and finished in 1797; this however having fallen in June, 1806, it
was rebuilt of stone in the same year. The Church itself was commenced in
1800, but not ready for use until 1809, when the Rev. W. Cowper
officiated therein for the first time. It was completed about a year
afterwards, and a handsome Altar Service of silver presented to it by His
Majesty King George III. Such is a brief outline of its history. As a
building it is confessedly somewhat unecclesiastical, and singular; but
has, nevertheless, a sort of traditional claim to our respect, from its
connection with so early a period in the annals of the Colony. For
nineteen months previous to the opening of St. Philip's Church for Divine
Worship, (August, 1809,) there was no minister of the Church of England
officiating in the Colony. Since that date, astonishing progress has been
made. Sydney now holds the rank of Metropolitan City in the sixth
Province of the Anglican Church; having, in connection with it as many as
five suffragan bishoprics, while the number of clergymen in this diocese
alone amounts at the present time to fifty. Connected with this most
gratifying church extension, is a work just commenced, with such energy
and zeal as to ensure a speedy attainment of the end in view. This is no
other than the erection of a new and magnificent Church for the Anglicans
of this Parish, of which the foundation has been laid at the back of the
present edifice, on the top of the hill.

Our second Descriptive Engraving represents the continuation of George
{page 13} Street northward to Essex Lane or Gaol Hill. The four first
houses in the plate, as far as Mr. Dawson's, stand upon what was
originally the eastern limit of the Parade Ground before noticed; and
near the corner of it was the entrance and eastern end of the Old
Government Spirit Store, which extended backwards in an oblique direction
towards St. Philip's Church. Of this Store nothing now remains, its site
being completely occupied as in the engraving. The houses opposite, from
Mr. Gaunson's--formerly the Bank of Australia--to the "Herald Office,"
are generally known as Underwood's Buildings; having been erected by Mr.
James Underwood on his grant of land, which reached from the street in
front to the water's edge. It was here that the first Colonial ship,
named the _King George_, was built by that spirited proprietor, and
launched on the 19th of April, 1805. The space intervening between the
"Herald Office" and Bridge Street, had previously been enclosed as the
Garden of the Female Orphan School, which stood nearly in the centre of
it. This Garden also fronted that part of Bridge Street, often called the
Colonnade, which appears in the lower part of the plate. Bridge Street
contains, as may be observed, many respectable buildings, but, from a
variety of contingent circumstances, remains as yet in an unfinished
state.

There is nothing in this immediate vicinity calling for particular
notice, except the Office of the Sydney Morning Herald. This newspaper,
the "Times" of Australia, is conducted with much ability, but at the same
time with such a careful abstinence from all political and party feeling,
that it generally pleases all by displeasing none. In those articles,
however, which touch upon religion, it is decidedly, though not
violently, Protestant. As a commercial and daily paper, it ranks
deservedly very high. It was established in the year 1831, and first came
out as a daily paper in October, 1840. Its circulation is 3000; and it
furnishes constant employment to nearly _sixty_ men.

{page 14}



CHAPTER IV.


AUSTRALIAN LIBRARY--LOWER GEORGE STREET--EARLY HISTORY, ETC.

At the eastern end of Bent Street; which forms a winding continuation of
Bridge Street and Macquarie Place, on an eminence of considerable
elevation, stands the Australian Library. The Institution, to which this
handsome edifice owes its name and existence, was first established
through the exertions of Thomas De La Condamine, Esquire, Private
Secretary to Governor Darling, about one-and-twenty years ago. The
projector, communicating the object of his honourable ambition to the
Reverend Messrs. Cowper and Hill, immediately gained their hearty
co-operation--which was also most willingly afforded by the merchants of
Sydney and other residents. The Society began its career under the
official sanction and patronage of His Excellency the Governor, and has
ever since steadily advanced in utility and importance. The first meeting
was held at the Sydney Hotel, on February 3rd, 1826, when Alexander
M'Leay, Esquire, F.R.S., was elected President, and a subscription list
made out. By the judicious arrangements of the Committee--furthered,
also, by the liberal donations of Governor Darling and Archdeacon Scott,
and a large bequest of books left by the Will of T. Campbell, Esq.--the
Library was opened on the 1st October, 1827, at No. 1 Terry's Buildings,
Pitt Street. These premises were held conjointly with the Sydney
Dispensary, the officer of which served also as a temporary Librarian,
daily, from 1 to 4 P.M. Shortly afterwards, it was enriched by Governor
Darling's granting to its use some valuable allotments of land:--first,
two situated in Hyde Park, on what now lies between the Sydney College
and St. Mary's Cathedral, as a site for the Institution; and, secondly,
two other pieces of land above {page 15} Rushcutter's Bay, in aid of the
Building Fund. The latter were sold by public auction, in the year 1841,
for £3384.

The grant of the allotments in Hyde Park having been cancelled or
disallowed by Sir Richard Bourke, a correspondence was entered into with
the Government on the subject, and kept up for several years. It resulted
in Sir George Gipps granting the site of the present edifice, of which we
present our readers with an accurate engraving. The first stone was laid.
by the President, A. M'Leay, Esq., on the 14th February, 1843, and it was
ready for use in January, 1846. It is built of light-coloured freestone,
after the design of Henry Ginn, Esq., and adorned with numerous and well
carved pilasters in the composite order of architecture. The Library Room
occupies the entire of the eastern side facing Macquarie Street, and is
lighted by fifteen windows. Its size is 80 feet by 40, and it is
thirty-five feet in height. Though as yet incomplete it is a noble
apartment, and is to be surrounded by a gallery, reaching out as far as
the pillars, when finished. The Reading Room is of much smaller
dimensions, and has a south-western aspect. The cost of the building, in
its present state, has been about £5000.

The Society at present consists of Proprietors, who pay £5 as an entrance
fee, with an annual subscription of £2;--and Subscribers, who pay £3
a-year and no entrance fee. Honorary Members must be introduced by two
Proprietors, whereupon they are admitted to the use of Library and
Reading Room for a period of three months, but can have no books issued
to them. The admission is by ballot, but its use is not so offensively
exclusive as generally imagined. The Library contains 15,000 volumes.
About forty periodicals--and newspapers, both British and Colonial, are
regularly received. Books are issued from 11 A.M. till 5 P.M., and the
Reading Room is open from 9 in the morning till 9 at night.

Retracing our steps toward George Street we come in sight of the Obelisk,
erected in 1818 by Governor Macquarie, as a starting point from {page 16}
which distance on the roads of the Colony might be calculated. It stands
in a small grass plot, in front of Macquarie Place, at the eastern
extremity of Bridge Street, but will doubtless be soon swept away by the
tide of improvement, which in this as in every other part of the City is
beginning to make great alterations. Its very site will soon be a matter
for conjecture.

Our third descriptive engraving forms a continuation of the line of
George Street northward, from the point where the preceding plate broke
off; viz. from Essex Lane to the Queen's Wharf. This portion of the Town
bears a strong resemblance to part of a maritime town in England, and
swarms with an active and busy population, mostly depending for their
subsistence upon the shipping. As one of the most prominent and
interesting features of this locality, we must direct attention to Mr.
Dawson's Foundry, which is generally considered to be the first in the
Colony. It was established in 1833, by the gentleman whose spirited
industry and enterprise it is now amply rewarding. As an instance of what
can be done in this Colony, it may be mentioned that iron work, of more
than _four tons_ weight, has been cast here with success. Mr. Dawson
has also, for multifarious uses, an excellent high pressure steam engine,
of eight horse power, which has been in constant use for the last eleven
years. It was made on the premises, and, it is scarcely necessary to add,
is a finished piece of mechanism. In the adjacent houses there is,
perhaps, a little less regular uniformity of aspect than is now usual in
Sydney, but most of them are of stone and substantially built. The
present Shop and Dwelling of Mr. Holmes was originally the Office of the
"Sydney Gazette," formerly the principal newspaper in the Colony, and the
first daily paper in this part of the world. It is long since defunct.
Opposite to the Australian Hotel (a very commodious and respectable Inn),
stands the House and Marine Store of Mr. F. Mitchell, and is the oldest
establishment in Sydney of the kind. The Shop has been, built for more
than twenty years, but the House, which is the oldest in this part of
George Street, was erected by a Mr. Redman.

{page 17}

We must now resume our brief outline of the history of Sydney; tracing,
as far as possible, its gradual progress from a humble settlement to a
thriving and populous city. That part of it, we have just attempted to
describe, was the first built upon; although, for many years, scarcely
any thing was to be seen therein at all resembling a regular street. The
cottages and huts were but thinly scattered over the hill lying to the
north-west of the Cove, the stumps of trees thereon still remaining
everywhere visible. It required all the energy of Captain Phillip and his
associates to accomplish even this, so harrassing were the difficulties
with which they had to contend. Nevertheless, bricks were burnt, stones
hewn, timber cut, and houses built, in spite of obstacles which seemed
almost insurmountable. The winter rains, it is true, at first increased
the hardship of the prisoners, but eventually impelled them to labour for
the amelioration of their discomforts. Thus the midwinter of '88 found
them busily employed in erecting Barracks for the Marines, building
houses for the Governor and Lieutenant-Governor (Major Ross), shingling
the Hospital, and erecting an Observatory on the spot now known as Dawes'
Battery, at the north-western extremity of the Cove. This last building
was soon found insufficient for its immediate object; and being also far
too small for the accommodation of the family of Lieutenant Dawes, the
Resident Astronomer, the stone-cutters and masons set about erecting
another forthwith, nearly in the same spot. The building, however,
intended as Barracks for the soldiers, proved far too large for the
exclusive occupation of the military, and was accordingly partially used
as a store. Great inconvenience was felt from the want of men, of
practical knowledge, both in agriculture and building; the majority of
the population, both bond and free, being totally unused to any thing of
the kind.

In October, 1789, was launched the _first boat_ built in the Colony.
It was intended for the conveyance of stores to the agricultural
settlement {page 18} of "Rose Hill, now known by the aboriginal name of
Parramatta. It was a large unweildy affair, and is described as any thing
but a _chef d'oeuvre_ in naval architecture. The convicts ironically
termed it the _Rose Hill Packet_; until finding, by sad experience,
how difficult it was to move it at all, they gave it the significant
nickname of the "Lump." A Magazine was subsequently erected near the
Observatory above-mentioned, and in December the Judge-Advocate's house
was built. At the same time, also, the roadways in the settlement were
made somewhat more passable, and the first Guard-house built--east of the
Cove, not far from the bridge. A Signal-staff was set up at the South
Head in the beginning of 1790, by which intelligence of the approach of
any vessel could be immediately communicated to those in Sydney.

In consequence of an universal failure of the crops, and no arrivals from
England, so great a scarcity prevailed that every man was put upon short
allowance; and it was even customary, for those officers and gentlemen
who went to dine at Government House, to carry with them their daily
ration of bread. In April, 1790, the scarcity increasing, the Governor
gave noble instance of self-denial, by placing three hundred pounds of
flour, his private property, in the common stock; consenting to receive
only the rations of a simple soldier in the ranks:--a rare example of
magnanimity, which only those, who have felt what hunger is, can duly
appreciate. It cannot be a matter of surprise for us to learn, that
sickness, the usual attendant upon famine, made great ravages amongst the
soldiers and prisoners. Day after day these unhappy victims of want and
disease were borne to their graves, in what we now call the Old Burial
Ground, then nearly a mile from the settlement. And when the portable
Hospital, brought out from London, was put up in July, nearly five
hundred persons were immediately placed under medical treatment, of whom
great numbers died. During this year (1790) a fresh Storehouse was
finished; and, in December, a Landing-place formed near the site of the
present Custom House. {page 19}  But, little could be done, because it
was impossible to compel those to work who were in actual want of food.



CHAPTER V.


ST. PATRICK'S CHURCH, GUILD, ETC.--GEORGE STREET, HUNTER STREET.

In Charlotte Place, not far from its Anglican sister, stands the Roman
Catholic Church of St. Patrick--a fine Gothic structure, in the Decorate
style. It is substantially built of well dressed stone, and consists of a
nave and chancel, with sixteen side-windows; and another of three lights,
over the porch and main door way, facing the street. There is, besides,
an oriel at the back of the altar, which, contrary to usual custom, looks
toward the north. The principal gables are surmounted by floriated
crosses; and, at the southern end are two spiral turrets, topped with
well carved finials. Below these, and, beside the main entrance, are two
other doors for the aisles, and another in the chancel for the priest.
The windows are all filled with mouldings of great elegance and beauty,
and most of them richly adorned with painted glass. The corbeils, of
fanciful design, are in good keeping with the rest of the building;
which, despite of some disadvantages incident to its situation, is one of
great architectural merit, and well worthy of the communion to which it
belongs. It was built by subscription; assisted, however, by the grant of
£1000 from the Colonial Government. Its extreme length, including the
chancel, is 126 feet, and its breadth 37; but, at the altar recess, it is
not more than 30 feet wide. The first stone was laid on the 25th of
August, 1840, by His Grace the Most Reverend the Archbishop; and was, by
the same Prelate, dedicated on the 18th of March, 1844. In the interior,
as yet not quite {page 20} completed, there is a large gallery. The
fittings are of cedar; and it will contain about 700 persons.

Underneath the Church is a large vaulted apartment, lighted by several
windows at the side, below the level of the street. It serves as the Head
Quarters and Convocation Room of _three_ Societies, whose special
objects are religious and social improvement amongst members of the Roman
Catholic faith. Of these, the first that claims our attention and
approbation is the Guild of Saint Mary and Saint Joseph--an institution
which, in its peculiar sphere of usefulness, stands alone. We say this,
of course, without directly recognising the expediency of all its minor
details; we speak only of its general utility, and may thus be permitted
to regret its isolated position. It is a Christian Association or
Fellowship, deriving its existence from ecclesiastical authority, in
which each member specially binds himself to the performance of certain
religious duties prescribed by his Church. Frequent communion, prayer and
almsgiving, are the most prominent of these spiritual duties, and the
manner of their performance is distinctly expressed and enjoined. Thus it
carries the influence of Religion into all the ordinary transactions of
life; making provision for the time of sickness, old age, and death, and
accomplishing its useful and benevolent purposes with promptness and
efficacy. To effect this there are three separate funds:--One, for
providing for weekly payments to members during sickness; another, for a
permanent annual allowance to members after the 65th year of their age;
and a third, for a sum to be paid to the widow or children on the death
of a member. The chief officers are a Chaplain, Warden, Bursar,
Secretary, and Council or Committee. Its Rules and Financial arrangements
evince a carefulness and judgment beyond all praise. The members wear a
peculiar dress on official occasions, and are thus sometimes met with in
our streets, accompanying some departed brother to his long, last home.
We do not envy that man his feelings, who has beheld the sight unmoved.
The {page 21} Guild of St. Mary and St. Joseph was established on the 8th
of June, 1845, and now numbers 250 members. It may not be uninteresting
to the general reader to be informed that it has been honoured by the
express approbation of Pope Pius IX, who, through the Archbishop, lately
presented to its Warden a large gold medallion of himself, and a curious
chain of the same metal.

Verum haec ipse equidem spatiis exclusus iniquis
Praetereo, atque aliis post me memoranda relinquo.

In connexion with the same edifice, and of prior date, is a Total
Abstinence Society, which has upwards of thirteen thousand members on its
lists. This Institution, though established by the Roman Catholic Clergy,
for the good of their flocks, is not of a sectarian character, but open
to every community; and has greatly checked the demoralising and brutal
crime of drunkenness, which, before its establishment, was dreadfully
prevalent. Its officers are, a President, Treasurer, and Secretary, who
are assisted by a Committee of twenty-one persons. The third Institution,
whose officers assemble here, is a Benefit Society, at present numbering
140 members, and of which the Reverend John Sumner, the Incumbent, is
President. It was established on the 4th of April, 1842.

Our Fourth Descriptive Engraving represents, first, the continuation of
George-street toward the South, from Jamieson Street to Hunter Street;
and secondly, Hunter Street itself. This locality has long been built
upon; and a corresponding line of road may be traced in some of the
oldest charts of Sydney. It contains, however, little deserving notice,
except perhaps the _quondam_ Bank of Australia, an establishment
which was first founded in 1826, recognised in 1833, and closed as a Bank
in February 1843. Hunter Street, delineated in the latter part of the
plate, is pleasantly situated on a gentle ascent, meeting George Street
at right angles. It contains many excellent shops, and that part of it
called Regent's Terrace is no disgrace to its name. These and all the
other {page 22} houses on the southern side of the street have been
erected within the last eight years. Behind Mr. Solomon's Stores is the
site of the Pavilion Theatre, the ephemeral existence of which is now
well nigh forgotten.



CHAPTER VI.


GEORGE STREET--PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS--POST OFFICE.

That part of George Street facing the eastern wall of the Barrack Square
comprises some of the best built houses in Sydney. Our fifth Descriptive
Engraving represents this portion of the City, which forms the
continuation of George Street, southerly, from Hunter Street to the Post
Office. It is chiefly occupied by wealthy tradesmen, whose stores and
shops are fully equal to those of a principal street in an English city.
More than this we cannot say; where so much spirited enterprise and
improvement is visible, it would be invidious to praise a few. In this
quarter land has of late years sold for a very high price, and often
found ready purchasers at £20 per foot. Yet, within the memory of man it
had scarcely a nominal value; we are even assured that the site of
several houses near the Bank of New South Wales was exchanged for a
bottle of rum within the last thirty years! So rapidly has our metropolis
advanced in spite of every discouragement and difficulty.

Proceeding along George Street in a southerly direction, and passing
Hunter Street, which abuts on it on our left, we have on the opposite
side for some hundred yards a blank wall, at present enclosing the
Barrack Square. The extensive quarters provided for the military in the
early formation of the colony, at that time bounded the town, and, by
their vicinity and commanding position, afforded the protection called
for by the peculiar {page 23} nature of its population: having, however,
been gradually surrounded by buildings till they occupied the centre of
the city, the valuable locale could ill be spared from the space required
for the increasing population, and it was found necessary to make
provision for the accommodation of the troops in the outskirts of the
town. Commodious buildings having been erected at Darlinghurst, the head
quarters have been removed thither; and we trust soon to see the
straggling and dilapidated erections of the primitive colony replaced by
elegant and useful edifices adapted to civil purposes, and the site
pierced by the thoroughfares so much required for the circulating current
of commercial activity Returning to the corner of Hunter Street we find
upon our left hand, or upon the eastern side of George Street, a block of
buildings with some architectural pretensions, substantially constructed
of brick with stone dressings--the angle occupied by Mr. Skinner's
commodious Tavern. Amid a row of elegant and well-stored shops is the
office of the Australian General Insurance Company, and at a short
distance the massive and old-fashioned stone house occupied by the Bank
of New South Wales--the oldest institution of that description in the
colony, and a strictly colonial undertaking, established in 1817, with a
capital of £400,000. We must not leave unnoticed the office of the Atlas,
weekly journal;--originally projected with a view of advocating the
pastoral interests of the colony, and at one time powerfully supported by
numerous and able contributors. The editorial department has undergone
numerous changes, but has always been remarkable for the warmth of style
which it has employed in giving expression to its views. The
typographical portion, under the able management of Mr. Welch, the
proprietor, has all through been remarkable for its excellence.

A short distance further southward are the offices where the business of
the now defunct "Church of England Lay Association" was conducted. It is
needless, however, to enter into detail upon the objects of an
institution no longer in existence. In the same building remains the
"Sydney Choral Society," {page 24} founded in March, 1845, with a view to
improve the state of choral music in the city, to provide volunteer
choirs for the parish churches, and to encourage the practice of music in
general. To these objects it has already largely contributed, and
promises to diffuse an extensive and cultivated taste for sacred music.
At the same office is transacted the business of the "Church of England
Cemetery Company," formed in consequence of some objections raised to the
consecration of any part of the General Cemetery provided by the Act of
the Legislature in the Session of 1847; certain clauses of which were, by
the high church party considered objectionable. Here is also the
"Australian Benefit Investment and Building Society," yet in its infancy,
but having for its object the introduction of a principle which has been
found to work beneficially in England.

We now arrive before one of the most important buildings of the colony,
not merely as regards the structure, but as being the centre and focus,
the heart, as it may be termed, from which the pulse of civilization
throbs to the remotest extremity of the land. We mean the Post Office.
The projected improvements, commenced last year, in which is contemplated
the re-edification of the whole building on a scale commensurate with the
growing wants of the community, have not yet progressed beyond the
erection of a handsome portico. Six Doric columns support an appropriate
entablature and pediment, with the royal arms (executed by Mr. Abraham,
an able sculptor resident in the colony,) in the centre of the tympanum.
The whole effect is chaste and severe, and much more befitting the aspect
of a place of business than a more ornamental and gaudy design would be.
When the Barracks are removed the portico will afford a noble termination
to the street which will be opened forming a vista in the front of the
building. The accompanying engraving, however, will enable our readers to
form a better idea of it than a verbal description can by any possibility
convey.

{page 25}

In the earlier days of the Colony, the Settlers were necessarily left
dependent upon chance opportunities of conveyance, for the interchange of
the scanty correspondence which sufficed for the primitive nature of
their commercial transactions--direct barter being, for many years,
almost the only mode of trade. It was not therefore until 1828, forty
years after the first formation of the Colony, that its growing wants
required the aid of a Post Office, which, from the modest extent
originally given to it, has expanded into the important and daily
increasing Establishment, over which Mr. James Raymond so ably presides
as Postmaster General. At the outset, daily Mails were despatched only to
Parramatta and Liverpool; twice a-week to Windsor, Campbelltown, and
Penrith; once a-week to Bathurst; while one solitary sailing vessel
formed the medium of communication between Sydney and Newcastle, which
now affords full occupation for so many splendid Steamers. The entire
distance annually traversed by the Mails amounted to 40,500 miles,
exclusive of the water carriage. Since that period the number of the Post
Offices has been augmented from 8 to 102; the distance travelled over to
nearly 600,000 miles, besides water carriage. The communication now
comprehends a Mail twice a-week to Melbourne, a distance of nearly 600
miles; once a-week to Adelaide, almost double the distance; while, to the
northward, it reaches Moreton Bay, and in a westerly direction extends
beyond Wellington, comprising a journey of upwards of 260 miles towards
the interior of this vast island-continent.

Continuing our walk southward, we pass the handsome Offices of the
Commercial Banking Company, lately reorganised; a new Company having been
formed, with a capital of £120,000 in 4,800 shares, upon the winding up
of the old Company, in consequence of the effluxion of the time of the
partnership licensed by the original Deed of Settlement.

We now arrive at the corner of King Street, which, running from east to
west, from the Government Domain to the shores of Darling {page 26}
Harbour, completely intersects the City. Having reached the centre of the
town, let us pause for a moment and look around us. Few strangers, we
imagine, could do so on their first arrival in the metropolis of New
South Wales, without the most lively emotions of surprise. In place of a
paltry town, which many of them are led to expect, they find shops and
warehouses which would do credit to an European capital, offering for
their convenience every article of comfort and luxury; while, in every
direction, are to be seen unequivocal indications of progress and
improvement. 'The handsome equipages that dash past, the elegantly clad
females, and the stylish groups of gentlemen, point out the seat of
amusement and gaiety. The heavily laden wains--the crowds that sweep
past, in every direction--the hasty step of some, the thoughtful brow of
others, betokening the purpose of intense occupation--all speak of
extensive trade and untiring commercial activity.

A swarm of calumnious libellers have lately found it a profitable
speculation, at least so it may be inferred from the assiduity with which
they persevere in their vocation, to propagate the most abominable
falsehoods respecting the state of society in New South Wales, especially
in Sydney. Some person of the name of Byrne in a publication which has
lately appeared in London, has however excelled most of his predecessors
in fertile powers of unblushing and inventive mendacity. We cannot pass
over these systematic attacks upon the fair fame of our adopted land
without expressing the indignation they excite, as well as our surprise
that the British public should be so far imposed upon as to tolerate and
encourage such masses of absurd falsehoods. We can only account for the
fact that such books have purchasers, by supposing that it proceeds from
the same depravation of public taste that finds greedy readers for highly
wrought details of crime and murder, and the extent of credulity for
which John Bull is so famous, and which readily gives credence to any
thing, however monstrous, which comes from {page 27} a distance. We will
not rely upon our own flat contradiction of such malevolent and baseless
effusions: we will quote a few lines from an impartial witness, a
distinguished foreigner, Count P. E. De Strzelecki, whose valuable work
on New South Wales is too profound and scientific to obtain the
circulating library notoriety of the mendacious babblers to which we
allude. Count Strzelecki wrote in Sydney, under the fresh impression of
surprise at the scene which surrounded him, having been deluded into the
belief that he could scarcely disembark in Sydney with any degree of
safety: he quotes his memorandum, made at the time, in a note upon the
introduction of his book:

"Let the authors of these epithets on New South Wales congratulate and
applaud themselves; my mystification was complete...I found, however, in
the streets of Sydney a decency and a quiet which I have never witnessed
in any other of the ports of the United Kingdom. No drunkenness, no
sailors' quarrels, no appearances of prostitution. George Street, the
Regent Street of Sydney, presented houses and shops modelled after those
of London; but nowhere did its lamps and the numerous lights in its
windows, reflected upon the crowd, betray those signs of a corrupt
society common to the streets of other capitals."--P. 2 Introduction.

We wish our space allowed us to quote more largely from the repeated
testimony in favour of the general morality and hospitality prevailing
throughout the Colony, borne by one whose minute enquiries and extensive
opportunities of observation render it of so much value, while at the
same time he may fairly be considered to have written without prejudice
or bias. Another foreign gentleman, who enjoyed the best opportunities of
becoming acquainted with the state of society amongst us, M. Delessert,
has published a pleasing sketch of his rambles in the Colony, in which he
records his grateful sense of the kindness and hospitality which greeted
him everywhere, and the highly favourable ideas which he formed of the
manners and morals of the Colonists. Is it {page 28} not scandalous that
we should be compelled to appeal to foreigners against the calumnies
heaped on us by our own countrymen?



CHAPTER VII.

The intersecting lines of George Street and King Street--the former from
north to south, the latter from east to west--divide the City into four
parts; the divisions of the streets, at this point, being designated by
the points of the compass. Turning to the left, from George Street, we
proceed up King Street East, a portion of which is shown in our
Descriptive Engraving--a line of thriving shops, some of them of
considerable importance. Passing Pitt Street, Castlereagh Street, and
Elizabeth Street on our right and left, we reach a group of public
buildings. On the right hand, the Supreme Court of the Colony, and St.
James's Church, a view of which is annexed: in front, the pile of
building called Hyde Park Barracks, formerly tenanted by the convicts in
Government service. Although none of these edifices have much
architectural pretension, being constructed entirely of brick and devoid
of ornament, yet, the proportions being good, the masses broad, and the
lines bold and unbroken, they form an imposing and dignified whole.

St. James's Church is a building of considerable dimensions, the
foundation of which was laid on the 7th October, 1819. The spire,
surmounting the brick tower at the west end, not only takes away from the
heaviness of the edifice, but also forms a conspicuous object from every
part of the City and its neighbourhood. The interior, which is
commodiously fitted up, received considerable improvements about two
years ago; the galleries were altered and enlarged, and the Church now
affords sittings for 1500 persons. There is a well toned and powerful
organ, and an excellent choir {page 29} under the direction of Mr. James
Johnson, to whom the Colony is indebted for the first introduction of
this branch of music. The Choral Society, mentioned above, owes its
origin to the meetings originally held for practice for the service
of this Church. St. James's, although not the oldest, may, probably,
be considered the principal Church of the City. Situated near Government
House, in the centre of the most fashionable part of the metropolis,
the congregation usually includes the family of the Governor, and
a large proportion of the leading members of society. It is also
decidedly the favourite resort for the more aristocratical among
the votaries of Hymen. Divine Service is performed three times on
Sunday, every Friday and Holy Day, and Prayers are read every morning at
nine. The present Incumbent is the Rev. Robert Allwood, M. A., the
learned President of the Theological College at Lyndhurst, assisted by
the Rev. Mr. Priddle and the Rev. Mr. Macarthur; the latter gentleman (a
native of the Colony) is a younger member of the respected family whose
name is so inseparably connected with the early annals of the Colony.

Opposite the north-eastern angle of St. James's Church is the Office of
the Bishop's Registrar, the vicinity probably of which, combined with the
advantages of locality, and the superior accommodations of the building,
renders St. James's, although not the Diocesan Church, the seat of the
most important transactions connected with the Church of England. It may
not be out of place here to mention that the present Lord Bishop of
Sydney, the Right Reverend William Grant Broughton, D. D., is the first
Prelate who presided over an episcopal see in this Colony. His Lordship
first arrived on the 13th September, 1829, as Archdeacon; New South Wales
being then nominally attached to the see of Calcutta, although the
distance and unfrequency of communication precluded, of course, any
interference on the part of the titular head of our Church. He returned
by the Camden, from a visit to England, on the 2nd June, 1836, with the
title and authority of Bishop of Australia, and was installed the same
day {page 30} in St. James's Church; the ecclesiastical importance of the
Colony having been at length considered sufficient to entitle it to
release from the imaginary dependence in which it had previously been
held. In its connexion with the English Church, Australia is comprehended
in the Archepiscopal jurisdiction of Canterbury. Rather more than two
years since, his Lordship announced that, having for some time past
considered the diocese (including as it did the country from Moreton Bay,
to Portland Bay) too extensive to be properly superintended by one
Bishop, he had determined on requesting the Government to appoint
another. Fearing, however, that objections on the score of expense would
be raised to his proposal, he met them in anticipation by the munificent
and singularly disinterested offer to sacrifice half his professional
income (then £2,500 per annum) as an endowment for the second see:--an
instance of self-devotion to which, perhaps, it would be difficult to
find a parallel. The Home Government, however, did not think itself
justified in taking advantage of this liberality to its full extent; but
complied with the suggestion of the Bishop so far as to deduct the sum of
£500 per annum from the resources of the Bishopric of Australia, and to
sub-divide it into three; Sydney having a metropolitan superiority over
the other two, Newcastle and Melbourne. It is almost presumption in us to
offer an opinion on the merits of this eminent Prelate; but we cannot
refrain from making use of the opportunity now afforded us of recording
the humble tribute of our admiration of them. Those who know the many
difficulties he has had to contend against can alone appreciate the skill
with which he has conducted the affairs of the Church: his zeal for its
prosperity is sufficiently demonstrated by the action we have just
related. During the already lengthened period of his residence in New
South Wales his friends and hearers have gained ample demonstrations of
his exalted piety, his profound learning, and his eloquence, clear and
simple in its style, and at the same time both commanding and convincing
in its earnestness.

{page 31}



CHAPTER VIII.


PITT STREET.--ROYAL VICTORIA THEATER.

Retracing our steps from the eastern termination of King Street, we
return to its intersection with Pitt Street. The accompanying
embellishment comprehends the elevations of the buildings in this Street,
proceeding southward from King Street to Market Street; a line which may,
on many accounts, claim to be considered one of the most remarkable
localities in Sydney, and where, particularly in the evening, when the
Theatre is open, among the blaze of gas from the splendid and glittering
shops, the music and bustle attending the movements of a crowd bent on
its evening's amusement, and those of the multitude still busied in
closing the avocations of the day, the new arrival from London may
recognise the most striking features of that great City united in the
varied scene around him; on a diminutive scale, it is true, as compared
with those of the metropolis of the world, but nevertheless the identical
features in miniature. He will here find a combination of Bond Street and
Drury Lane, while the scene is sprinkled with a sufficiency of blue and
red jackets to give it a slight touch of Wapping and Tothill Fields,
divested of their grosser and objectionable peculiarities. This portion
of the Street presents on the whole the most continuous lines of
buildings, perhaps, which can be found in Sydney, and offers fewer
objects calculated to remind the new corner that he is in a young town.
Selected by the purveyors to beauty and fashion as the mart for
displaying their tempting wares, articles are there displayed to attract
and tempt the eye, as well as some of the best specimens of domestic
architecture which the town affords. Among these, four houses, built
under the superintendence of Mr. Duer, Architect, deserve to be
particularised on account of the good taste displayed {page 32} in the
design, and the excellence of the work and materials employed. The fronts
are bold and lofty, faced with fine brick with massive stone dressings
and cornices. The spirited proprietor, Mr. Moffitt, deserves great credit
for the liberality with which he has contributed towards ornamenting the
city. There are also some other good specimens of building, including the
Theatre and its dependencies, but for these we reserve a special notice.
Among the objects well deserving inspection is the Shakspeare Saloon,
(erected in 1846 by its spirited proprietor, Mr. Knight), concealed
within the modest exterior of the Shakspeare Tavern, where the visitor is
surprised to find a well proportioned apartment lighted from the roof,
richly and artistically decorated with designs from some of the most
striking scenes in the Bard of Avon's matchless works, painted as
vignettes in compartments, upon the walls. These designs sprang from the
fanciful pencil of Mr. A. Torning, who was assisted in the execution of
them by Messrs. Newall and Balcomb, whose names are registered in the
archives of Colonial Art.

We now turn to the Victoria Theatre, the interior of which forms the
subject of one of the pictorial illustrations of the present number.
Before, however, entering upon a detailed description of this elegant
edifice, it may not be uninteresting to trace the early, rude, and
unformed efforts of the dramatic art in this Colony, through their
various phases, until they reached the high position of the present day.
It is needless to enter into a lengthy dissertation upon the humanizing
influences which the drama exercises over mankind: the eloquence of the
orator, the philosopher, the poet, and the historian is raised in its
laudation; and if they fail to convince, the intense sympathy which the
Theatre finds with the people is an unerring testimony of its value.
Sergeant Talfourd, one of the first dramatists and lawyers of the day, in
descanting upon the subject, with all the feeling of an enthusiastic and
powerful mind, writes thus:--"Surely the art which separates, as by a
divine alchymy, the artificial from {page 33} real in humanity--which
supplies, to the artisan in the capital, the place of those woods, and
free airs, and mountain streams, which insensibly harmonise the peasant's
character--which gives the poorest to feel the old grandeur of tragedy,
sweeping by with sceptred path--which makes the heart of the child leap
with strange joy, and enables the old man to fancy himself again a
child--is worthy of no mean place among the arts which refine our
manners, by exulting our conception." This opinion is particularly echoed
in the bosoms of the sons of Britain. It is not, therefore, to be
wondered at that the first wretched exiles who came into the Colony
should have endeavoured to relieve the monotony of a bush life, and to
divert their minds from brooding over unpleasant reflections, by getting
up a dramatic entertainment. The scale was humble enough, consisting, in
the first instance, of mere recitations from well-known authors; these
subsequently grew into attempts to produce complete dramas; and singular
to relate, in 1826, during the dynasty of General Darling, the Gaol of
Sydney was turned into a Temple of Thespis; the debtors' room afforded
the arena; and persons of the highest standing in the town were not
ashamed to witness the crude representations or these dramatic
enthusiasts.

It was some years subsequently to this that his Excellency Sir Richard
Bourke granted Mr. Barnett Levy a license for dramatic performances, with
a restriction that he should confine himself to the representation of
such pieces only as had been licensed in England, by the Lord
Chamberlain. Mr. Levy was at that time the owner of the original Royal
Hotel, in George Street, and he fitted up the Saloon of that
establishment as a Theatre, where the first specimens of the legitimate
drama were exhibited in the Colony. The encouragement which this
untertaking received induced the spirited Proprietor to enlarge his
sphere of action. He caused a Theatre to be built, which was termed the
"Theatre Royal," and opened it at the latter end of the year 1833, with
the best company that could be {page 34} collected. The first Manager was
Mr. Meredith, who, at that time, acquired some celebrity for his
personation of old men, but he has since retired, for the most part, from
the stage. This gentleman was succeeded in his office by Mr. Simmons, who
seceded, after a management of some two or three years, when the Theatre
fell into the hands of Mr. Joseph Wyatt, one of the Proprietors of the
Victoria Theatre in Pitt Street, the interior of which is the subject of
our pictorial illustration.

The foundation stone of this latter building was laid on the 7th
September, 1836, by Mr. R. Broad; the architect was Mr. Henry Robertson,
many structures from whose hand now ornament the metropolis. The exterior
of the building presents an extremely chaste appearance, and is more
imposing than if a more florid style of architecture had been adopted.
The entrance to the Dress Circle and Upper Boxes is enclosed by a pair of
handsome and elaborately designed iron gates; on either side of them are
two handsome shops, one of which is occupied as a Tavern, by Mr. Wyatt,
and the other by Mr. Blyth, a Confectioner. The entrances to the Pit and
Gallery are most conveniently placed on the north side. The size of the
Theatre is 100 feet by 50; the stage is 47 feet broad, and 100 feet in
depth, 60 feet having been added to the original design, by throwing open
some premises at the back. For greater convenience, the Green Room,
Dressing Rooms, Scene Painter's Room, and other necessary apartments,
although in immediate contiguity with the main building, do not form any
portion of it. The interior of the house is arranged into the Upper and
Dress Circle, with an extensive Pit and Gallery. The Boxes will hold
about 550 people, the Pit 1000, and the Gallery 350, making in all 2000
individuals; but even more than that number have been in the house on
particular occasions. The Theatre was opened on the 17th of March, 1838,
Mr. Wyatt having offered its service gratuitously for a public ball, in
commemoration of the patron Saint of Ireland. In a few days afterwards
the performances commenced with an excellent company, and have {page 35}
continued with signal success until the present day. Several changes have
occured in the Proprietorship and Management of the Theatre since its
opening; the former is now in the hands of Messrs. Wyatt and Knight,
while the Stage direction vests in Mr. Griffiths.

It may appear somewhat invidious to institute comparisons between the
early performers at the Victoria and those of the present day, but it is
universally acknowledged that the Company was never so strong in all its
departments as now. Mr. Nesbitt, Mr. Griffiths, Mr. Arabin, and Mrs.
Guerin are the principal supporters of Melpomene; her higher sister
Thalia boasts of Mr. Frank Howson, Mr. Hydes, Mr. Rogers, Mr. Hambleton,
Mr. Griffiths, and Mesdames Guerin, Gibbs, Ximines, and Carandini: in
opera, these ladies are also powerful adjuncts, and, with Mr. John
Howson, his brother, and the other aids of the Theatre, many of the most
favorite operas on the English Stage have been produced here in a very
superior style. In summing up the improvements of late years, the
Orchestra must not be forgotten, which, under the able direction of Mr.
John Gibbs, has attained a high grade in musical excellence. In quitting
this subject, it is due to the Proprietors of the Victoria Theatre to
remark, that they deserve the thanks of the public for their exertions in
upholding the drama throughout the general depression of colonial
affairs, and for having preserved its high tone amongst a community
formed of such discordant elements.



CHAPTER IX.


PITT STREET (CONTINUED).--SCHOOL OP ARTS.--INDEPENDENT CHAPEL.

Proceeding along Pitt Street we cross Market Street, at which point the
character of the former thoroughfare changes very considerably. The {page
36} fashionable establishments give place in a great measure to those of
a more utilitarian description, among which are many wholesale and
manufacturing concerns on a very extensive scale. We now arrive at one of
the most interesting institutions of the Colony, the Sydney Mechanics'
School of Arts. The building at present occupied by the Society, being
only intended for temporary purposes, offers no architectural features
worthy of being inserted among our illustrations; but if the support of
the public should keep pace with the ambition of the managers, the School
of Arts, ere many years have elapsed, will form one of the most prominent
ornaments of the metropolis. The objects of the Institution are similar
to those which have been so successful in the parent country,--the
diffusion of useful knowledge, and the awakening a love of Study, by
means of a Library, News and Reading Rooms, Lectures, and Classes for
instruction, accessible on terms within the reach of the less wealthy
orders of Society. Since the year 1823, when the Institution was first
projected, it has partaken of the varying fortunes of the prosperity of
the Colony, gradually increasing, however, until, at the date of the last
report, the number of members was four hundred and ninety-two, of whom
fifty-one were life members. Their Excellencies Sir Richard Bourke, the
late Governor of the Colony, and his successor Sir Charles Augustus Fitz
Roy, have evinced the warm interest they felt in the welfare of the
Institution by allowing their influential names to be used as its
patrons, and afforded all the support that Government was in a position
to extend to it.

The idea of forming a Mechanics' School of Arts in this Colony was first
publicly broached by the Rev. Henry Carmichael and Dr. Band. After some
trouble and much discussion a Committee was formed, the only members of
which now remaining amongst us are, as far as we have been able to
ascertain, Mr. Henry Hollinshed and Mr. Thomas Carter. The Rev. Dr. Lang
aided the progress of the infant undertaking, by the loan of apparatus,
besides contributing valuable assistance in other respects, {page 37} by
his learned and eloquent lectures, and numerous presents. It is also with
pleasure we record the names of Dr. Nicholson, the worthy President; Dr.
Leichhart, Arthur A'Becket, Archibald Michie, and W. T. Cape, Esqs., who
have all, by their exertions either in the delivery of lectures or
otherwise, contributed materially to the advancement of the Institution.

The present building contains an ill arranged Theatre, in which the
lectures are delivered, (and is also occasionally used for concerts and
public meetings, independent of the Institution), Library, and Reading
Room, besides private apartments for the Librarian.

The Library itself contains 3000, volumes, embracing every branch of
Literature and Science, an extension of which is continually made by
purchase and presents: during the last year it was increased by the
addition of 138 volumes. The Reading Room, which adjoins the Library, is
open daily, from nine in the morning till the same hour at night, for the
convenience of its members; and upon its table will be found Blackwood's,
Tait's, Fraser's, Bentley's, The Penny, and New Monthly Magazines, The
United Service, Art Union, Dublin University, Chambers' Edinburgh, The
Civil Engineers and Architects Journals, The Lancet, Quarterly Review,
and La Belle Assemblee, together with the Spectator, Evening Mail, Punch,
Illustrated London News, Sydney Morning Herald, and Atlas Newspapers.
Several other British and Colonial periodicals were formerly received,
but it having been communicated to the Library Committee that many of the
Reviews and Magazines, and even Newspapers, were never opened by Members
visiting the Reading Room, and being desirous of retrenching their
expenses, eight of the former and six of the latter were very properly
discontinued.

The Institution also possesses a very choice and extensive collection of
Fossils and Geological Specimens, and, in connexion with the Lecture
Room, complete apparatus for the illustration of lectures on Chemistry,
Mechanics, etc., which has cost the Institution upwards of five hundred
{page 38} pounds. The annual subscription to the Society is only twelve
shillings, and it is equally a matter of surprise and regret that in so
extensive a community as that of Sydney there should be found so few who
exhibit a disposition to support, either for personal pleasure and
improvement or public benefit, such an institution as the School of Arts.
Sincerely, however, do we trust that ere long we shall observe an
advancement in the march of intellectual taste and refinement, and the
classes judiciously projected by the Committee (now almost neglected)
become thronged with the youthful members of this Society, emulating each
other in the acquirement of useful knowledge.

E'en now the midnight waneth, and the day
Of Truth is dawning with a brighter ray.
O'er this fair land she spreads the fruits of peace,
Bids schools arise--the finer arts increase,
Rebukes the narrow minds that vainly strive
To keep a moral ignorance alive;
And proves Religion, Order, and Repose
Are best preserved as man in _knowledge_ grows.

The Congregational Church, or, as it is frequently called, the
Independent Chapel, Pitt Street, is the handsomest building of the kind
in Sydney, or indeed in any of these Colonies. It was designed by Mr.
John Bibb, Architect, and erected under his superintendence. The
foundation stone was laid by the Rev. Dr. Ross on the 26th of January,
1841; but in consequence of the embarrassed state of the Colony it was
soon after thought prudent to suspend the progress of the work, and it
was not until October, 1844, that it was determined to recommence it. The
Church was opened for public worship on the 1st January, 1846, by
religious services in which various Ministers of other denominations of
Christians took a part. The whole cost of the erection has amounted to
upwards of £6,000, which has been raised by voluntary contribution, it
being contrary {page 39} to the principles of this body of Christians to
accept of assistance from Government, either for the building of their
churches or the support of their ministers.

The front of the building is of the Ionic order of Architecture, with two
columns twenty-six feet in height, according to the Ionic Temple of the
Ilisus at Athens; and four Antaic pilasters with ornamental capitals;
with an entablature and pediment extending over the columns and
pilasters. The design is in imitation of the smallest Grecian Temple,
denominated by the Greeks a "Temple in Antis" at the principal entrance
to the Cella (or interior) of the Temple. The whole front is of polished
free-stone, and is divided from the street by an ornamental iron railing
on a dwarf stone wall, The pulpit is octagonal, standing on a bold
pedestal, and has many carved mouldings of Grecian leaves and ornaments;
it is ascended by a winding stair, and is made of the most handsome
cedar, which is French polished. The edifice is ninety-five feet long,
forty-five feet wide, and thirty feet high, all in clear of the interior.
The ground floor has two entrance vestibules, which contain the stairs
leading to the galleries, and between them is a room used as a vestry or
school room, and which will contain about one hundred and thirty
children. Above the vestibules and the vestry is a large room, divided by
a balustre railing from the galleries, used also as a school room and
sittings for the Sunday school children during divine worship; it will
accommodate two hundred and forty children. The interior of the Church is
elliptical on the ground plan at the end opposite to the pulpit, and
three pews in width against the wall run parallel to the sides and
circular end with an elevation of four inches at each pew, an arrangement
favourable for conveying the sound to all parts of the spacious building:
galleries at two sides and at the end opposite to the pulpit follow the
same curve as the walls and pews below, and are supported by fourteen
cast iron columns of the Ionic order and fluted. These were cast by Mr.
Dawson, of Sydney, in a very neat and {page 40} superior manner, and are
the first series of ornamental columns cast in the Colony--they are
'finished in imitation bronze. The Church will accommodate about one
thousand persons with sittings, besides the children of the Sunday
school. The whole of the pews are of cedar, and the breast-work framing
in front of the galleries is of the most choice kind, equal in appearance
to mahogany. The place is well lighted with gas, except the pulpit, on
each side of which are handsome brass sconces for wax candles. The bronze
pendants which hang from the entablature of the galleries are nearly five
feet in length, are very massive, and were made, with the other lighting
apparatus, under the direction of the Engineer of the Gas Company. There
is also a beautiful organ built specially for this Church by Mr. W. J.
Johnson of Sydney.

It was not until the year 1828 that the Congregationalists made any
movement in Sydney as a distinct body of Christians. Although numerous
and powerful in England, their number in this Colony, from various
causes, some of them no doubt highly creditable to them, has never been
very great. In that year they invited the assistance of the public
towards the erection of a Chapel in which they might worship God
according to their own principles, and be the means, along with other
denominations, of diffusing he knowledge of divine truth among the
ignorant and the depraved of this City. By persevering and zealous
efforts they succeeded in the purchase of land, and in the erection of a
building in Pitt Street, next to the School of Arts, which in 1833 was
opened for divine worship, and in which the Rev. W. Jarrett, who came out
the same year from England, officiated as their Minister for upwards of
five years. Having left the Colony in 1838 he was succeeded by the Rev.
Dr. Ross, formerly of Kidderminster, in Worcestershire, but who, at the
urgent request of the Colonial Missionary Society, resigned his pastoral
charge there in order that he might devote himself to the interests of
religion, in connexion with the body to which he belongs here, and {page
41} also act as agent of the London Missionary Society, for the numerous
important missions it has established in the islands of the Pacific. He
arrived in the Colony in February, 1840, and immediately commenced his
ministerial duties, which he still continues to discharge. In a short
time after his arrival the congregation increased so much that it was
considered advisable to erect a larger building,--and the present
handsome edifice in which they now worship has been the result, with a
large and increasing congregation.



CHAPTER X.


PITT STREET NORTH.--UNION BANK OF AUSTRALIA.--THE FREE PRESBYTERIAN
CHURCH.

Having followed Pitt Street in a southerly direction as far as Park
Street, we retrace our steps, and our ninth and tenth numbers contain
representations of the houses in Pitt Street north, from King Street to
its termination; together with a portion of Hunter Street.

The present illustrations are highly characteristic of the transitory
state of an infant City, from its primitive bark or slab huts to more
convenient weather-boarded cottages, and lastly to the substantial and
handsome stone and brick houses, of which we here present some creditable
specimens.

Commencing at King Street we have, on the right hand, or east corner, the
Rose and Crown Hotel and Restaurant, by Mr. Win. Toogood, and adjoining,
a range of respectable houses; the upper portions of several (from their
proximity to the Courts of Law) are occupied as chambers by members of
the legal profession. On the opposite corner is the Rainbow Tavern,
erected a few years since, and opened by Mr. William Toogood--now kept by
Mr. T. W. Roche. Proceeding a little further, the first house {page 42}
of any interest engaging our attention is that occupied by Mr. Foss,
Chemist and Druggist. It was here the celebrated Quaker, John Tawell,
resided, and in the year 1823 commenced the business now carried on, and
which is said to have been the first regular establishment of the kind in
the Colony; this he conducted successfully about four years, when he
disposed of the same to the present proprietor, and in the next year,
1828, sailed for England, where, in March, 1845, he was executed for the
murder of Sarah Hart at Salt Hill, near Slough, leaving considerable
property in the colony.

Adjoining Mr. Alexander's Coach Establishment and Livery Stables, on the
opposite side of the Street, is the Office of the "Australian Sportsman,"
a weekly newspaper conducted with considerable talent, its object being
to supply faithful records of every sporting event in the Colonies. The
next house is the residence of Dr. Bland, one whose name will ever be
remembered with reverence by the colonists, for his unwearied zeal in
connexion with the Patriotic Association, in procuring for this Colony a
Representative Assembly, and to which, with his compatriot, W. C.
Wentworth, Esq., he was returned at the first election, in 1843, as
member for this City.

A few yards further is the residence of John Hosking, Esq., (first Mayor
of Sydney), and immediately facing is Gill's Hotel, one of the best
houses in Sydney. It was erected in 1835, by Mr. Saul Lyons, and used by
him as a private residence until 1846, when it was let to the present
occupant. We have next a low range of weather-boarded cottages, in the
first of which a wealthy old colonist of the name of Connell has resided
forty-nine years. The fine row of brick houses opposite, known as Terry's
Buildings, form an agreeable contrast to the mean cottages just noticed,
and which, it is to be hoped, will soon give place to more substantial
and ornamental buildings. Mrs. Terry, widow of the notoriously wealthy
Sam Terry, lives in the long stone house on the west side, and, after
passing a few small {page 43} shops, the fine range of stone buildings
(lately the Fitz Roy Hotel), Messrs. Rowand, M'Nab, and Co.'s
establishments, etc., we arrive at the Union Bank of Australia. It was
commenced in 1839, and that part extending from Hunter Street as far as
the vestibule was completed in April, 1840, when the business of the
Bank, which had been carried on from its commencement at temporary
offices in King Street, was removed to the new building. The business of
the Bank, however, having increased so rapidly, it was found necessary,
for further accommodation, to make a considerable addition, and the other
portion south of the former was erected in 1846, under the
superintendence, and from the designs of, John Bibb, Esq., Architect, to
whose taste, skill, and ability the work itself bears lasting testimony.

The Union Bank of Australia was established in London, October, 1837, for
conducting the business of Banking in the Australian Colonies, with a
capital of £500,000, afterwards increased to £800,000. Branches are
formed at Sydney, Melbourne, Geelong, Portland, and Bathurst, in New
South Wales; Hobart Town and Launceston, in Van Diemen's Land; Auckland
and Wellington, in New Zealand. The business of each branch is conducted
by Local Directors, a Manager, and Accountant--the whole being under the
control of the London Board of twelve Directors.

The various branches are under the superintendence of an Inspector--John
Cunningham M'Laren.

The Union Bank of Australia is situated at the corner of Pitt and Hunter
Streets, the principal front, extending about eighty-five feet, being in
the former, whilst the other, to the extent of about fifty feet, is in
the latter Street. The whole of the basement story is rusticated, with
arched windows and doors, and at the principal entrance to the vestibule
of the Bank Offices is a chaste portico of the Grecian Doric order,
supporting another on the next story of the Ionic, with ballustrade,
pediment, and acroteria; the same order is continued by attached columns
between the {page 44} windows in Pitt Street, and by ant pilasters in
Hunter Street, surmounted by a handsome cornice; the upper story of both
fronts is the Attic order of pilasters and cornice, and crowned on the
front in Pitt Street with carved acroteria above the blockings.

Our engraving, however, gives a more correct idea of the building than
any description can. We will only remark that whether we consider the
light and elegant exterior, or the admirable arrangements within, it must
be admitted one of the best buildings in the City, and one of its
greatest ornaments.

The Free Presbyterian Church, which forms the subject of our present
illustration, is a very neat, plain, and commodious edifice, being
centrally situated in Pitt Street, between Market and Park Streets. It
was erected in 1830, by the Congregationalists, and, upon the opening of
their new place of worship, was purchased, in 1846, for the use of the
Free Presbyterian community.

The community worshipping in this Church, under the denomination of the
Free Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia, occupies the same position
in this Colony the Free Church does in Scotland, and its separation, in
1846, from the Synod of Australia (which is also identical with the
Established Church of Scotland) arose from the same reasons that caused
the disruption at home; esteeming it unscriptural to recognise the
supremacy of the civil powers, in spiritual matters. The Minister at
present officiating is the Rev. William M'Kee.



CHAPTER XI.


HUNTER STREET--EARLY HISTORY CONTINUED.

The portion of Hunter Street represented in our accompanying plate {page
45} extends from Pitt Street westward as far as Castlereagh Street. The
upper line contains the extensive Stores of Messrs. Flower, Salting, and
Co.; the private residence of Mr. Young, and Stores belonging to the firm
of Young and Co.; whilst the corner (a low verandah cottage, and one of
the old style) is occupied by Mr. Armstrong, the Veterinary Surgeon,
whose Hospital and Stables are situated in the yard at the back. The
house facing, with verandah, is the residence of Mr. T. E. Jones, whose
Stables form the Depot for the Hon. East India Company's horses,
purchased in the Colony for shipment.

The year 1790 was one of the most disastrous in the annals of the Colony.
Early in the year the flour that had been brought from England was
exhausted, and there only remained that which had been taken in at the
Cape: the harvest, too, had not produced more than would be required for
seed, the whole production of the cultivated land at Rose Hill being two
hundred bushels of wheat, thirty-five of barley, and a small quantity of
oats and maize. The Governor's farm at Sydney, which had only been sown
with barley, yielded only twenty-five bushels.

Captain King, however, who had been sent with a number of prisoners and a
detachment of marines, to form a settlement at Norfolk Island, having
reported favourably of the richness of the soil, and the success
attending their efforts at cultivation, notwithstanding the continued
drought they had experienced, determined Captain Phillip upon sending
thither about two hundred of the convicts, and two companies of the
marines, with their officers, and by this means relieving the provision
store for a time. It was also determined that, upon the return of the
Sirius from Norfolk Island, she should be despatched to China for
provisions, if relief had not previously arrived: but, alas! she was
doomed never to return. After a fine run of only seven days she landed
the convicts and marines in Cascade Bay, when a gale rising she was
compelled to run for Sydney Bay, on the lee side of the Island, and came
to an anchor, from which however she {page 46} drifted, and, in
endeavouring to work out, struck upon the rocks, and became a total
wreck. The officers and crew were rescued by being hauled through the
surf on a grating; and nearly the whole of the stores were providentially
saved.

The return of the Supply to Sydney with this distressing intelligence
spread universal dismay, and even the most courageous and sanguine became
depressed. Their last hope was now concentrated in the Supply, which was
to be despatched to Batavia as soon as she could be got ready. Yet, after
their recent misfortune, how fearful to contemplate their very existence
as depending upon the safety of one frail bark, which a hidden rock or
tempestuous sea might in one moment destroy. As the provisions in store
were now reduced to so low a pitch, it was again determined to reduce the
already scanty pittance, and from the first of April the weekly ration of
each adult was only two and a half pounds of flour, two pounds of pork,
and one each of rice and peas; and after having been kept for two years,
it can easily be imagined of how inferior a description these were.

The Supply sailed on the 17th of April, and it was estimated she would be
absent at least six months.

Two years had now elapsed without any communication from home; the
clothing was as much reduced as their provisions, and many died from
starvation; some little relief was obtained by fishing, but their lines
and nets were also worn out, and the Colony did not even possess the
materials requisite to mend them. A convict, however, managed to spin
some lines from the bark of a tree, which temporarily supplied their
boats.

The greatest caution and severity was necessary to prevent robberies of
provisions, which were however frequently committed, and many suffered
death for their temerity.

The greatest despondency pervaded all classes, many despairing of ever
receiving relief. Yet day after day how many anxious eyes were directed
to the signal station in the hope of seeing the desired flag hoisted.

{page 47}

It was not until the third of June the desired signal was hoisted, and
truly we may say every pulse throbbed with joyous excitement; the whole
place was in the greatest commotion.

The Governor and some of his officers in boats went down the harbour to
welcome the arrival, which, instead of a store ship, proved to be the
transport Lady Juliana, with two hundred and twenty-two female convicts.
She had been ten months making the voyage, and brought the melancholy
intelligence of the loss of H. M. S. Guardian, with two years'
provisions, clothing, etc., for the Colony. She had touched at the Cape
to refresh, and had there taken on board a great number of fruit trees
and other plants, as well as seven horses, sixteen cows, two bulls, a
number of sheep, goats, and two deer. After leaving the Cape, and when in
lat. 45° 54' south, and long. 41° 30' east, on the 23rd of December, she
struck upon an ice island, and received so much injury that they were
compelled to throw overboard the greatest part of her cargo. Many on
board fearing the vessel would founder preferred trusting themselves in
the boats to remaining in the ship; and of the five boats which left her,
only one reached the land in safety, and she was picked up by a French
vessel after many days' sailing. The Guardian, however, reached the Cape,
with the remaining provisions in safety; and seventy-five barrels of
flour were forwarded to this Colony by the Lady Juliana. The provisions
received by the transport were only sufficient to warrant an increase of
one pound and a half of flour to their weekly rations, and it was not
till the arrival, on the 20th of June, of the store ship Justitian that
the full ration was again issued, and labour (which had for some time
been suspended) was again resumed. On the 26th and 28th of June three
other transports arrived with convicts in a deplorable state, two hundred
and seventy-four having died on the passage.

In the month of July the Governor caused the town of Parramatta to be
laid out, and houses were immediately erected; several grants of land
were {page 48} also made in the vicinity to emancipated convicts, and to
some of the marines and sailors lately belonging to the Sirius,
instructions to this effect having been received by the last mentioned
vessels. Grants were authorised to be made to non-commissioned officers
of one hundred and thirty acres, if single, or one hundred and fifty, if
married; to privates eighty acres, if single, and one hundred, if
married; and to emancipated convicts, thirty acres, if single, and fifty,
if married, and ten acres additional for each child they had at the time
of granting.

In the latter part of this month, as a midshipman and three sailors of
the Sirius were returning up the harbour in a boat, when near Pinchgut
Island, a whale rose so near them as almost to swamp the boat with the
swell; after bailing out the water they pulled for the shore, but the
whale again rose underneath the boat, and capsized it, by which three of
them were drowned. The monster did not effect its escape from the
harbour, but was some time afterwards ashore in Manly Cove, and was
killed by the natives. On the 7th of September the Governor, whilst
superintending the erection of a column at the Signal Station on the
South Head, observed a number of the natives assembled near the whale at
Manley Beach, and having been informed that Benilong (a native who had
been in some measure domesticated, but had recently escaped) was amongst
them, he took an armed party for the purpose of recapturing him; upon
landing they found Benilong; and during the interview a native threw a
spear with such force that it entered above the collar bone of the
Governor, and the barb protruded at the back; the spear was broken off,
and upon his arrival at Sydney the other part was carefully extracted.
Fears were entertained for his safety, but by great care he recovered.

In October, after an absence of six months and two days, the Supply
returned from Batavia, and was followed in a short time by a Dutch vessel
hired at Batavia for the conveyance of the remaining stores. Their
arrival was most opportune, for already had the former stores become
nearly {page 49} exhausted; and the weather being very hot, and no rain
having fallen since June, the crops were in a very sickly condition, and
the prospects of harvest any thing but encouraging.

The Storehouse at Parramatta, 100 feet by 24, and the Wharf, were
completed, and about thirty cottages or huts erected by the end of the
year; and, in Sydney, another Store of equal dimensions, and in a line
with that already erected on the east side of the Cove, was commenced.



CHAPTER XII.


THE ROYAL HOTEL; GEORGE STREET; THE POLICE OFFICE.

This has been truly called the age of action, and of quick and rapid
events. In our previous chapter we described the state of things in 1790,
when, at one period, there was not in the colony four months' provisions
for the entire population, even on the most reduced scale; and when
several persons had perished of inanition before the arrival of the
transports from the Cape, bringing part of the stores saved from the
Guardian and now, by a stroke of the enchanter's wand, we find the scene
rapidly changed, and ourselves introducing our readers to a far different
state of things:--our denizens of the pasturage--plains boiling down into
tallow sufficient meat, _per annum_, to feed nearly half a million
of persons, because we have not mouths to eat it: and our denizens of the
city luxuriating in all the delicacies which the well appointed hotels
and _restaurants_ of Sydney afford on the most princely scale. Let
us ask our readers to turn from the days of 1790-1, when our first brick
building was begun and finished, and glance at the engraving which we
present of the Royal Hotel, George Street, within whose hospitable walls
the starving regime of Governor Phillip is now regarded as one {page 50}
of the bygones of doubt and wonder. Few things strike new arrivals with
more surprise than the external appearance and the inner appointments of
this huge building--its ranges of balconies without, its labyrinth of
corridors within. We may observe that the present structure was built on
the ruins of the old Royal Hotel, which was erected by Mr. Barnett Levy,
to whom the Colony stands indebted for the legalised introduction of the
_Legitimate Drama_ into New South Wales; for although, so early as
1796, Plays were performed here, the peculiar circumstances of the
Colony's _'penality'_ prevented the local authorities from
sanctioning the regular performances of the stage. It was on the old
English Boxing-day, 26th December, 1832, that, in Mr. Barnett Levy's
Saloon, "money was _publicly_ taken at the doors," on which occasion
Douglas Jerrold was the dramatist honored with the _pas_, his
"Black-eyed Susan" being the play; whilst Billy Moncrieff's "Monsieur
Tonson" was selected for the farce. This, however, is not the place where
we may linger over dramatic affairs. We accordingly pass to the time when
the disciples of Thespis, having removed to a more spacious temple, the
old Royal was again devoted to Hotel purposes, and, under the able
management of Mr. Sparkes, received the chief share of the patronage of
our Settlers and Squatters, who, "on business or pleasure bent," paid
their welcome periodical visits to our metropolis. From 1836 to 1840, a
period of dazzling but false prosperity, Mr. Sparkes presided over the
hospitalities of the old Hotel; but on the night of the 17th of March, in
the latter year, the whole of the building was destroyed by fire. A
drunken carter, who had been indulging in copious libations to St.
Patrick, amused himself by smoking a pipe in an adjoining stable,
belonging to Mr. Blanch; and the straw igniting, the immense stack of
buildings was speedily in flames. Mr. Joseph Wyatt, the proprietor of the
Victoria Theatre, was at this time the owner of this property, which was
valued at £12,000, but unfortunately only insured for £3000. Mr. Sparkes'
property, valued at £5000, was not insured at all. The total {page 51}
damage was estimated at £20,000; and Colonel Barney declared that if the
wind had set in freshly, either from the south or west, scarcely any
human means could have prevented the destruction of property to the
amount of half a million sterling. A grand ball was taking place at
Government House when the fire broke out; and Colonel Barney, Capt.
Collins, Lieut. Lugard, and other Officers, rushed out in their gay
attire and lent their aid in extinguishing the flames. By levelling
several tenements in the rear of Mr. Belmore's residence, Lieut. Lugard,
in all probability, saved the Victoria Theatre, and also Mr. Nash's
premises, from being consumed; and Colonel Barney anticipating, from a
slight breeze to the southward, that the flames from the Hotel might
communicate to Macdonald's buildings, had a train ready laid to blow up
the two first houses, and thereby save the rest from destruction: but
this was rendered unnecessary by the providential lulling of the wind.
From Mr. Wyatt the fee-simple passed into the hands of Mr. John Terry
Hughes, who built the structure which we are now about to describe.

When George the Fourth's favourite architect built the Church of All
Souls in Langham Place, Regent Street, there was a passable joke current,
about its 'order' being _'Mr. Nash's positive order'_; and,
premising that Mr. J. T. Hughes was his own architect when the immense
stack of stone and wood-work was raised, which now, under the title of
the Royal Hotel, occupies nearly an acre of ground in George Street,
Sydney, we set out with the confession that no _'comparatives'_ or
_'superlatives,'_ that we can command, are adequate to a faithful
description of this "Curiosity of Colonial Architecture."

With a frontage of 72 feet, and a depth of 170, the exterior or naked
stone walling of the Royal Hotel is extremely plain. Neither
architectural nor ornamental character of any kind is assumed, albeit the
front is enclosed by a series of balconies supported on Roman columns.
The building is five stories in height, with a basement story used for
cellars chiefly, {page 52} in one part whereof an imitation of the London
_'Shades'_ has been attempted with partial success. The roof of the
main building is flat, covered with lead, and is surrounded with a plain
open embrasure, which ill accords with the Roman style of the series of
balconies in the front. These balconies, entered from and on a level with
the different floors of the building, are wide and spacious, forming a
fine promenade in hot and sultry weather; and, giving shade and shelter
to the adjoining rooms, are admirably adapted to a climate like ours.
Still we cannot refrain from adverting to the recklessness which (with
the fate of the old Royal in memory) constructed this immense frontage of
_Wood!_ With the exception of the lower columns, the whole of the
range of balconies is composed of this combustible material.--A side
entrance leads us into an open quadrangular court, situate about the
centre of the buildings; and here again we find a series of flights of
wooden stairs, ascending to the different stories of the building, with
spacious landings or projecting balconies, supported on wooden pilasters.
And here are to be found a number of large apartments desolate,
unfinished, and perfectly useless, being at an absurd distance from the
main part of the Hotel. To this wilderness of stone and wood we would
particularly direct the attention of the young builder who would desire
to avoid the 'Hughesionian' style of architecture.--But now let us
conduct him to the main entrance in George Street, where the excellent
cheer of Mr. Sparkes tempts even the hypercritical in art to be blind to
the follies of the architect. The principal vestibule is of a good and
appropriate size and depth: the bar, which is of polygonal form, and
enclosed with glass sashes all round, being at the extreme end. Capacious
flights of stairs, well formed and easy of access, run up both from the
right and left of the bar. Two grand saloons, nearly 100 feet long,
occupy a portion of the south side (the one immediately above the other).
In width and height they are sadly disproportionate to their length; and,
as many of our readers will admit who have visited the lower room (which
{page 53} has been used for Concerts, Bazaars, and Public Meetings), it
is extremely ill adapted for any of these purposes.

However, in the centre of the main building are to be found several fine
suites of rooms (so far as area and space are concerned); and these,
together with spacious corridors, whence run lengthy passages, with a
number of single dormitories fitted up with every necessary comfort,
impress new corners with high notions of the resources of a city, which
can support establishments of so gigantic a design as this. The kitchen,
and other culinary offices, are in the basement story; they are dark and
ill-suited for the purposes intended, and are by no means compatible with
the requirements of an Hotel of this magnitude.

Including the large saloons, the billiard-room, and principal
coffee-room, the design of the Hotel contains nearly one hundred
apartments, many of which, by the way, now unfinished and closed up, are
without the means of being lighted, except by artificial means! With Mr.
Hughes's system of building we are not acquainted, but we presume that he
never could have placed upon paper, a plan of the huge mass of
cumbersomeness which he has piled in George-street? One half of the money
wasted thereupon, would have sufficed for a building worthy of the finest
street in Europe.

We are glad to be enabled to add to these strictures, that the interior
of the Royal Hotel is now undergoing considerable repairs, in so far as
relates to the habitable portions. The grand saloon, hitherto unopened,
is to be furnished and fitted up, so as to provide for a want generally
felt by disciples of Apollo and Terpsichore:--indeed by all parties,
desirous of assembling in large numbers, for purposes of festivity or
business. The walls, floors, and roof of this part of the building, will
be strengthened by means of a number of substantial iron columns, so as
to shorten the bearings of the heavy girders, of which we have already
complained. Various other improvements are in contemplation; and when we
state that these {page 54} important works have been confided to Mr.
James Hume, our readers will join with us, in predicting that the Royal
Hotel will soon present, in _reality_, all those facilities which
its eccentric and enthusiastic projector imagined he had offered in
erecting it.

We may state, in conclusion, that Mr. Daniel Cooper of London, is now the
owner of this extensive property.

George Street:--the main artery through which the vital stream of
commerce flows to the remotest parts of the Colony, extends in an
unbroken line from Dawes' Point, the northern extremity of the City, to
the old Toll Bar, at the southern, a distance of two miles, and is
continued nearly another mile under the name of Parramatta Street,
connecting the extensive and populous suburbs of Chippendale and Redfern
with the City, and forming the grand approach from the southern and
western districts. The newcomer cannot fail of being surprised with the
bustle and animation that pervades this street; numberless Omnibuses in
constant motion, Hackney Carriages, Coaches, Gigs, Waggons, and every
description of vehicle, from the humble "shay cart" to the regular four
in hand, passing and re-passing; with now and then the huge bullock dray,
laden with wool or other produce, and drawn by eight or ten immense
bullocks, wending its devious way to the Merchant's Stores; gives
character to the scene, and stamps it Colonial. That portion of George
Street, between the Queen's Wharf and King Street, has already been
illustrated by our first five plates, and now after having rambled
through a portion of King and Pitt Streets, we return to it again, and
the eleventh and twelfth plates represent all the buildings between King
Street and the Police Office, commencing at King Street; Mr. Woolley's
Ironmongery Stores and Show Rooms (formerly the private residence of
William Hutchinson, Esq.), first claim attention, the main building
surrounded as it is by the shops facing the street, would hardly be
noticed by a stranger; but its interior displays in rich profusion, every
article of luxury, taste, or utility, the trade can supply.

{page 55}

We have also in this locality, the establishments of all the principal
Ironmongers;--facing Mr. Woolley's is that of Mr. R. M. Robey, a spacious
and ornamental building, erected some fourteen years since, by Mr. Grose;
a few doors further on, we have Mr. C. Scott's, and Mr. R. 0. Reilly's;
and next to the Royal Hotel, Messrs. Harper and Moore's; a little further
on, Messrs. Hawley and Co.; and after crossing Market Street, the
establishment of the late Mr. L. Iredale, opposite the Market. After
passing Messrs. S. Peek and Co.'s Grocery and Tea Warehouse (which like
Mr. Woolley's, must be examined, to discover its vast extent), we come to
a range of highly respectable houses, extending to the Royal Hotel;
including the fashionable Tailoring Establishments of H. Hayes and Co.;
and Mr. Alderman Broughton; the White Horse Tavern and Coach Office; and
the Hot and Vapour Baths of Mr. Robinson.

At the back of Messrs. Harper and Moore's, is the Sydney Foundry, an
extensive establishment belonging to the Messrs. Russell; a little
further on is the Whip Manufactory of Mr. J. Scott, the only one in the
Colony, where every variety of that article is made fully equal to the
best London whips.

The adjoining substantial and elegant houses, the property of Mr. M.
Joseph, have been erected only some seven or eight years, the sites
having been previously occupied by low weather-boarded cottages; and the
whole row of houses extending to Market Street, has been renovated or
rebuilt, within that period. The houses opposite, occupied by Mr.
Titterton, and the Savings' Bank, are creditable specimens of our street
architecture.

The Savings' Bank, whose offices occupy the ground floor of one of these
houses, (the upper part being the offices of Messrs. Carr and Owen,
Solicitors), is an Institution that shows at once, most clearly and
incontestibly, the prosperity of the working classes in this Colony, and
the great advantages such people have in emigrating hither.

{page 56}

It must be borne in mind we have no Poor Laws, or even need of them, for
except by extreme old age, sickness, or some other of "the ills that
flesh is heir to," we have few suppliants for relief, and these are
provided for by the voluntary contributions of the Citizens. The honest
and industrious, no matter of what calling, are enabled to earn a good
maintainance, and also to lay by something for the day of sickness or
adversity, whilst many who have landed upon these shores destitute, have
risen to comparative affluence.

The great advantages afforded to the Operatives, by such an Institution,
have long been acknowledged at Home, but it was not until the year 1832,
a Savings' Bank was established in Sydney. Since which time, however, it
has gradually extended its influence, accumulating capital for thousands
who, most probably, would otherwise have wasted or spent it.

The management of the affairs of the Bank is vested (by Act of Council),
in eighteen Trustees; His Excellency the Governor being President, the
Honourable the Colonial Secretary, Vice President, and George Miller,
Esq.,. Accountant; to whose able direction in the details of the business
of the Bank, much of its success must be attributed.

By the last quarterly balance, it appears the deposits had increased to
upwards of £170,000; and as it was impossible to find profitable and safe
investment for so large an amount of capital, a great portion remained
unemployed, consequently the rate of interest payable to the depositors,
was reduced to two and a half per cent. per annum. By a recent Act of the
Legislative Council, the Trustees were empowered to dispose of a portion
of their accumulated capital, by way of loans to the Corporations of
Sydney and Melbourne, for the general improvement of these Cities; and it
is further proposed to employ the available funds in the formation of
projected Railways, the Government being responsible for the monies so
advanced; an increased rate of interest will therefore be insured; the
city improved; and a national benefit derived from this unassuming yet
{page 57} invaluable institution.

Opposite the Royal Hotel is Mr. Cetta's Picture Frame and Looking Glass
Manufactory, from whence all the neighbouring Colonies are almost
exclusively supplied; the Carving and Gilding executed at this
establishment is of the highest order, and merits the extensive patronage
it receives.

At the corner of Market Street, with the front in George Street, stands
the "Waterloo Stores," a spacious brick building, erected some twenty
years since by Mr. Daniel Cooper; it then stood alone at the corner of
the Cattle Market, and was without question the best building in the
City, and even in the present day, when the spirit and enterprise of the
colonists have caused the erection of many very excellent buildings, it
still holds its rank amongst the best. The business of this establishment
is conducted by Mr. D. Cooper, Junior, (the son of the above named
gentleman) on a very extended scale. Country Stores and Settlers are here
supplied with every thing they require: Wines, Spirits, Ales and Porter,
Grocery, and Drapery Goods, Slops, and Clothing, Ironmongery, etc., in
infinite variety.

Passing onwards we have a continuation of good shops, and facing them the
Market Sheds (which will be fully described in a future number), extend
southward to the Police Office.

The Police Office, which forms the subject of one of our illustrations,
was erected for a Market House, from the design of Mr. Greenaway, and as
far as its exterior is concerned, is certainly creditable to the Colony.
The Portico on the south side or front, with four Grecian Pillars
supporting a pediment and roof, forms the entrance, with doors leading
into the Courts on either side.

The building surmounted by its Cupola and Lantern rising from the centre
to a considerable height, forms a conspicuous object, visible from all
parts of the City, and the Country for many miles round. The internal
arrangements however, are both unsightly and incommodious, and anything
{page 58} but realize the anticipations formed by the external appearance
of the building.

Its appropriation is of course for the exercise and distribution of
justice, and is daily opened for this purpose (at 9 o'clock, a.m.),
before two or more Magistrates. There are besides the two open Courts of
Justice, several other apartments, comprising, the Senior Magistrate's
Private Room, and those set apart for the Clerks of the Establishment, as
offices. Captain J. L. Innes, the present Senior Police Magistrate, is
the successor of Mr. Windeyer, who retired from office after many years'
active and able service, on account of his advanced age and declining
health rendering him unfit for the further prosecution of so responsible,
arduous, and harrassing an office.

Captain Innes also holds the situations of Commissioner of Police, and
Visiting Magistrate to the Gaol, and Convict Establishment at Cockatoo
Island; and in the efficient discharge of his public duties, he has
gained the respect and esteem of the Citizens at large. Laurence Miles,
Esq., is Junior Police Magistrate.

The Establishment consists also of one Chief Clerk, seven Junior Clerks,
and an Interpreter. The City Police force contains four Inspectors,
twelve Sergeants, and seventy-six Constables; and the District force, one
Inspector, one Sergeant, and fifteen Constables, all of whom wear the
same costume as the London Police Force, and are paid by the Government.
The Police force generally muster for inspection every morning in the
yard, after the business of the Court is concluded.

The old Police Office was the building now used as the General Post
Office, the present one not having been appropriated as such until about
the year 1830. It is in contemplation to make some alterations and
improvements in the interior of the present building, and we must
confess, not before they are required, for it can hardly be expected that
a building {page 59} erected for a Market House, and used for some time
as a store, should be at all suitable for its present uses.



CHAPTER XIII.


SCOTS' CHURCH.--YORK STREET.

The Scots' Church of St. Andrew's, more generally known as Dr. Lang's
Church, stands on the southern extremity of Church Hill, near the
entrance to the old Military Barracks, and in the immediate vicinity of
the Episcopalian Church of St. Phillip's. It is a commodious and well
finished building, and with the gallery capable of holding 1000 persons.
Thi s was the first Scots' Church erected in the Colony, for previous to
the arrival of the Rev. Dr. Lang, May 23, 1823, there had not been a
Presbyterian minister: he commenced his duties in the small chapel in
Prince Street (now used by the Wesleyans), on the 8th June, in the same
year, and continued to perform service according to the rites of the
Scottish Church, in the same place of worship until the completion of the
present edifice.

Soon after his arrival in the Colony, a congregation of Scots'
Presbyterians was formed, and shortly afterwards it was proposed to erect
a Church in Sydney, and upwards of £700 was subscribed for that purpose
in the course of a few days.

The Committee of Management addressed a memorial to the Governor, Sir
Thomas Brisbane, who was himself a Scotsman and a Presbyterian, praying
assistance from the Government in aid of their undertaking, such
assistance having been previously afforded to the Roman Catholics of the
Colony. To this memorial a most disrespectful reply was sent refusing the
sought for aid. The memorial and reply having been published in the
Colonial Newspapers, after a time found their way home, and were
afterwards {page 60} copied into the _Morning Chronicle_, together
with some stringent remarks from the Editor (himself a Scotsman). These
remarks having fallen under the eye of the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, Earl Bathurst, and feeling the injustice of the whole
proceeding, spontaneously directed Sir Thomas Brisbane immediately to
advance one third of the estimated cost of the erection, from the
Colonial Treasury and afterwards further directed that a salary of £300
per annum, should be paid to the officiating minister, "regretting" at
the same time "that his Excellency had put to their probation members of
the Church of Scotland in the Colony, the Established Church of one of
the most enlightened and virtuous portions of the Empire."

It is but justice to the Governor, however, to state, that previous to
the arrival of the above despatches, he had perceived his error, and
afterwards did everything in his power to atone for the injury he had
occasioned; and although he had caused his name to be erased from the
original list of subscribers, he now replaced it, and to show his zeal
for his country's religion, laid the foundation stone himself, on the
first of July, 1824.

We cannot close this subject without expressing our admiration of the
persevering zeal of the Rev. Dr. Lang, who has devoted his exalted
talents, his private property, and so large a portion of his life (now
upwards of a quarter of a century), to the advancement of religion, and
general improvement of the Colony at large. We are not unmindful that in
many ways his conduct has been reprehensible, and that he has frequently
incurred the displeasure even of his own countrymen, but "to err is
human," and his faults have generally been errors of judgement: there are
few we believe will deny his grand aim has ever been the advancement of
Australia, his adopted country.

York Street is a short street, running north and south, parallel with
George Street, extending from the south entrance of the Military
Barracks, to the old Burial Ground, and is intersected at right angles by
{page 61} King Street West and Market Street; from its central position
it might be expected to possess more importance than it actually does;
but when the contemplated improvements in the Barrack Square (the whole
of which is about being laid out for sale) are completed, it will become
a leading thoroughfare, and the value of property in this locality will
be consequently much enhanced. Entering York Street from the Old Barracks
we meet at each corner (as is generally the case in Sydney) a Public
House with open doors, inviting the thirsty traveller to refresh. We pass
on, and on the right hand at a short distance stands the "Masonic Hall"
kept by Mr. J. Entwisle. The front, which is of two stories, with
verandah and balcony supported by columns, is of a plain and unassuming
appearance, and conveys no idea of the extent of the internal
arrangements and accommodation. A few years since this house was the
property of the Freemasons, and the general resort of the brotherhood of
that ancient and honorable order, whose lodges were held here--but in
consequence of increase of business and the property's being sold to
other parties, the Lodges have been removed and it is now the Masonic
Hall only in name.

Since the change in the proprietory, Mr. Entwisle has made extensive
alterations in the rear of the original house,--having erected a splendid
Saloon, surrounded by private rooms on the ground floor and on the first
floor by bed-rooms, leading from a gallery which encompasses it and
connects it with the main building.

Mr. Entwisle has obtained considerable celebrity for the excellent
ordinary served up in the Saloon at one o'clock, which is very
respectably and numerously attended by not less than eighty or ninety
persons daily.

On the opposite side of the Street immediately facing the Masonic Hall,
is a large brick built house with a willow tree in front, which was for
many years, the private residence of J. Raymond, Esq., Postmaster
General, and is now occupied by Mr. Stewart, Veterinary Surgeon. The
extensive back premises belonging to this house are well adapted for the
{page 62} use to which they are appropriated, namely, a Horse Bazaar,
where, after the style of Tattersall's in London, are held periodical
sales of Horses, etc., by auction.

Reader! refer to the plate in the 13th number, and observe that
unpretending, but comfortable cottage adjoining the Horse Bazaar. Mark it
well: that is one of the few perfect specimens of Colonial domestic
Architecture still to be met with in Sydney, which have hitherto escaped
being consigned to oblivion, and have not yet given way to the march of
improvement, imposed by the present building act. The remaining houses in
this portion of York Street, are characterised by no remarkable
architectural beauty, but occupied by a business-like class of persons
diligently engaged in their several avocations.



CHAPTER XIV.


WESLEYAN CENTENARY CHAPEL, YORK--STREET; AND JEW'S SYNAGOGUE.

THE Wesleyan Centenary Chapel represented in one of our plates, is one of
those few good buildings, of which the Wesleyans particularly, and the
Citizens generally have reason to be proud; indeed few of the provincial
towns in England can boast of a building equal to this. It was erected by
Mr. Jacob Inder, from a design by Mr. Josiah Atwool. The foundation-stone
was laid by the Rev. J. M'Kenny, on the 24th of February, 1840, and the
building was opened for Divine Worship on the 14th of the same month,
1844. The front is built of dressed freestone, having a rusticated
basement, and the portico with four columns of the Doric order,
supporting the pediment etc., is approached by a flight of steps
extending {page 63} its entire width. The body of the building is of
brick, extending backwards eighty feet, with a frontage to the street of
fifty feet. The basement is divided into two spacious School-rooms,
capable of affording accommodation for five hundred children.

The interior arrangements are in the usual style adopted in England. An
aisle leading down on either side, with pews extending to the walls, and
occupying the entire centre. The pulpit which is octagonal, with
geometrical staircase ascending from the aisle, is a very clever piece of
workmanship. The reading desk is in the front of the pulpit; and at the
back, in the recess, stands the Organ gallery, with semicircular front. A
gallery is now in course of erection, extending round the remaining
portion of the building, the panels in front of which, as well as the
other fittings are of the choicest specimens of Colonial cedar, and the
workmanship equal to any at Home.

When the galleries are finished the Chapel is estimated to contain twelve
hundred persons. The cost of erection we are informed has been little
short of seven thousand pounds. The Ministers now officiating in the
Sydney district are, the Rev. W. Boyce, General Superintendent of the
Mission, in this and the neighbouring colonies; Rev. Mr. Turner, for many
years in New Zealand, Launceston, and this City; Rev. Messrs. Lewis and
Harris.

The Wesleyans are rapidly gaining ground in this Colony, and it must be
gratifying to sincere Christians of every denomination, to see a
progression so desirable. Thirty years since they had no public place of
worship, their first chapel in Macquarie Street, having been opened July
1st. 1821, from which period their numbers have been steadily and rapidly
increasing, so that now in the City and Suburbs there are no less than
ten chapels, all well attended. The last Census returns show the number
of Wesleyans in Sydney to be 2128. And in the whole Colony 7935, being an
increase of 4700 during the last five years.

{page 64}

JEWISH SYNAGOGUE.--The erection of this building was attended at first by
many difficulties, which have been happily surmounted, by the incessant
efforts of a mere handful of people. After several ineffectual attempts,
grants of land were applied for and obtained from the Government, but
the authorised sites were never accepted, in consequence of their
inconvenience. At length on the 3rd of November, 1841, the present site
was purchased at a public sale, for and on behalf of the Congregation,
and vested in the names of several Trustees. A Building Committee having
been appointed, a plan presented by Mr. Hume was approved of, and the
present beautiful building was erected, at a cost of three thousand six
hundred pounds. It was opened for the performance of Divine worship after
the Hebrew form, in the presence of a numerous congregation, on the
2nd of April, 1844, the consecration service being performed in a most
efficient manner by Mr. Isaacs, the Reader, assisted by Mr. Solomon
Phillips and others.

The records of the early period of the Hebrew religion in this Colony,
are not very authentic, but from enquiries made, it appears that in 1817,
there were about twenty Hebrews in the Colony, and those little versed in
the faith of their ancestors: notwithstanding this they formed themselves
into a Society, and raised a subscription for the interment of their
dead. At this period the first Hebrew funeral took place. From 1817 to
1820 the Society continue in operation, meeting occasionally to regulate
financial affairs. In 1820, a person named Joel Joseph died, and on the
application of Mr. A. Levi to the Rev. Dr. Cowper, the right-hand corner
of the Christian Burial Ground was allotted to the Hebrews for the
interment of their dead.

From the year 1820 to 1828 the Society became extinct, and no attempt was
made to revive it except when a death occurred, which did not happen above
five times during that period. The worldly condition of the Hebrews in the
Colony improved considerably in 1827 and 1828, in consequence of {page
65} the great influx of respectable merchants during that period, and this
with other circumstances had raised the Hebrews in the estimation of
their fellow-colonists.

About this period Mr. P. J. Cohen having offered the use of his house for
the purpose, Divine Worship was performed for the first time in this
Colony, according to the Hebrew form, and was continued regularly every
Sabbath and Holiday. From some difference of opinion then existing amongst
the members of this faith, Divine Service was also performed occasionally
in a room hired by Messrs. A. Elias, and James Simmons. In this condition
everything connected with their religion remained, until the arrival of
the Rev. Aaron Levi, in the year 1830; he had been despatched on a special
mission to the Colony, by the Chief Rabbi of the British Jews, the
Rev. Solomon Hirschell, and being one of the Beth Din, or Rabbies, and
duly accredited, corrected many of the errors and abuses then existing,
and endeavoured by his judicious management, to instil into the minds of
the Hebrew community, a taste for the religion of their fathers; his
efforts proved successful, a Roll of the Law (Seiphor Torah) was purchased
from him by subscription, Hebrew books of Prayer were also supplied by
him to those who had no previous opportunity of possessing them. Divine
Service was more regularly conducted, and from this time may be dated the
establishment of the Jewish Religion in Sydney. In the year 1832 all the
members of the Hebrew faith, resident in the Colony, formed themselves
into one Society, selected a Committee to manage their secular affairs,
and appointed J. B. Montefiore, Esq., their president. He obtained from
the Government a distinct grant of land for a burial ground (the same now
used as such), and erected thereon a house for devotional purposes.

Upon the foundation of the Society, it was found necessary to engage a
larger place for worship, and the room now used by Mr. Gordon as a store,
on the north side of Bridge-street, was used as a temporary Synagogue,
{page 66} and named Beth Tephiloh or the House of Prayer. In this year
(1832) the first Jewish marriage was solemnized, that of Moses Joseph,
Esq., and Miss Nathan, the ceremony was performed by Mr. P. J. Cohen,
who was duly authorised by letter from the Chief Rabbi in England, and
which was also recorded in the office of the Colonial Secretary. In the
year 1835 Mr. Rose and family arrived, bearing credentials from the
Chief Rabbi, and was engaged as Reader, Mowell, and Shouchatt, to the
congregation, the ceremonies of the Jewish Church having been previously
performed by Messrs. Lear and Hyams.

At length the Hebrews became so numerous and respectable a portion of the
community, that it was thought necessary to erect a new synagogue,
subscriptions lists were opened, and to which many names, belonging to
various denominations of Christians, were added, displaying a liberality
rarely to be met with even in England, and in a short time upwards of
two thousand pounds were collected, and the present chaste and classic
edifice, represented in the annexed plate, was erected.

The Hebrews according to the Census of 1846, numbered in Sydney
(603) six hundred and three, and in the Colony (1086) one thousand and
eighty-six, since which period their numbers have been considerably
augmented. Isaac Levy, Esq., is now their President; Elias Moses, Esq.,
Treasurer; Mr. Jacob Isaacs, Reader, etc.; and Mr. George Moss,
Secretary.

The continuation of York-street, presents few objects deserving
particular notice, for though in the earlier days of the City it was the
main street leading into the Country, it ceased to be so upon the regular
formation of George-street, in Governor Macquarie's time. Previous to
that period the whole of that portion of the City bounded by the line now
formed by George-street on the east, Druitt-street on the south, and a
line extending from Hunter-street to the waters of Darling Harbour on the
north, comprised what was called the Military District, and no Civilians
were allowed {page 67} within its limits, which regulation continued in
force until the arrival of Governor Macquarie. In those days, it is true,
the lines of some of the streets were defined, and occasionally a few
connected houses indicated its direction, but they had received no names;
and it was not till 1811 that any were given. The first streets were
named after the Royal Family; George-street, which then extended from
Campbell's Wharf to Hunter-street, was named after the King;
Prince-street, after the Prince of Wales; York, Clarence, Kent,
Cumberland, Sussex, Cambridge, and Gloucester Streets, after the Royal
Dukes. At the same period the City was divided into five districts, with
a watch-house in each.

The low weatherboard cottage with small garden in front, next to Mr.
Coveny's the Grocer, for many years the residence of Mr. Fairweather, is
one of the oldest houses now in the City, having been erected some
forty-five years, it was then considered one of the best; the small
cottages next are also some of the original houses erected by the
Military. The house on the opposite side, retiring a little from the line
of street, with balcony in front, was for some time the only Coach-office
in Sydney, and kept by the proprietor of the Coaches, Lincoln Bill.

The house used as the Town Council Chambers, since the Incorporation of
the City in 1842, was erected by Mr. Commissary Broughton, about the year
1813, on the site of a row of soldiers' huts, known by the name of the
Rookery; it was afterwards the residence of the first Colonial Secretary,
Major Goulburn; and again that of Sidney Stephen, Esq., and ten years ago
it was the Pultenay Hotel, kept by Mr. Levien.

The Market Sheds on the opposite side of the street, were erected about
seventeen years since, they consist of four separate buildings, each
about two hundred feet long, by thirty in width, and divided into stalls
for the sale of the various kinds of produce; the first in York-street is
used for the sale of meat, poultry, eggs, butter, cheese, etc., and the
next for fruit and vegetables, those on the side of George-street, for
wholesale dealers. {page 68} The Markets are opened every day from 7
a.m., till 6 p.m. The first Market was held on that space near the
Queen's Wharf now used as a stand by the licensed drays. It was
afterwards removed to the open space at the bottom of Charlotte Place,
facing Mr. S. Lyons' Auction Mart, and was subsequently removed to the
site of the present Market and Police Office; at first this was only a
paddock, with occasional bark or slab huts, as a protection from the
weather, where the various articles were exposed for sale. The Cattle
Market being enclosed by posts and rails; between it and the water, as
late as 1810, was the wild bush, through which a road was ordered to be
cleared, for the convenience of those who brought their produce by water.



CHAPTER XV.


HYDE PARK.--ST. MARY'S CATHEDRAL.

Hyde Park, or as it was originally designated the Race Course, is a fine
open space, upon the rising ground to the eastward of the City, reserved
very judiciously for the recreation of the inhabitants. It is fenced in,
and the walks, etc., are now undergoing a complete repair, the main walk
forms a very agreeable promenade, having an extensive view of the
harbour, and consequently open to the refreshing sea breezes. It also
forms the arena in which the native youths delight to contend for the
laurels of victory in the noble game of cricket, and in which they
certainly excel; there are numerous cricket clubs, which make this their
rendezvous, and it is seldom you can pass through the Park without
finding some of them at practise, It has for many years ceased to be a
race course, although originally cleared for that purpose. In the year
1810 on the arrival of the 73rd Regiment, under the command of Lieutenant
Colonel O'Connell, {page 69} (the late Sir Maurice O'Connell), who was
also Lieutenant Governor of the Colony; it was encamped on the rising
ground at the southern extremity of what is now the Park. The Officers of
this Regiment, assisted by the Government Officials, and Gentry, desirous
of establishing in the southern hemisphere the truly national sport of
horse-racing, for which Britons are so justly celebrated, raised
subscriptions, and in a short time "cleared the course," where had
previously been a wild forest, or in colonial phraseology, the
_bush_, and in October, the same year, held the first racing
meeting. The Grand Stand and winning post stood at the top of what is now
called Market-street, and the Course took a sweep to the right, in the
direction of Hyde Park Barracks, thence near the site of St. Mary's
Cathedral and the Sydney College, passing in front of Lyons' Terrace
obliquely to the top of Bathurst-street, along what is now
Elizabeth-street, to the corner of Park-street, and thence to the winning
post. That portion of the Course from Park-street to the corner of
Macquarie-street, near Hyde Park Barracks, and from Macquarie-street
south, to Bathurst-street may be easily traced to this day, the land
having been levelled. When first formed, the length of this Course was
one mile and a quarter, but it was subsequently shortened to a mile and
six yards. At this first meeting, a horse named "Chance," the property of
Captain Ritchie, won the first prize, Colonel O'Connell's horse "Carlo"
won another, and a horse belonging to Darcy Wentworth, Esq., took a
third. The racing went off with great éclat, and was followed (as is
usually the case in England), with a race ball. The races continued to be
held here during the administration of Governor Macquarie, the last
meeting being in 1821; by this time many houses had sprung up in the
vicinity, and several of the public buildings being in course of
erection, it became necessary to remove the races further from the town,
and subsequent meetings took place at the Sandy Race Course, as it was
then called, about four miles to the southward, in the direction of
Botany Bay.

{page 70}

The vicinity of the Race Course was selected by Governor Macquarie,
probably on account of its elevated and commanding situation, as the site
of many of our most important buildings, near it we have the Legislative
Council Chambers, the General Hospital and Dispensary; the Supreme Court,
St. James' Church and Hyde Park Barracks, are on the north side; St.
Mary's Cathedral, the Museum and Sydney College on the east; and on the
opposite or west side, the Normal Institution, and Georgian School House,
more commonly called the old Court House, from its having been used as
such prior to the completion of the present Supreme Court.

The private buildings surrounding the Park deserve particular notice,
those on the south side, built by Mr. S. Lyons in the year 1840, and
completed in 1841, are without exception the best in the City, and would
not disgrace the Regent's Park in London.

The other houses on the same side of the Park, as also those on the east,
including Burdekin's Terrace, are well built respectable residences,
those on the west side are of a motley character, having been erected at
various periods, and after every variety of style; there are however many
superior houses amongst them, such as the residences of G. Bennett, Esq.,
M.D. and Dr. Foulis, with the new buildings known as Henderson's
Buildings, extending to King-street.

The first place of execution was in the vicinity of what is now Hyde
Park; some say it was on the spot now occupied by the St. James'
Watch-house, others that it was on the opposite side of Elizabeth-street,
where Henderson's Buildings now stand, but by a chart in a French work,
published by the authority of Napoleon in 1803, it appears to have been
not many yards from the site of the old Court House: on one point,
however, there is no difference of opinion, viz., that the exact spot
afterwards formed part of a garden that extended up King-street from the
corner of Castlereagh-street, embracing part of the site of the Supreme
Court, that of the Watch-house and part of the site of the old Court
House, and which was {page 71} granted to a person who had been
condemned, and whilst under the gallows awaiting execution, was
reprieved.

About the year 1804 the gallows was removed to the corner of Park and
Castlereagh-street, where the "Barley Mow" public house now stands, again
it was erected near the site of Barker's Mills, in Sussex-street, it was
afterwards removed to the east corner of what is now the Protestant
burial ground, near Strawberry Hill, again over the Sand Hills to the
back of the new Military Barracks, and in the year 1820, to the old Gaol
in Lower George-street, and finally to the gate in front of the new Gaol
at Darlinghurst, where the first execution of two men for murder took
place, October 29,1841.

In reviewing the early history of the Colony, it is much to be regreted
that its pages are stained with records of so many instances of the
sacrifice of human life as punishment for the most trifling offences;
even among the small population then in the Colony, the number executed
far exceeded that of the present day, with a population of nearly two
hundred thousand.

St. Mary's Cathedral was commenced under the auspices of the Rev. J. J.
Therry, the first stone having been laid by His Excellency, Governor
Macquarie, October 20, 1821. Considering the state of the Catholic
religion at that period, and the limited means then existing in the
Colony, it must be admitted to have been a noble effort of the worthy
founder; it was considered even by many most zealous friends to the
cause, as far too extensive an undertaking, and the great length of time
taken in the erection proved the justness of their opinions; however by
the unceasing efforts of a few individuals all these difficulties were
surmounted, and the noble edifice represented in the annexed plate
erected. The Church is a vast and lofty pile, in the pointed Gothic style
of Architecture, extremely plain and devoid of ornament, yet imposing
from its situation and magnitude; the interior however still remains
uncompleted. Beneath the Church foundation has been excavated and fitted
up as private apartments for religious students, etc. The Church having
been erected on rising ground; {page 72} these apartments are on a level
with the gardens on the east side, whilst the floor of the Cathedral is a
little above the level of the street on the west. On the north side have
been erected cloisters, (of a much more ornamental character than the
Church itself) connecting the private residence of the Archbishop and
priests, with the Cathedral. Adjoining the latter is the very elegant and
beautifully finished private chapel of His Grace the Archbishop; the
windows are of stained glass, and the seats are of the finest cedar,
richly and elaborately carved and polished. Opposite the entrance to this
chapel is the library, well stored with valuable books.

Descending the hill at the back of the Cathedral, we come to the School;
a building erected about four years since, it is in perfect keeping with
the cloisters, and deserves a better position than the one it occupies;
it is capable of holding about five hundred persons.

It is matter of surprise that the Government of an enlightened nation (as
the British claims to be), should have sent to this country so many of
its subjects without having made any provision for their spiritual
instruction, yet such was the case, and we find the first efforts to
establish the Roman Catholic Faith in this Colony, was made by political
offenders, who had been banished from their native land, during the Irish
Rebellion, in 1798, and sent prisoners to this country. They of course,
had no chapel or public place of worship, but performed their religious
services in private dwellings, the best way they could. The first mass
(it is believed), was performed in the house in Harrington-street, now
the residence of Mr. Davies, by a priest who accompanied the French
surveying vessels that arrived here in 1802.

We have not been able to trace the progress of the Catholic Religion from
that period to the arrival of the Rev. Jeremiah O'Flinn in 1817, but
judging from the hearty manner in which he was received, and the success
that attended his labours for the short period he was allowed to remain,
we cannot suppose the ordinances and practice of their religion had been
{page 73} neglected. The Local Government however, a few months after his
arrival placed him in confinement, and ultimately sent him away by the
first vessel sailing for England.

In order to allay the excitement created in the mother country by the
treatment the Rev. J. 0. Flinn, had suffered, the Government there was
induced to grant a stipend each to two missionaries, to be sent to this
Colony, the Revds. J. J. Therry and Connolly, the latter of whom, shortly
after his arrival in 1820, established himself at Hobart Town, leaving
this extensive Colony to the sole charge of the Rev. J. J. Therry,
through whose exertions, as we have before stated, St. Mary's Cathedral
was erected.

The Catholic religion progressed rapidly from this period, for by the
Census taken in the year 1828, (which was the first having any returns
relating to the religion of the inhabitants) we find the number of
Catholics exceeded eleven thousand, in a population of thirty-six
thousand; and by the last Census in 1846, they had increased to fifty-six
thousand.

The Rev. Dr. Polding, the first Catholic Bishop of Australia, arrived in
the Colony, September 13, .1835, and his inauguration took place on the
20th of the same month. He was accompanied by several priests and other
ecclesiastics. In many of the towns of the Colony churches were now
commenced, and ministers appointed, and to those parts of the Colony
where the population was scattered over a vast extent of country,
itinerant missionaries were sent.

At the end of the year 1838, the Rev. Dr. Ullathorne, Roman Catholic
Vicar General, accompanied by three Priests, and five Sisters of Charity,
arrived. In 1840 Dr. Polding embarked for England, and during his visit
to Rome was created an Archbishop, and in 1843 he again returned to the
Colony, bringing with him nine other clergymen. It was also during this
visit to England that Dr. Polding caused to be sent out the first peal of
bells, which arrived in 1842; a belfry was erected near the {page 74}
Cathedral and the first merry peal upon them ushered in the new year
1843.



CHAPTER XVI.


SUPREME COURT--ELIZABETH STREET.

The Supreme Court represented in the annexed plate was commenced in the
year 1820, and completed in August 1828; it was built from the design of
Mr. Greenaway the Colonial Architect. It is a very plain brick building,
having no pretensions to architectural beauty, neither is it designed
after any particular style, except it be that already adopted in the Hyde
Park Barracks; its situation, however, on the rising ground at the corner
of King and Elizabeth Streets, with the Park at its back, is such as
would give good effect to a building of more classic design. The sittings
of the Supreme Court, both in its Criminal and Civil jurisdiction, were
held in this Court until the erection of the new Court House,
Darlinghurst, in 1842; to which the Criminal Court was removed, and the
Civil causes alone are now tried here.

The entrance was originally on the west side, (the portico and steps are
still remaining) it is now on the north side with a lobby leading into
both Courts. At the back are the Judges' Chambers, and a circular stairs
leading to the various offices connected with the Court, and which occupy
the whole of the upper part of the building.

In the early days of the Colony the administration of justice in Criminal
causes was entrusted to a Judge Advocate Colonel Collins (the early
Historian of the Colony), and a jury of six officers, naval or military:
the Court was convened from time to time under the hand of the Governor,
as occasion required; there being no fixed periodical sittings. Similar
to {page 75} Courts Martial, witnesses were examined by any member of the
Court, the Judge Advocate was president or judge, and sworn in to "well
and truly try, etc.", the same as the other members, and retired with
them to consult upon the case, and also to vote as a juryman, he had
however to frame and exhibit the indictments against the prisoner; the
verdict being by a majority of the Court. If guilty, and the offence
capital, they pronounced judgment of death, or other punishment,
according to the custom in England, as near as the circumstances of the
Colony would admit. But no offender could be put to death unless five
members of the Court should adjudge him guilty, or until the King's
pleasure should be known. The Provost Marshal caused the judgment of the
Court to be executed, according to the Governor's warrant, under his hand
and seal.

Almost immediately upon the first landing of the prisoners, many of them
commenced pilfering, and in order to put a check upon them, the Criminal
Court was convened for the first time on the 11th February, (only fifteen
days after the first arrival), when one was sentenced to receive one
hundred and fifty lashed, and another to be confined on Pinchgut Island
for a week, upon bread and water. The mildness of these punishments
seemed rather to have encouraged than deterred others, for before the
month was ended the Criminal Court was again assembled for the trial of
four men who had robbed the public store. They were convicted, and one
named James Burrell, suffered death on the following day. This was the
first execution that took place in the Colony.

Besides the Criminal Court there was also a Court of Civil Jurisdiction,
as it was styled, consisting of the Judge Advocate and two inhabitants of
the settlement, appointed by the Governor; which Court had full power to
hear and determine in a summary way "all manner of personal pleas
whatsoever." From this Court, on either party finding himself aggrieved
by the judgment, appeal might be had to the Governor (when the matter in
dispute exceeded the value of £300,) {page 76} to the King in Council;
these appeals were to be put in, if from the Court, within eight days,
and if from the Governor, within fourteen days, after the pronouncing of
the judgment. To this Court was likewise given authority to grant probate
of wills, and administration of personal estates, of intestate persons
dying within the settlement. The first action tried in this Court was in
the year 1790, when the captain of one of the convict ships was sued for
monies, etc., entrusted to him, for some of the prisoners he brought out,
and a verdict was found for the plaintiffs.

Lieutenant Colonel Collins continued to act as Judge Advocate, from the
foundation of the Colony to the year 1804, when he was removed to Van
Dieman's Land, having been appointed Lieutenant Governor of that
settlement; he was succeeded by Richard Atkins, Esq., who continued in the
same office until the arrival of Ellis Bent, Esq., in 1810, who also
retained the office till his death in 1815.

The Court was held at this time in the building in Bent Street, lately
used for the Government Land Sales, and during the administration of
Judge Advocate Wylde, who succeeded Ellis Bent, it was held in the
building in Macquarie Street, now the Executive Council Chambers. In the
year 1817 Judge Field arrived. Although the settlement of Van Dieman's
Land had been established twelve years, they had no Court further than
that held before a magistrate, and all cases of any importance had
consequently to be sent hither for adjudication, this was attended with
great expense and inconvenience, and the ends of justice were frequently
frustrated by the absence of evidence and other causes, it was therefore
determined to form a Court at Hobart Town, and in the year 1818, Judge
Field proceeded thither to hold his first Court, under a similar
constitution to that in Sydney.

Up to the year 1824 the Courts retained the same constitution; when a new
Charter of Justice arrived, with the proper officers necessary to give
{page 77} it effect. Francis Forbes, (afterwards Sir Francis Forbes),
arrived as Chief Justice; Judge Advocate Wylde was created Judge (Judge
Field having left the Colony). Saxe Bannister came out as Attorney
General, John Stephen, Esq, (the father of our present Chief Justice, Sir
Alfred Stephen,) as Solicitor General and Commissioner of the Court of
Requests. John Mackuness, Esq., as Sheriff, and T. E. Miller, Esq., as
Registrar.

The formal promulgation of the new Charter took place at the Georgian
School House, Castlereagh Street, in May, 1824, and the first sittings of
the Supreme Court, in its Criminal Jurisdiction, was also held there on
the tenth of June following. Trial by Jury in Criminal cases was first
instituted at the Quarter Sessions held at Liverpool in October the same
year; but it was not until February of the next year, 1825, that a Jury
was empanneled in a Civil cause, viz: the King v. Robert Cooper, when a
verdict was returned for the defendant.

The present officers in the administration of Justice are, Sir Alfred.
Stephen, Chief Justice; John Nodes Dickinson, and William. Montague
Manning, Esqrs., Puisne Judges; John Hubert Plunkett, Esq., Attorney
General; William Foster, Esq., Solicitor General; A. W. Young, Esq,
Sheriff; S. T. Milford, Esq., Master in Equity, Curator of Intestate
Estates, and Commissioner of the Vice Admiralty Court; G. P. F. Gregory,
Esq., Prothonotary and Registrar; Samuel Raymond, Esq., Chairman of
Quarter Sessions; and Alfred Cheeke, Esq., Commissioner of the Court of
Requests; John Moore Dillon, Esq., Criminal Crown Prosecutor; George
Cooper Turner, Esq., Civil Crown Prosecutor; Thos. Callaghan, Esq., Crown
Prosecutor of Quarter Sessions; and Edward Rogers, Esq., Clerk of the
Peace.

Elizabeth Street, one of the leading thoroughfares, traverses the City in
a southward direction from Hunter Street to its termination at the Burial
Ground, exceeding a mile in length, and as we have seen in our former
plates, forms the western boundary of Hyde Park, from King to Liverpool
Street.

{page 78}

Our present plate represents the most respectable portion of the street,
namely, from King Street to its northern extremity at Hunter Street; with
few exceptions the whole of the buildings are of modern construction, and
being situated in the vicinity of the Supreme Court, are principally
occupied as Chambers by the Barristers, and other members of the Legal
Profession. The first house in the plate is also one of the oldest in the
street, having been erected as a private residence for Mr. G. F. Read, of
Hobart Town, some twenty-five years since, it was afterwards used as
offices by J. Norton, Esq., the Solicitor, and for the last fifteen years
it has been in the occupation of the present proprietor, Mr. R. Driver,
as a public-house, known as the "Three Tuns," and for a long time the
general rendezvous of the Australian Cricketers. Passing onwards we come
to the Dancing Academy of Mr. Clark--and as it is one of the places of'
public amusement, we cannot pass it by without comment. The ball room on
the first floor occupies the full extent of the house, being fifty-five
feet long by twenty-five feet wide, and about the same in height, it has
a neat gallery erected at one end, for the accommodation of the
orchestra, is well lighted from the ceiling with gas, and adjoining are
dressing and refreshment rooms, forming together a very complete suite.
The Dancing Classes meet on Tuesday and Friday Evenings, and are very
numerously attended, particularly in the winter season. Mr. Clark also
indulges the votaries of Terpsicore occasionally with public Assemblies,
and the eclat with which they go off, proves his efficiency as master of
the ceremonies. These balls are always very respectably attended. The
ball room from its size being capable of affording accommodation to about
five hundred persons, is often used for concerts, etc., for which it is
well adapted.

On the opposite side of the street are several verandah cottages, built
the style peculiar to the Colony, and which if it be not remarkable for
architectural beauty, is at all events best suited for comfort and
convenience in this climate. The wide verandahs afford a cool shelter
from the intense {page 79} heat of the meridian sun, and give the
cottages an air of shady retirement, which has its own peculiar elegance.
One of these cottages is occupied as the business offices of George
Allen, Esq., one of the most respectable Solicitors, and wealthy men of
the City. He was admited an Attorney of the Supreme Court in the year
1822, and his career has strikingly illustrated how high respect and
honour can be achieved by persevering industry, and unswerving integrity.
Mr. Allen was elected an Alderman of the City at the first Municipal
Election, and became the third Mayor of the City. He was also nominated
as a Member of the Legislative Council by Sir George Gipps, and
re-appointed after the dissolution of the first Legislative Council. In.
all these positions his conduct has been such as to command respect and
approval, but a far higher claim will endear his name to the Citizens
arising out of his sterling worth as a man, and the unbounded
philanthrophy which has marked his course through life.



CHAPTER XVII.


LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL CHAMBER.--HYDE PARK BARRACKS.--MACQUARIE STREET.

The Chamber in which the deliberate wisdom of the Legislators of New
South Wales decides on the destinies of the Colony, is by no means
imposing in its appearance; there is an entire absence of any attempt at
grandeur of effect, in its design and architecture.

Built, at a time, when the Colony was sorely feeling the effects of
former extravagance, the economical mind of the then Governor, Sir George
Gipps, discountenanced any expenditure for the purpose of mere display.

The building in Macquarie Street, however, is far from being disreputable
in its outward aspect, while its interior is at least comfortable if not
elegant.

{page 80}

When the Constitution of the Colony was altered;--when New South Wales
was permitted to elect representatives, to make laws, whereby her
population should be governed; the close chamber which contained the
dozen nominees; with its abominable little galleries, like side-boxes at
a theatre, was abolished. Fresh figures were introduced into the
Estimates for 1843, and the Colonial Architect was put in motion, and
perhaps the most decided proof of the promptitude his department can at
times display, exists in this building. In about six months after the
money was voted, the Chamber was completed; in one short year it had
become the arena of fierce discussion.

By some strange chance, the old Council Chamber, a low, mean looking
building, adjoined the buildings appropriated to the Medical Department
of the Colony, and in the immediate vicinity of the Government Hospital.
The new Chamber has arisen in the place of the old, and although the
Hospital "stands where it stood," we are happy to say it is now an
Institution, supported, not out of Commissariat funds, but by private
subscriptions.

It would be out of place to enter here into any details of the
proceedings inside of the Legislative Council Chamber of New South Wales;
we may perhaps observe, that whether the deliberations have been for good
or for evil, they have at all events evinced as much ability,
earnestness, and zeal, as the debates of any Legislature in the British
Dominions.

The Council consists of thirty-six Members, twenty-four of whom are
elected by the people, and twelve nominated by the Government, six of the
latter being paid officials, and six non-officials, The first elected
Speaker was the Hon. Alexander M'Leay, Esq., formerly Colonial Secretary
of the Colony, and an elected Member for the counties of Stanley and
Macquarie. On his resignation in consequence of his advanced years,
Charles Nicholson, Esq., M.D., was elected, and re-elected at the
commencement of the first session of the second elected Council of New
South Wales, in 1849.

{page 81}

The proceedings of the Council have at all times been conducted with the
utmost decorum, and it is looked up to with that respect and confidence,
which can alone attach dignity to the legislature of any country.

Hyde Park Barracks, situated at the eastern end of King Street, and the
north-east corner of Hyde Park, (from which it derives its name,) was
erected by Governor Macquarie, as the principal convict depot in the
Colony, and was first occupied in June, 1819. It is a spacious brick
building, and very well adapted for the purpose for which it was
designed. On the basement are the offices, and the other part is divided
into nine spacious wards, each of the larger ones being capable of
accommodating one hundred and fifty men, as many as fourteen hundred have
been confined at one time in this building. All convicts, upon their
arrival in the Colony, were forwarded here, and after being duly
registered, were open for assignment to the free inhabitants as servants;
and, if they conducted themselves well, (upon the recommendation of their
employer, backed by that of a magistrate,) were entitled to the
indulgence of a _Ticket of Leave_, after a servitude proportionate to
their sentence; thus a convict transported for seven years, could apply
for his ticket at the expiration of four years, if for fourteen years, at
the end of six, and if for life after the eighth year; they frequently
however obtained this indulgence as 'a reward for any praiseworthy act;
this ticket gives them the liberty to support themselves in any way they
choose, within the district for which it was granted, but if they
misconducted themselves in any way, or quitted their district, their
tickets were cancelled, and themselves returned to the barracks. Masters
bad the power to take their assigned servants before a Magistrate, for
any misconduct or neglect of duty, when they were, if found guilty,
summarily punished by the lash, and returned to their service, but if
they became incorrigible, they were usually returned to Barracks and
exchanged for others. The prisoners returned to Barracks, or undergoing
{page 82} any colonial sentence, were then employed upon the public works
or roads of the Colony.

The assignment system has however ceased since the year 1840, and from
that period may be dated the decline of the colony from that state of
prosperity, for which it was then notorious; many systems have since been
adopted, and all have failed most signally, and although we by no means
desire a return to the convict system in this Colony, we still believe
that it was the best suited, to reclaim the fallen, and to enable him to
resume a position in society, and while doing so the country was spared
the expense of his support, and enriched by his labour. If any argument
were necessary to prove this, we have only to look around us, and how
many men of capital, as stockholders, merchants, tradesmen, etc., do we
see who have served their time as assigned servants, and who are now as
honest, industrious, and in every way as respectable members of society,
as any who have arrived free. Will the probationary system of Van
Diemen's Land, Maconochie's of Norfolk Island, or any of the newly
invented schemes at home, afford any similar results?

In January, 1848, the prisoners were removed to Cockatoo Island, and the
Superintendant's department, to offices in the Executive Council
Chambers; since the resumption of emigration, these Barracks have been
occupied by the female emigrants, and the offices by the Emigration
Commissioners' department.

The first house in our plate of Macquarie Street, is the parsonage house
of St. James', and the adjoining premises are the offices of the Attorney
and Solicitor Generals, we have then three houses of modern construction,
and the original Wesleyan Chapel (the first opened by that body in 1821,)
next claims our attention. It has recently been used by a party of
Presbyterians, but is at present unoccupied. The succeeding cottages
serve to shew the prevailing style of architecture some thirty years
since, and by the contrast, give importance to the more modern erections
near them. {page 83} The splendid mansion of Mrs. Burdekin, which is next
represented, is without exception, the finest private residence in the
city, and deserving of particular notice. The premises now used as a
Baptist Chapel, was formerly the "Friend's Meeting House." We pass
Horbury Terrace, the private residence of many respectable families, and
the Australian Library, of which we have previously given a full notice,
presents itself; and our plate is completed by the elegant row of modern
houses, recently erected, a fitting specimen of the thriving condition of
the city. The first two form the private residences of Messrs. Kemp and
Fairfax, the proprietors of the Sydney Morning Herald.



CHAPTER XVIII.


THE AUSTRALIAN MUSEUM.--NATIONAL SCHOOL.

The next plate by which this work is illustrated is the Australian
Museum.

This institution was founded in the year 1836, and originated by a number
of gentlemen interested in the promotion of science in Australia. It
received the cordial support of Governor Sir Richard Bourke, and since
that year a sum of money has been annually placed on the estimates for
its support and extension.

The first President was the late Venerable Alexander M'Leay, Esquire,
then Colonial Secretary, who made large donations to the institution of
valuable scientific specimens, and who actively interested himself in its
advancement until the day of his death.

Besides the annual sum voted out of the general revenue, convict servants
were assigned to the institution, and under the direction of the
Government, Collectors of specimen, chosen from this class, were
appointed, at the distant penal settlements such as Moreton Bay and
Norfolk Island.

The Museum was first established in a small room attached to the {page
84} Legislative Council, and Mr. Surgeon Bennet was appointed Director,
an office he continued to fill for several years, with great advantage to
the institution; indeed from its commencement to the present time, the
institution has been deeply indebted to the zeal and activity which this
gentleman has exhibited in its behalf.

In a short period the specimens having largely increased, the Museum was
removed to two rooms in the Surveyor General's Office, and while
established there, Dr. Bennet resigned his office of Director in favor of
Mr. William Sheridan Wall, who has continued to superintend its
management ever since.

In the year 1840, Mr. 'Wall, under the instructions of the committee, and
at the request of Governor Sir George Gipps, again removed the Museum, to
apartments prepared for it, in the Supreme Court buildings, at
Darlinghurst.

But the accommodation afforded in all of these establishments was not
only insufficient to admit of any attractive exhibition of the specimens,
but did not afford proper facilities for their preparation and
preservation: consequently, although the Museum was opened to the public
on every Wednesday, but few visitors availed themselves of the privilege,
and the advantages of the institution were enjoyed chiefly by the few
individuals, whose taste for scientific pursuits led them thither.

The collections of specimens however, under the able management of the
Committee, and the indefatigable exertions of Mr. Wall, the Curator,
rapidly increased in extent and value, and it being at length found, that
to attempt any display of them was impracticable, application was made to
the Government for the erection of a building worthy to be devoted to
such a purpose, in the first City of this Hemisphere. Accordingly, in the
estimates for the year 1846, a sum of £3000 appeared for the building of
a Museum, and a site was recommended by the Local Government to be
granted for the purpose, at the corner of William and Stanley Streets.

{page 85}

The design and estimates of the proposed building, were prepared by Mr.
Mortimer William Lewis, Colonial Architect, and after considerable delay
the building was commenced.

The sum of £3000 was soon found to be utterly inadequate for the purpose,
and a supplementary vote of £1500 was passed in the year 1848. Meanwhile
the building progressed very unsatisfactorily, which, combined with the
unsightly appearance it presented in its half-finished state, began to
excite public notice, and frequent complaints were made in public and
through the Press. On the occasion of a further vote being asked in the
session of 1849, the universal discontent at the conduct of the Colonial
Architect's department in the matter, found a voice, and it being
represented, that the completion of the building on the original design,
would cost a sum nearly equal to that already expended; its continuance
was loudly protested against, by several of the representative Members of
the Legislative Council.

An enquiry was instituted, when it was discovered that a sum of £1300 had
been expended and was due to the Contractors, over and above what had
been voted by the Council, and the supplementary vote of the Council, was
accordingly restricted to a sum sufficient to roof in the building, so as
to prevent injury to the interior from rain.

This neglect and utter miscalculation on the part of the Colonial
Architect, contributed very extensively to prejudice the institution, in
the eyes of the public. The professed economists in the Legislative
Council talked loudly, of the financial difficulties in which the Colony
was involved, and denounced the institution, as altogether too expensive
for the Colony, and as unproductive of any advantage corresponding with
its cost. A more minute enquiry, instituted by the Government, discovered
the expenditure incurred in the building to have been very extravagant,
and Mr. Lewis retired from his office at the head of the Colonial
Department.

In the commencement of 1849, the portion of the building appropriated
{page 86} to the accommodation of the Curator and his family having been
made habitable, and two smaller rooms prepared for the reception of
specimens; Mr. Wall was instructed by the Committee to commence removing
the Museum from Darlinghurst, which was accomplished early in March.

The collections at present in the Museum are very valuable, and its
usefulness, as an institution for the promotion of science, has been
warmly acknowledged, by the most distinguished scientific society in the
mother country. They consist principally of a collection of
Minerals--Colonial and Foreign; a collection of Shells--Colonial and
Foreign; a collection of Geological Specimens arranged by the Rev. W. B.
Clarke. But the Museum is chiefly rich in its extensive Ornithological
and Zoological Collections comprising thousands of specimens, which from
the unfinished state of the building, cannot at present be properly
displayed.

A very large proportion of these collections, have accrued as the results
of the labours of Mr. Wall.

The Museum has lately presented another feature of a most attractive
nature. Dr. Nicholson, Speaker of the Legislative Council, a short time
ago, presented the Institution with a princely gift, consisting of a
collection of Casts, of the most celebrated specimens of the Italian
School of Sculpture.

These, decidedly the most valuable works of art exhibited in the Colony,
are already beginning to attract public attention to the institution and
this, once obtained, there can be little doubt that it will soon overcome
the obstacles that have hitherto beset its career. The great impediment
in the advancement of any institution of this nature, is the difficulty
in overcoming these prejudices, which interfere with a fair appreciation
of merit.

The sordid views of penny wise and pound foolish economy, will soon give
way before a generous and liberal admiration of art, and a growing sense
of the wonders that the more recluse sciences are daily unfolding to us;
and while the diffusion of education in all its grades, is in this
century {page 87} admitted, by the most thrifty of politicians to be the
wisest and most legitimate mode, of expending the public revenues of all
countries, the wiser, and more enlightened statesman will feel, that no
greater aid can be afforded to the cause of education, than the promotion
of those Institutions which display the excellence to which art may be
carried, the mysteries which science can reveal, and, in the admiration
they command, excite that generous emulation to equal and excel, which is
the nursing mother of all improvement.

Before this feeling, we believe the institution is rapidly gaining ground
in public favor, and although its hall of exhibition is now wholly
useless for the purposes for which it was designed, we are confident,
that, even at a greater cost to the public purse, than could reasonably
have been anticipated, the public will readily and speedily acquiesce in
its completion.

The engraving presented to our readers is in accordance with the original
design, so far as its external appearance is concerned.

The steps at the entrance and the dome in the roof, are not however yet
completed.

For a considerable period the all important subject education, has been
pressed upon public notice, by many of our enlightened and patriotic
colonists, and it is now receiving that attention which the rapidly
increasing population demands.

The system of education about to be established, is based upon the Irish
National, or Lord Stanley's system, and the books written expressly for
the use of these schools, have been received, and are now in the
possession of the Board of Management.

The first important movement, in promoting the national system of
education, was a vote of the Legislative Council, in the session of 1848,
of two thousand pounds for the use of the Sydney or Middle District, one
thousand five hundred pounds for that of Port Philip, and for the
districts {page 88} beyond the boundaries of location, one thousand five
hundred pounds; the like sums have also been voted for the years 1849 and
1850.

In the year 1849, the building formerly used as the Military Hospital,
pleasantly situated on the highest ground in the city, near Fort Phillip,
was appropriated by the Government, for the formation of the model
school, arid at considerable expense, has been entirely remodelled. The
exterior aspect has been changed from the unsightly building it was, into
that represented in the annexed plate. Its internal economy has also been
altered, the old wards having been converted into spacious and convenient
class rooms, and the extensive grounds surrounding, afford ample space
for exercise and training.

This model school (as the term implies,) is intended for the preparation
of efficient teachers, with whom the various district schools of the
colony will be supplied, and who upon the completion of their education
will have diplomas granted them, the rising generation will thus receive
the benefit of every modern improvement in the art. Operations will
commence, on the arrival of teachers, daily expected from the Model
National School in Ireland.

Upwards of sixty schools on this system, are already in progress in the
various districts of the colony, and about twenty are in full operation.

The management of this national undertaking is intrusted exclusively to a
board of three gentlemen, and whatever difference of opinion may exist,
as to the probable efficiency of a body thus constituted, or of the
system introduced, we think there will be none, as to the long known
probity, enlightened sentiments and zeal of the individuals themselves,
namely,--The Honorable R. H. Plunkett, Attorney General; The Honorable
Charles Nicholson, Speaker of the Legislative Council; and J. K. Holden,
Esquire; Mr. W. C. Wills is Secretary.




INDEX

[Page numbers have been retained in this ebook, within braces ({}).
For example, search for page 79 using the string {page 79}.]

Entries derive from E. A. Ancher's typescript index in the Mitchell
Library. Each plate page is numbered the same as the preceding text page,
plus a letter, as 40A, 40B.

Aaron, I. 30A
A'Beckett, A. 37
Abraham (sculptor) 24
Adelaide House 56A
Adelphi Hotel and Squatters' Home 66A
Adnum 20A
Adrian, C. 60A
Albion House 30A
Albion Printing Office 26A
Alcock, E. 66A
Aldis, W. H. 20A
Alexander's Stables 40B, 42
Allen, George 79
Allen, H. 60A
Allen, J. 20A
Allwood, Rev. A. 29
A.M.P. Society 92, 94
Andrews (saddler) 20A
Arabin (actor) 35
Armstrong, J. 45, 93
Ashton, R. 12A
Atkins, Richard 76
Atkinson 30A
'Atlas' 22A, 23
Attorney-General's Office 82, 96
Attwood, J. 62
Australian Benefit Investment and Building Society 24
Australian Eating House 60A
Australian General Insurance Co. 23
Australian Hotel 16, 16A
Australian House 26A
Australian Library 14, 14A
Australian Marble Works 30A
'Australian Sportsman' 42

Baker 26A
Balcomb (artist) 32
Baly 70A
Bank of Australasia 10, 10A
Bank of Australia 13, 20A, 21
Bank of New South Wales 22A, 23
Banks 6
Bannister, Saxe 77
Baptist Chapel 80A, 83
Barney, Colonel 50
Barr, R. 60A
Barracks, George Street 22, 59, 60, 61; wall of 20A, 22, 24
Barracks, Hyde Park 28, 78A, 81
Bath's hotel 12A
Beattie, J. 54A
Belisario 68A
Belmore 51
Belper House 30A
Bennett (shoemaker) 10A
Bennett, Dr. G. 68A
Bennett, Dr. T. 68
Bennett, T. and W. 20A
Bent, Ellis 76
Bent Street 14
Bibb, John 38, 43, 95
Billyard 76A
Bishop's Registrar 29
Black Boy Hotel 54A, 94
Blanch 50
Bland, Dr. William 36, 42, 93, 94
Blore, E. 10
Blunt 12A
Blyth's refreshment room 30A, 34
Bowden, T. W. 56A
Boyce 12A
Boyce, Rev. W. 63
Brambletye House 68A
Bridge Street. See Key to Street Plates
Brisbane, Governor 59
Broad, R. 34
Broughton, Ald. 55
Broughton, Bishop 29
Broughton, Commissary 67, 95
Bull's Head Inn 56A
Burdekin, Mrs. 83
Burdekin's Terrace 70, 70A
Burial ground 18
Burke, Mrs. 70A
Busby, N. 22A
Butts, Stephen 80A, 94, 96
Buyers and Lockhead 84A
Byrnes, T. 60A

Caldwell, J. 34A
Callaghan, T. 77
Cameron, A. and J. 56A
Campbell, E., and Co. 54A
Campbell, T. 14
Cape, W. T. 37, 96
Carandini, Mme. 35
Carmichael, Rev. H. 36
Carr and Owen 54A
Carter, T. 36
Carter, W. 60A
Castle, M. 40B
Census (1846) 5
Cetta, L. 54A, 57
Chapman, C. 22A
Chapman and Son 56A
Charlotte Place. See Key to Street Plates
Cheeke, A. 77
Chisholm, G. 30A
Choral Society 24, 29
Christie, W. 30A
Church, first 11
Church Hill 10A
Church of England Cemetery Co. 24
Church of England Lay Association 23
City Toy Bazaar 26A
Clark, Thomas 68A
Clark's Stables 40B, 94
Clarke, C. 26A
Clarke, J. 76A, 78
Clarke, Rev. W. B. 86
Clarkson and Hunter 54A
Cleeve, I. K. 10A, 11
Coates, T. R. 56A
Cobden House 30A
Cockatoo Island 82
Cohen and Son 22A
Cohen, H., and Son 20A
Cohen, J. C. 20A
Cohen, R. J. 65, 66
Cohen, S. J. 84A
Cohen, T. G. 22A
College Street. See Key to Street Plates
Collins, Judge-Advocate 74, 76
Colman and Piddington 22A
Colonnade 13
Commercial Banking Co. 22A, 25
Commercial House 54A
Companies, public 6
Compton House 30A
Congregational Church 38, 38A, 44
Connell, John 42, 94
Connolly, Rev. Fr. 73
Conroy, Dr. 30A
Cooper, D. 54, 94
Cooper, D., jnr. 57
Coudie 30A
Courthouse, old 68A, 70, 77
Cousens, Mrs. 68A
Coveny, T. B. 66A
Crego 26A
Cripps, T. 56A
Crooked Billet Hotel 12A
Crown and Kettle Inn 60A
Cussen, W. 16A
Cowper, Rev. Dr. 12, 14, 64

'Daily Advertiser' 34A
Dalley 80A
Davies 22A
Davy 10A
Dawson 12A
Dawson's Foundry 16, 16A
Deacon 10A
Deene, I. P. 68A
Deeper 20A
De la Condamine, T. 14
De Metz, the Misses 76A
Dickinson (judge) 77
Dickinson (tailor) 56A
Dillon, J. M. 77
Dispensary, Sydney 14
Dixon 22A
Dixon, M. 64B
Dobson, Mrs. 76A
Dobson, W. H. 22A
Douglas 12A
Dowd, J. C. 60A
Doyle, Mrs. 93
Dreutler, A. 54A
Driver, R. 76A, 78, 94
Dubost, Mlle. 68A
Duer 31

East India Co. 45
Education: establishments 7; system 87
Edwards, J. 26A Egan, D. 94
Eldridge, J. 66A
Elias, A. 65
Elizabeth Street. See Key to Street Plates
Entwistle, J. 60A, 61
Ewen, J. 16A
Execution, places of 70, 71, 75

Fairfax, A. 54A
Fairfax, J. 83, 96
Fairweather 67, 95
Fattorini, Dr. 76A
Farrell, T. 30A
Favenc 30A
Fawcett, T. L. and Co. 22A
Fawcett's sale rooms 22A
Fearnley, J. 16A
Fell, J. 66A
Female Orphan School 13, 91
Ferris, H. 30A
Field, Judge 76, 77
Fisher (bootmaker) 40B
Fisher's wine and spirits store 22A
Fitzroy Hotel 43
Fitzsimmons, J. 60A
Flashman 66A
Fletcher, J. 12A
Flower, Salting and Co. 40A, 45
Forbes, Sir Francis 77
Forbes Hotel 60A, 95
Ford (shipping agent) 12A
Ford, W. and F. 10A
Foss 40B, 42
Foster, William 77
Foulis, Dr. 70
Fountain, Macquarie Place 20A
Fowles, J. 84A
Free Presbyterian Church 36A, 44
French Stay Warehouse 40B
Friend, W. S. 64B, 95
Friends' Meeting House 83

Gaol Hill 13, 16A
Gardener's Arms 64B
Garrick 60A
Garrick's Head Hotel 60A, 93
Gaunson, E. 12A
George Street. See Key to Street Plates
Gibbs, Mrs. (actress) 35
Gibbs, J. 35
Gill's hotel 42, 94
Gillespie, J. 12A
Ginn, H. 15
Glanham, I. 0. 10A
Glasgow Boot and Shoe Warehouse 54A
Glasgow House 12A
Gordon 65
Gosling, J. W. 10A
Goulburn, Major 67
Government House 9, 10
Gowland 76A
Grant 40B
Graveley 30A
Greenway, Francis 57, 74, 92, 94
Gregory, G. P. F. 77
Griffiths (actor) 35
Grocott, J. G. 22A
Grose 55
Guard House 11
Guerin, Mrs. (actress) 35
Guild of St Mary and St Joseph 20

Hambleton (actor) 35
Hamilton (bootmaker) 22A
Hamilton, G. 20A
Hamilton, G. H. 30A
Hancock 22A
Harp and Shamrock 66A
Harper and Moore 54A, 55
Harpur (surgeon) 60A
Harrington Street. See Key to Street Plates
Harris, Rev. Mr. 63
Hawkins, J. 60A
Hawley, A., and Co. 54A, 55
Hayes, H., and Co. 54A, 55
Henderson's Buildings 70, 95
Hensley 66A
Hewitt 20A
Heydon, J. K. 60A
Hibernian Printing Office 26A
Hill, Rev. Mr. 14
Hill, J., jnr. 26A
Holborraw, D. 20A
Holden, J. K. 88
Hollinshed, H. 36
Holloway's Depot 66A
Holman, J. 54A
Holmes 16A
Hope Tavern 60A
Horbury Terrace 80A, 83
Hordern, J. 10A, 12A
Horse Bazaar, York Street 62
Hoskins, J. 42
Hospital, Macquarie Street 80
Hospital, Military 88
Houses, number of, in 1846 and 1848 5
Howson, F. (actor) 35
Howson, J. (actor) 35
Hudson, G. W. 40A
Hughes, John Terry 51, 53
Hume, J. 54, 64, 95, 96
Hunt, C. N. 84A
Hunter 54A
Hunter Street. See Key to Street Plates
Hutchinson, W. 54, 92, 94
Hyams 66
Hyde Park 68
Hyde Park Barracks 28, 78A, 81
Hydes (actor) 35

Illidge, I. M. 56A, 92
Independent Chapel 38, 38A
Inder, J. 62, 66A, 95
Inglis 26A
Innes, Captain J. L. 58
Insurance companies 6
Iredale, L. 55, 56A, 64B
Isaacs, J. 12A
Isaacs, Jacob 66

Jamieson Street. See Key to Street Plates
Jarrett, Rev. W. 40
Jervis, N. C. 40B
Jews: 64, 66; synagogue 64, 64A, 64B, 65, 91
Johnson, J. 29
Johnson, Rev. R. 11
Johnson, W. J. 40
Johnson and Weight 30A
Jones (tailor) 30A
Jones, D. 70A
Jones, David, and Co. 22A
Jones, J. T. 60A
Jones, R. 20A
Jones, T. (grocer) 56A
Jones, T. E. 45, 93
Jones and Webb 30A
Joseph, Joel 64
Joseph, Moses 54A, 55, 66
Josephson, J. 95
Kearey, B. 40B
Keene 26A
Kemish's Day School 80A
Kemp, Charles 83, 96
Kern and Mader 20A
King George (ship) 13
King Street. See Key to Street Plates
King's Arms 30A
Knight 32, 35
Kosten 30A

Lamb, R. 22A
Land, value of, in George Street 22
Lane and Co. 16A
Lang, Dr., J. D. 36, 59, 60, 96
Law Courts 74
Lear 66
Legislative Council Chambers 78A, 79
Leichhardt, Dr. 37
Levi, A. 64
Levi, Rev. Aaron 65
Levick, J. and J. 10A
Levy, Barnett 33, 50
Levy, I. 66
Lewis, Rev. Mr. 63
Lewis, M. W. 85, 91, 94, 96
Leworthy, R. 22A
Lincoln Bill 67, 95
Lingard 54A
Little 30A
Liverpool Arms 26A, 30A
Liverpool Street. See Key to Street Plates
Livingstone, W. 12A
Lloyd, B. S. 22A
Lloyd, C. A. 22A
Lloyd's Rooms 22A
Lochhead 84A
London Tavern 56A
London Tea Warehouse 56A
Lopdell, H. I. 34A
Lublin, J. 20A
Lyons, Sam 10, 10A, 70
Lyons, Saul 42, 94, 96
Lyons Terrace 70, 70A

McArthur 30A
Macarthur, Rev. Mr. 29
McCool (bootmaker) 26A
McCrow, A., and Co. 60A
McCullock 76A
Macdonald 51
Mace 26A
Mackaness, J. 77
McKee, Rev. W. 44
Mackellar, C. 16A
Mackellar, Dr. F. 16A
McKenny, Rev. J. 62
McLaren, J. C. 43
McLeay, Alexander 14, 15, 80, 83
McNab 43
Macquarie Place: fountain 26A; obelisk 15, 16A
Mader 20A
Manchester House 30A
Manning, Judge 77
Market sheds 36A, 64E, 67
Marsh, S. and H. 84A
Martyn 34A
Martyn and Combes 10A
Masonic Hall 60A, 61
Matthews 12A
Meares, R. 30A
Mechanics' School of Arts 34A, 36
Medical Hall 26A
Melville, W. 24A
Menzies, R. 22A
Meredith (actor) 34
Merrall, J. 54A
Michil, A. 37
Miles, L. 58
Milford, S. T. 77
Military District 66
Military Hospital 88
Miller, George 56
Miller, T. E. 77
Milward 20A
Mitchell; F. 16, 16A
Moffitt 30A, 32
Molloy, T. 56A
Montefiore, J. B. 65
Moore 54A, 55
Morgan, P. F. 36A
Moses, E. 66
Moss, G. 66
Mullen, John 68A, 95
Murphy, T. 66A
Museum 82A, 83

Nathan, Miss 66
Nation, W. 84A
National School 86A
Nesbitt (actor) 35
Newall 32
Newland, W. 12A
Newton, Chris 30A
Nicholson, Dr. 37, 80, 86, 88
Niebel, I. H. 56A
Nimmo, W., and Co. 84A
Nobbs, J. 64B
Northern House 60A
Norton, J. 78, 96
Nott, R. 20A
Nottingham House 10A

Obelisk, Macquarie Place 15, 16A
O'Connell, Sir Maurice 68
O'Flinn, Rev. J. 72, 73
Olbrecht, A. 56A
O'Neill 10A
Oram, R. 76A
Orphan School 12
Owen 54A
Owen, R. 30A
Oxford House 10A

Palmer 30A
Palmer, J. 20A
Parade Ground 11, 13
Parishes 6
Parkes, Henry 20A
Patten, W. 30A
Pattison 60A
Pavilion Theatre 22
Peck, R. 95
Peden 20A
Peek, S., and Co. 30A, 54A, 55
Penny, C. M. 10A
Phillips, S. 64
Piddington 22A
Pierson, Mrs. 40B
Pillet, J. 20A
Pite and Preston 30A
Pitt Street. See Key to Street Plates
Plunkett, J. H. 77, 88, 96
Polding, Rev. Dr. 73
Police Office 56A, 56B, 57, 64B
Population in 1846 and 1848 6
Post Office 22A, 24, 25
Presbyterian Church 36A, 44
Preston 30A
Prevost and Rudd 50A
Priddle, Rev. Mr. 29
Price and Favenc 30A
Price and Steddon 10A
Protois 40B
Pultenay Hotel 67, 95

Queen's Head Inn 66A

Racecourse 68, 69
Rainbow Tavern 26A, 41, 94
Raphael, J. C. 16A
Raymond, J. 25, 61, 95
Raymond, S. 77
Read, G. F. 78
Read's Fancy Bazaar 68A
Redfern Inn 66A
Redman, John 16, 92
Regent's Terrace 20A, 21
Reilly, R. 0. 54A, 55
Reynolds, A. 56A
Rickards, J. (auctioneer) 22A
Rider, W. E. 54A
Roberts, D. 76A
Robertson, H. 34
Robey, R. M. 54A, 55
Robinson 54A, 55
Robinson, J. R. 54A
Roche, J. W. 26A, 41
Rochester House 30A
Rogers (actor) 35
Rogers, D. 30A
Rogers, E. 77, 95
Roman Catholic Church 72
Romanson, Mme. 68A
Rookery, the 67
Rose 66
Rose and Crown Hotel 40B, 41
'Rosehill Packet' 18
Rose of Australia Hotel 16A
Ross, Rev. Dr. 40, 70A
Row, J. 26A
Rowland McNab and Co. 43
Royal Hotel 33, 49, 50A, 54A
Royal Victoria Theatre 30A, 31, 32, 32A, 34, 51
Rudd 60A
Russell's Foundry 54A

St. Andrew's Scots Church 54A, 59
St. James' Church: 28, 28A; parsonage 80A, 82; watchhouse 70
St. Mary's Cathedral 71, 72A
St. Patrick's Church 18A, 19
St. Philip's Church 10B, 12
St. Philip's Infants' School 84A
Salamons, E. 22A
Salopian House 22A
Samuel E. 26A, 30A
Samuel, W. 30A
Sands, J. 54A
Sandy Racecourse 69
Saunders, A. 40B
Savings Bank 55, 56
Schools 7
Scott, Archdeacon 14
Scott, C. 54A, 55
Scott, J. 54, 55
Scots Church 58A, 59
Sergeant 76A
Seventy-third Regiment 68
Shakespeare Tavern 32, 93
Simmons (theatrical manager) 34
Simmons, J. 65
Simmons, J., and Son 20A
Skinner, E. 22A
Skinner's Hotel 20A, 22A, 23
Smith, J. 30A
Smith, M. 26A
Smith, T. 16A
Smith, T., and Son 20A
Societies and institutions 6
Solicitor-General's Office 82, 96
Solomon, J. 22A
Solomon, S. 20A
Soole, W. 22A
Sparkes 52
Staddon 10A
Staffordshire House 60A
Staffordshire Warehouse 56A
Star Hotel 22A
Starkey 76A
Steel, Mrs. 34A
Stephen, Sir Alfred 70A, 77
Stephen, John 77
Stephen, S. 67
Stewart 61
Stewart, F. 20A
Stirling, J. 10A
Stone, H. 16A
Stone, Mary 30A
Streets, naming of 67
Strzelecki, Count de 27
Suburbs 5
Sumner, Rev. J. 21
Supreme Court 28, 74, 74A
Swain, Webbs and Co. 84A
Sydney Choral Society 24, 29
Sydney Dispensary 14
Sydney Foundry 54A, 55
'Sydney Gazette' 16, 91, 92
'Sydney Morning Herald' 12A, 13
Sydney Training School 34A

Tawell, J. 42, 94
Taylor 26A
Tebbutt 66A
Terry, Sam 42
Terry's Buildings 14, 42
Thacker and Co. 84A
Theatres: Pavilion 22; Royal 33, 50; Royal Victoria 30A, 31, 32, 32A, 34, 51
Thompson and Son 30A
Thomson 56A
Three Tuns Inn 76A, 78
Thurlow and Grant 40
Ticket-of-leave system 81
Titterton 55
Toogood, W. 26A, 40B, 41
Torning and Boyce 12A
Total Abstinence Society 21
Townend, E. 26A
Town Council Chambers 64B, 67
Treasury 20A
Trood, J. 26A
Tucker, Lingard and Co. 54A
Turley 26A
Turner, Rev. Mr. 63
Turner, G. C. 77

Ullathorne, Rev. Dr. 73
Underwood, James 1
Underwood's Buildings 13
Union Bank of Australia 40A, 42A,

Vickery (bootmaker) 56A
Victoria Hotel, 30A, 34

Wait, H. 60A
Wall, D. 66A
Wall, W. S. 84, 86 Wallace, Dr. 70A
Wallis 76A
Waterloo House 26A
Waterloo Stores 57
Webb 30A
Weight 30A
Welch 23
Wesleyan Chapel 62, 82, 95, 96
White, Miss 68A Whitehead, W. 66A
White Horse Commission and Livery Stables 40A
White Horse Tavern 54A, 55
Whitfield, G. 56A
William the Fourth Hotel 30A
Williams 80A
Willis, W. C. 88
Woolley, T. 54, 54A
Wright 40B
Wyatt, J. 30A, 34, 50, 51
Wyatt and Son 34A
Wylde, Judge-Advocate 76, 77

Ximines, Mrs. (actress) 35

York Street. See Key to Street Plates
Young, A. W. 77
Young and Co. 40A, 45



THE END




Project Gutenberg Australia


