

Project Gutenberg Australia


Title: The Demon Spell
Author: Hume Nisbet
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0602471.txt
Edition: 1
Language: English
Character set encoding: Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted: July 2006
Date most recently updated: July 2006

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


The Demon Spell
Hume Nisbet



It was about the time when spiritualism was all the craze in England,
and no party was reckoned complete without a spirit-rapping seance
being included amongst the other entertainments.

One night I had been invited to the house of a friend, who was a great
believer in the manifestations from the unseen world, and who had
asked for my special edification a well--known trance medium. 'A
pretty as well as heaven-gifted girl, whom you will be sure to like, I
know' he said as he asked me.

I did not believe in the return of spirits, yet, thinking to be
amused, consented to attend at the hour appointed. At that time I had
just returned from a long sojourn abroad, and was in a very delicate
state of health, easily impressed by outward influences, and nervous
to a most extraordinary extent.

To the hour appointed I found myself at my friend's house, and was
then introduced to the sitters who had assembled to witness the
phenomena. Some were strangers like myself to the rules of the table,
others who were adepts took their places at once in the order to which
they had in former meetings attended. The trance medium had not yet
arrived, and while waiting upon her coming we sat down and opened the
seance with a hymn.

We had just furnished(sic) the second verse when the door opened and
the medium glided in, and took her place on a vacant set by my side,
joining in with the others in the last verse, after which we all sat
motionless with our hands resting upon the table, waiting upon the
first manifestation from the unseen world.

Now, although I thought all this performance very ridiculous, there
was something in the silence and the dim light, for the gas had been
turned low down, and the room seemed filled with shadows; something
about the fragile figure at my side, with her drooping head, which
thrilled me with a curious sense of fear and icy horror such as I had
never felt before.

I am not by nature imaginative or inclined to superstition, but, from
the moment that young girl had entered the room, I felt as if a hand
had been laid upon my heart, a cold iron hand, that was compressing
it, and causing it to stop throbbing. My sense of hearing also had
grown more acute and sensitive, so that the beating of the watch in my
vest pocket sounded like the thumping of a quartz-crushing machine,
and the measured breathing of those about me as loud and nerve-
disturbing as the snorting of a steam engine.

Only when I turned to look upon the trance medium did I become
soothed; then it seemed as if a cold-air wave had passed through my
brain, subduing, for the time-being, those awful sounds.

'She is possessed,' whispered my host on the other side of me. 'Wait,
and she will speak presently, and tell us whom we have got beside us.'

As we sat and waited the table moved several times under our hands,
while knockings at intervals took place in the table and all round the
room, a most weird and blood-curdling, yet ridiculous performance,
which made me feel half inclined to run out with fear, and half
inclined to sit still and laugh; on the whole, I think, however, that
horror had the more complete possession of me.

Presently she raised her head and laid her hand upon mine, beginning
to speak in a strange monotonous, far away voice, 'This is my first
visit since I passed from earth-life, and you have called me here.'

I shivered as her hand touched mine, but had not strength to withdraw
it from her light, soft grasp.

'I am what you would call a lost soul; that is, I am in the lowest
sphere. Last week I was in the body, but met my death down Whitechapel
way. I was what you call an unfortunate, aye, unfortunate enough.
Shall I tell you how it happened?'

The medium's eyes were closed, and whether it was my distorted
imagination or not, she appeared to have grown older and decidedly
debauched-looking since she sat down, or rather as if a light, filmy
mask of degrading and soddened vice had replaced the former delicate
features.

No one spoke, and the trance medium continued: 'I had been out all
that day and without any luck or food, so that I was dragging my
wearied body along through the slush and mud for it had been wet all
day, and I was drenched to the skin, and miserable, ah, ten thousand
times more wretched than I am now, for the earth is a far worse hell
for such as I than our hell here.

'I had importuned several passers by as I went along that night, but
none of them spoke to me, for work had been scarce all this winter,
and I suppose I did not look so tempting as I have been; only once a
man answered me, a dark-faced, middle-sized man, with a soft voice,
and much better dressed than my usual companions.

'He asked me where I was going, and then left me, putting a coin into
my hand, for which I thanked him. Being just in time for the last
public-house, I hurried up, but on going to the bar and looking at my
hand, I found it to be a curious foreign coin, with outlandish figures
on it, which the landlord would not take, so I went out again to the
dark fog and rain without my drink after all.

'There was no use going any further that night. I turned up the court
where my lodgings were, intending to go home and get a sleep, since I
could get no food, when I felt something touch me softly from behind
like as if someone had caught hold of my shawl; then I stopped and
turned about to see who it was.

'I was alone, and with no one near me, nothing but fog and the half
light from the court lamp. Yet I felt as if something had got hold of
me, though I could not see what it was, and that it was gathering
about me.

'I tried to scream out, but could not, as this unseen grasp closed
upon my throat and choked me, and then I fell down and for a moment
forgot everything.

'Next moment I woke up, outside my own poor mutilated body, and stood
watching the fell work going on--as you see it now.'

Yes I saw it all as the medium ceased speaking, a mangled corpse lying
on a muddy pavement, and a demoniac, dark, pock-marked face bending
over it, with the lean claws outspread, and the dense fog instead of a
body, like the half formed incarnation of muscles.

'That is what did it, and you will know it again.' she said, 'I have
come for you to find it.'

'Is he an Englishman?' I gasped, as the vision faded away and the room
once more became definite.

'It is neither man nor woman, but it lives as I do, it is with me now
and may be with you to-night, still if you will have me instead of it,
I can keep it back, only you must wish for me with all your might.'

The seance was now becoming too horrible, and by general consent our
host turned up the gas, and then I saw for the first time the medium,
now relieved from her evil possession, a beautiful girl of about
nineteen, with I think the most glorious brown eyes I had ever before
looked into.

'Do you believe what you have been speaking about?' I asked her as we
were sitting talking together.

'What was that?'

'About the murdered woman.'

'I don't know anything at all. Only that I have been sitting at the
table. I never know what my trances are.' Was she speaking the truth?
Her dark eyes looked truth, so that I could not doubt her. That night
when I went to my lodgings I must confess that it was some time before
I could make up my mind to go to bed. I was decidedly upset and
nervous, and wished that I had never, gone to this spirit meeting,
making a mental vow, as I threw off my clothes and hastily got into
bed, that it was the last unholy gathering I would ever attend.

For the first time in my life I could not put out the gas, I felt as
if the room was filled with ghosts, as if this pair of ghastly
spectres, the murderer and his victim, had accompanied me home, and
were at that moment disputing the possession of me, so instead, I
pulled the bedclothes over my head, it being a cold night, and went
that fashion off to sleep.

Twelve o'clock! and the anniversary of the day that Christ was born.
Yes, I heard it striking from the street spire and counted the
strokes, slowly tolled out, listening to the echoes from other
steeples, after this one had ceased, as I lay awake in that gas-lit
room, feeling as if I was not alone this Christmas morn.

Thus, while I was trying to think what had made me wake so suddenly, I
seemed to hear a far off echo cry 'Come to me.' At the same time the
bedclothes were slowly pulled from the bed, and left in a confused
mass on the floor.

'Is that you, Polly?' I cried, remembering the spirit seance, and the
name by which the spirit had announced herself when she took
possession.

Three distinct knocks resounded on the bedpost at my ear, the signal
for 'Yes.'

'Can you speak to me?'

'Yes,' an echo rather than a voice replied, while I felt my flesh
creeping, yet strove to be brave.

'Can I see you?'

'No!'

'Feel you?'

Instantly the feeling of a light cold hand touched my brow and passed
over my face.

'In God's name what do you want?'

'To save the girl I was in tonight. It is after her and will kill her
if you do not come quickly.'

In an instant I was out of the bed, and tumbling my clothes on any
way, horrified through it all, yet feeling as if Polly were helping me
to dress. There was a Kandian dagger on my table which I had brought
from Ceylon, an old dagger which I had bought for its antiquity and
design, and this I snatched up as I left the room, with that light
unseen hand leading me out of the house and along the deserted snow-
covered streets.

I did not know where the trance medium lived, but I followed where
that light grasp led me through the wild, blinding snow-drift, round
corners and through short cuts, with my head down and the flakes
falling thickly about me, until at last I arrived at a silent square
and in front of a house which by some instinct, I knew that I must
enter.

Over by the other side of the street I saw a man standing looking up
to a dimly-lighted window, but I could not see him very distinctly and
I did not pay much attention to him at the time, but rushed instead up
the front steps and into the house, that unseen hand still pulling me
forward.

How that door opened, or if it did open I could not say, I only know
that I got in, as we get into places in a dream, and up the inner
stairs, I passed into a bedroom where the light was burning dimly.

It was her bedroom, and she was struggling in the thug-like grasp of
those same demon claws, and the rest of it drifting away to
nothingness.

I saw it all at a glance, her half-naked form, with the disarranged
bedclothes, as the unformed demon of muscles clutched that delicate
throat, and then I was at it like a fury with my Kandian dagger,
slashing crossways at those cruel claws and that evil face, while
blood streaks followed the course of my knife, making ugly stains,
until at last it ceased struggling and disappeared like a horrid
nightmare, as the half-strangled girl, now released from that fell
grip, woke up the house with her screams, while from her releasing
hand dropped a strange coin, which I took possession of.

Thus I left her, feeling that my work was done, going downstairs as I
had come up, without impediment or even seemingly, in the slightest
degree, attracting the attention of the other inmates of the house,
who rushed in their nightdresses towards the bedroom from whence the
screams were issuing.

Into the street again, with that coin in one hand and my dagger in the
other I rushed, and then I remembered the man whom I had seen looking
up at the window. Was he there still? Yes, but on the ground in a
confused black mass amongst the white snow as if he had been struck
down.

I went over to where he lay and looked at him. Was he dead? Yes. I
turned him round and saw that his throat was gashed from ear to ear,
and all over his face--the same dark, pallid, pock-marked evil face,
and claw-like hands, I saw the dark slashes of my Kandian dagger,
while the soft white snow around him was stained with crimson life
pools, and as I looked I heard the clock strike one, while from the
distance sounded the chant of the coming waits, then I turned and fled
blindly into the darkness.



THE END



Project Gutenberg Australia


