

Project Gutenberg Australia


Title: The Dualitists
Author: Bram Stoker
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0602491.txt
Edition: 1
Language: English
Character set encoding: Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted: July 2006
Date most recently updated: July 2006

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


The Dualitists
Bram Stoker




1. Bis Dat Qui Non Cito Dat


There was joy in the house of Bubb.

For ten long years had Ephraim and Sophonisba Bubb mourned in vain the
loneliness of their life. Unavailingly had they gazed into the emporia
of baby-linen, and fixed their searching glances on the basket-makers'
warehouses where the cradles hung in tempting rows. In vain had they
prayed, and sighed, and groaned, and wished, and waited, and wept, but
never had even a ray of hope been held out by the family physician.

But now at last the wished-for moment had arrived. Month after month
had flown by on leaden wings, and the destined days had slowly
measured their course. The months had become weeks; the weeks had
dwindled down to days; the days had been attenuated to hours; the
hours had lapsed into minutes, the minutes had slowly died away, and
but seconds remained.

Ephraim Bubb sat cowering on the stairs, and tried with high-strung
ears to catch the strain of blissful music from the lips of his first-
born. There was silence in the house--silence as of the deadly calm
before the cyclone. Ah! Ephraim Bubb, little thinkest thou that
another moment may for ever destroy the peaceful, happy course of thy
life, and open to thy too-craving eyes the portals of that wondrous
land where childhood reigns supreme, and where the tyrant infant with
the wave of his tiny hand and the imperious treble of his tiny voice
sentences his parent o the deadly vault beneath the castle moat. As
the thought strikes thee thou becomest pale. How thou tremblest as
thou findest thyself upon the brink of the abyss! Wouldst that thou
could recall the past!

But hark! the die is cast for good or ill. The long years of praying
and hoping have found an end at last. From the chamber within comes a
sharp cry, which shortly after is repeated. Ah!

Ephraim, that cry is the feeble effort of childish lips as yet unused
to the rough, worldly form of speech to frame the word 'father'. In
the glow of thy transport all doubts are forgotten; and when the
doctor cometh forth as the harbinger of joy he findeth thee radiant
with new-found delight.

'My dear sir, allow me to congratulate you--to offer twofold
felicitations. Mr Bubb, sir, you are the father of twins!'



2. Halcyon Days

The twins were the finest children that ever were seen--so at least
said the cognoscenti, and the parents were not slow to believe. The
nurse's opinion was in itself a proof.

It was not, ma'am, that they was fine for twins, but they was fine for
singles, and she had ought to know, for she had nussed a many in her
time, both twins and singles. All they wanted was to have their dear
little legs cut off and little wings on their dear little shoulders,
for to be put one on each side of a white marble tombstone, cut
beautiful, sacred to the relic of Ephraim Bubb, that they might, sir,
if so be that missus was to survive the father of two such lovely
twins--although she would make bold to say, and no offence intended,
that a handsome gentleman, though a trifle or two older than his good
lady, though for the matter of that she heerd that gentlemen was never
too old at all, and for her own part she liked them the better for it:
not like bits of boys that didn't know their own minds--that a
gentleman what was the father of two such 'eavenly twins (God bless
them!) couldn't be called anything but a boy; though for the matter of
that she never knowed in her experience--which it was much--of a boy
as had such twins, or any twins at all so much for the matter of that.
The twins were the idols of their parents, and at the same time their
pleasure and their pain. Did Zerubbabel cough, Ephraim would start
from his balmy slumbers with an agonized cry of consternation, for
visions of innumerable twins black in the face from croup haunted his
nightly pillow. Did Zacariah rail at ethereal expansion, Sophonisba
with pallid hue and dishevelled locks would fly to the cradle of her
offspring. Did pins torture or strings afflict, or flannel or flies
tickle, or light dazzle, or darkness affright, or hunger or thirst
assail the synchronous productions, the household of Bubb would be
roused from quiet slumbers or the current of its manifold workings
changed.

The twin's grew apace; were weaned; teethed; and at length arrived at
the stage of three years!

They grew in beauty side by side, They filled one home, etc.



3. Rumours of Wars

Harry Merford and Tommy Santon lived in the same range of villas as
Ephraim Bubb. Harry's parents had taken up their abode in no. 25, no.
27 was happy in the perpetual sunshine of Tommy's smiles, and between
these two residences Ephraim Bubb reared his blossoms, the number of
his mansion being 26. Harry and Tommy had been accustomed from the
earliest times to meet each other daily. Their primal method of
communication had been by the housetops, till their respective sires
had been obliged to pay compensation to Bubb for damages to his roof
and dormer windows; and from that time they had been forbidden by the
home authorities to meet, whilst their mutual neighbour had taken the
precaution of having his garden walls pebble-dashed and topped with
broken glass to prevent their incursions. Harry and Tommy, however,
being gifted with daring souls, lofty, ambitious, impetuous natures,
and strong seats to their trousers, defied the rugged walls of Bubb
and continued to meet in secret.

Compared with these two youths, Castor and Pollux, Damon and Pythias,
Eloisa and Abelard are but tame examples of duality or constancy and
friendship. All the poets from Hyginus to Schiller might sing of noble
deeds and desperate dangers held as naught for friendship's sake, but
they would have been mute had they but known of the mutual affection
of Harry and Tommy. Day by day, and often night by night, would these
two brave the perils of nurse, and father, and mother, of whip and
imprisonment, and hunger and thirst, and solitude and darkness to meet
together. What they discussed in secret none other knew. What deeds of
darkness were perpetrated in their symposia none could tell. Alone
they met, alone they remained, and alone they departed to their
several abodes. There was in the garden of Bubb a summer-house
overgrown with trailing plants, and surrounded by young poplars which
the fond father had planted on his children's natal day, and whose
rapid growth he had proudly watched. These trees quite obscured the
summer-house, and here Harry and Tommy, knowing after a careful
observation that none ever entered the place, held their conclaves.
Time after time they met in full security and followed their customary
pursuit of pleasure. Let us raise the mysterious veil and see what was
the great Unknown at whose shrine they bent the knee..Harry and Tommy
had each been given as a Christmas box a new knife; and for a long
time---nearly a year--these knives, similar in size and pattern, were
their chief delights. With them they cut and hacked in their
respective homes all things which would not be likely to be noticed;
for the young gentlemen were wary and had no wish that their moments
of pleasure should be atoned for by moments of pain. The insides of
drawers, and desks, and boxes, the underparts of tables and chairs,
the backs of pictures frames, even the floors, where corners of the
carpets could surreptitiously be turned up, all bore marks of their
craftsmanship; and to compare notes on these artistic triumphs was a
source of joy. At length, however, a critical time came, some new
field of action should be opened up, for the old appetites were sated,
and the old joys had begun to pall. It was absolutely necessary that
the existing schemes of destruction should be enlarged; and yet this
could hardly be done without a terrible risk of discovery, for the
limits of safety had long since been reached and passed. But, be the
risk great or small, some new ground should be broken--some new joy
found, for the old earth was barren, and the craving for pleasure was
growing fiercer with each successive day.

The crisis had come: who could tell the issue?



4. The Tucket Sounds

They met in the arbour, determined to discuss this grave question. The
heart of each was big with revolution, the head of each was full of
scheme and strategy, and the pocket of each was full of sweet-stuff,
the sweeter for being stolen. After having dispatched the sweets, the
conspirators proceeded to explain their respective views with regard
to the enlargement of their artistic operations. Tommy unfolded with
much pride a scheme which he had in contemplation of cutting a series
of holes in the sounding board of the piano, so as to destroy its
musical properties. Harry was in no wise behindhand in his ideas of
reform. He had conceived the project of cutting the canvas at the back
of his great-grandfather's portrait, which his father held in high
regard among his lares and penates, so that in time when the picture
should be moved the skin of paint would be broken, the head fall
bodily out from the frame.

At this point of the council a brilliant thought occurred to Tommy.
'Why should not the enjoyment be doubled, and the musical instruments
and family pictures of both establishments be sacrificed on the altar
of pleasure?' This was agreed to nem. con.; and then the meeting
adjourned for dinner. When they next met it was evident that there was
a screw loose somewhere--that there was 'something rotten in the state
of Denmark'. After a little fencing on both sides, it came out that
all the schemes of domestic reform had been foiled by maternal
vigilance, and that so sharp had been the reprimand consequent on a
partial discovery of the schemes that they would have to be
abandoned--till such time, at least, as increased physical strength
would allow the reformers to laugh to scorn parental threats and
injunctions.

Sadly the two forlorn youths took out their knives and regarded them;
sadly, sadly they thought, as erst did Othello, of all the fair
chances of honour and triumph and glory gone for ever. They compared
knives with almost the fondness of doting parents. There they were--so
equal in size and strength and beauty--dimmed by no corrosive rust,
tarnished by no stain, and with unbroken edges of the keenness of
Saladin's sword.

So like were the knives that but for the initials scratched in the
handles neither boy could have been sure which was his own. After a
little while they began mutually to brag of the superior excellence of
their respective weapons. Tommy insisted that his was the sharper,
Harry asserted that his was the stronger of the two. Hotter and hotter
grew the war of words. The tempers of Harry and Tommy got inflamed,
and their boyish bosoms glowed with manly thoughts of daring and hate.
But there was abroad in that hour a spirit of a bygone age--one that
penetrated even to that dim arbour in the grove of Bubb. The world-old
scheme of ordeal was whispered by the spirit in the ear of each, and
suddenly the tumult was allayed. With one impulse the boys suggested
that they should test the quality of their knives by the ordeal of the
Hack.

No sooner said than done. Harry held out his knife edge uppermost; and
Tommy, grasping his firmly by the handle, brought down the edge of the
blade crosswise on Harry's. The process was then reversed, and Harry
became in turn the aggressor. Then they paused and eagerly looked for
the result. It was not hard to see; in each knife were two great dents
of equal depth; and so it was necessary to renew the contest, and seek
a further proof.

What needs it to relate seriatim the details of that direful strife?
The sun had long since gone down, and the moon with fair, smiling face
had long risen over the roof of Bubb, when, wearied and jaded, Harry
and Tommy sought their respective homes. Alas! the splendour of the
knives was gone for ever. Ichabod!--Ichabod! the glory had departed
and naught remained but two useless wrecks, with keen edges destroyed,
and now like unto nothing save the serried hills of Spain.

But though they mourned for their fondly cherished weapons, the hearts
of the boys were glad; for the bygone day had opened to their gaze a
prospect of pleasure as boundless as the limits of the world.



5. The First Crusade

From that day a new era dawned in the lives of Harry and Tommy. So
long as the resources of the parental establishments could hold out so
long would their new amusement continue. Subtly they obtained
surreptitious possession of articles of family cutlery not in general
use, and brought them one by one to their rendezvous. These came fair
and spotless from the sanctity of the butler's pantry. Alas! they
returned not as they came.

But in course of time the stock of available cutlery became exhausted,
and again the inventive faculties of the youths were called into
requisition. They reasoned thus: 'The knife game, it is true, is
played out, but the excitement of the hack is not to be dispensed
with. Let us carry, then, this great idea into new worlds; let us
still live in the sunshine of pleasure; let us continue to hack, but
with objects other than knives.'

It was done. Not knives now engaged the attention of the ambitious
youths. Spoons and forks were daily flattened and beaten out of shape;
pepper castor met pepper castor in combat, and both were borne dying
from the field; candlesticks met in fray to part no more on this side
of the grave; even epergnes were used as weapons in the crusade of
hack.

At last all the resources of the butler's pantry became exhausted, and
then began a system of miscellaneous destruction that proved in a
little time ruinous to the furniture of the respective homes of Harry
and Tommy. Mrs Santon and Mrs Merford began to notice that the wear
and tear in their households became excessive. Day after day some new
domestic calamity seemed to have occurred. Today a valuable edition of
some book whose luxurious binding made it an object for public display
would appear to have suffered some dire misfortune, for the edges were
frayed and broken and the back loose if not altogether displaced;
tomorrow the same awful fate would seem to have followed some
miniature frame; the day following the legs of some chair or spider-
table would show signs of extraordinary hardship. Even in the nursery
the sounds of lamentation were heard..It was a thing of daily
occurrence for the little girls to state that when going to bed at
night they had laid their dear dollies in their beds with tender care,
but that when again seeking them in the period of recess they had
found them with all their beauty gone, with legs and arms amputated
and faces beaten from all semblance of human form.

Then articles of crockery began to be missed. The thief could in no
case be discovered, and the wages of the servants, from constant
stoppages, began to be nominal rather than real. Mrs Merford and Mrs
Santon mourned their losses, but Harry and Tommy gloated day after day
over their spoils, which lay in an ever-increasing heap in the hidden
grove of Bubb. To such an extent had the fondness of the hack now
grown that with both youths it was an infatuation--a madness--a
frenzy.

At length one awful day arrived. The butlers of the houses of Merford
and Santon, harassed by constant losses and complaints, and finding
that their breakage account was in excess of their wages, determined
to seek some sphere of occupation where, if they did not meet with a
suitable reward or recognition of their services, they would, at
least, not lose whatever fortune and reputation they had already
acquired. Accordingly, before rendering up their keys and the goods
entrusted to their charge, they proceeded to take a preliminary stock
of their own accounts, to make sure of their accredited accuracy. Dire
indeed was their distress when they knew to the full the havoc which
had been wrought; terrible their anguish of the present, bitter their
thoughts of the future. Their hearts, bowed down with weight of woe,
failed them quite; reeled the strong brains that had erst overcome
foes of deadlier spirit than grief; and fell their stalwart forms
prone on the floors of their respective sancta sanctorum.

Late in the day when their services were required they were sought for
in bower and hail, and at length discovered where they lay.

But alas for justice! They were accused of being drunk and for having,
whilst in that degraded condition, deliberately injured all the
property on which they could lay hands. Were not the evidences of
their guilt patent to all in the hecatombs of the destroyed? Then they
were charged with all the evils wrought in the houses, and on their
indignant denial Harry and Tommy, each in his own home, according to
their concerted scheme of action, stepped forward and relieved their
minds of the deadly weight that had for long in secret borne them
down. The story of each ran that time after time he had seen the
butler, when he thought that nobody was looking, knocking knives
together in the pantry, chairs and books and pictures in the drawing-
room and study, dolls in the nursery, and plates in the kitchen. Then,
indeed, was the master of each household stern and uncompromising in
his demands for justice. Each butler was committed to the charge of
myrmidons of the law under the double charge of drunkenness and wilful
destruction of property.

Softly and sweetly slept Harry and Tommy in their little beds that
night. Angels seemed to whisper to them, for they smiled as though
lost in pleasant dreams. The rewards given by proud and grateful
parents lay in their pockets, and in their hearts the happy
consciousness of having done their duty.

Truly sweet should be the slumbers of the just...



6. 'Let The Dead Past Bury Its Dead'

It might be supposed that now the operations of Harry and Tommy would
be obliged to be abandoned. Not so, however. The minds of these youths
were of no common order, nor were their souls of such weak nature as
to yield at the first summons of necessity. Like Nelson, they knew not
fear; like Napoleon, they held 'impossible' to be the adjective of
fools; and they revelled in the glorious truth that in the lexicon of
youth is no such word as 'fail'. Therefore on the day following the
éclaircissement of the butlers' misdeeds, they met in the arbour to
plan a new campaign. In the hour when all seemed blackest to them, and
when the narrowing walls of possibility hedged them in on every side,
thus ran the deliberations of these dauntless youths:

'We have played out the meaner things that are inanimate and inert;
why not then trench on the domains of life? The dead have lapsed into
the regions of the forgotten past--let the living look to themselves.'

That night they met when all households had retired to balmy sleep,
and naught but the amorous wailings of nocturnal cats told of the
existence of life and sentience. Each bore into the arbour in his arms
a pet rabbit and a piece of sticking-plaster. Then, in the peaceful,
quiet moonlight, commenced a work of mystery, blood, and gloom. The
proceedings began by the fixing of a piece of sticking-plaster over
the mouth of each rabbit to prevent it making a noise, if so inclined.
Then Tommy held up his rabbit by its scutty tail, and it hung
wriggling, a white mass in the moonlight. Slowly Harry raised his
rabbit holding it in the same manner, and when level with his head
brought it down on Tommy's client.

But the chances had been miscalculated. The boys held firmly to the
tails, but the chief portions of the rabbits fell to earth. Ere the
doomed beasts could escape, however, the operators had pounced upon
them, and this time holding them by the hind legs renewed the trial.

Deep into the night the game was kept up, and the eastern sky began to
show signs of approaching day as each boy bore triumphantly the dead
corse of his favourite bunny and placed it within its sometime hutch.

Next night the same game was renewed with a new rabbit on each side,
and for more than a week--so long as the hutches supplied the
wherewithal--the battle was sustained. True that there were sad hearts
and red eyes in the juveniles of Santon and Merford as one by one the
beloved pets were found dead, but Harry and Tommy, with the hearts of
heroes steeled to suffering and deaf to the pitiful cries of
childhood, still fought the good fight on to the bitter end.

When the supply of rabbits was exhausted, other munition was not
wanting, and for some days the war was continued with white mice,
dormice, hedgehogs, guinea pigs, pigeons, lambs, canaries, parakeets,
linnets, squirrels, parrots, marmots, poodles, ravens, tortoises,
terriers, and cats. Of these, as might be expected, the most difficult
to manipulate were the terriers and the cats, and of these two classes
the proportion of the difficulties in the way of terrier-hacking was,
when compared with those of cat-hacking, about that which the simple
lac of the British pharmacopoeia bears to water in the compound which
dairymen palm off upon a too-confiding public as milk. More than once
when engaged in the rapturous delights of cat-hacking had Harry and
Tommy wished that the silent tomb could open its ponderous and massy
jaws and engulf them, for the feline victims were not patient in their
death agonies, and often broke the bonds in which the security of the
artists rested, and turned fiercely on their executioners.

At last, however, all the animals available were sacrificed; but the
passion for hacking still remained. How was it all to end?



7. A Cloud With Golden Lining

Tommy and Harry sat in the arbour dejected and disconsolate. They wept
like two Alexanders because there were no more worlds to conquer. At
last the conviction had been forced upon them that the resources
available for hacking were exhausted. That very morning they had had a
desperate battle, and their attire showed the ravages of direful war.
Their hats were battered into shapeless masses, their shoes were
soleless and heel-less and had the uppers broken, the ends of their
braces, their sleeves, and their trousers were frayed, and had they
indulged in the manly luxury of coat-tails these too would have gone.

Truly, hacking had become an absorbing passion with them. Long and
fiercely had they been swept onwards on the wings of the demon of
strife, and powerless at the best of times had been the promptings of
good; but now, heated with combat, maddened by the equal success of
arms, and with the lust for victory still unsated, they longed more
fiercely than ever for some new pleasure: like tigers that have tasted
blood they thirsted for a larger and more potent libation.

As they sat, with their souls in a tumult of desire and despair, some
evil genius guided into the garden the twin blossoms of the tree of
Bubb. Hand in hand Zacariah and Zerubbabel advanced from the back
door; they had escaped from their nurses, and with the exploring
instinct of humanity, advanced boldly into the great world--the terra
incognita, the ultima Thule of the paternal domain.

In the course of time they approached the hedge of poplars, from
behind which the anxious eyes of Harry and Tommy looked for their
approach, for the boys knew that where the twins were the nurses were
accustomed to be gathered together, and they feared discovery if their
retreat should be cut off.

It was a touching sight, these lovely babes, alike in form, feature,
size, expression, and dress; in fact, so like each other that one
'might not have told either from which'. When the startling similarity
was recognized by Harry and Tommy, each suddenly turned, and, grasping
the other by the shoulder, spoke in a keen whisper: 'Hack! They are
exactly equal! This is the very apotheosis of our art!'

With excited faces and trembling hands they laid their plans to lure
the unsuspecting babes within the precincts of their charnel house,
and they were so successful in their efforts that in a little time the
twins had toddled behind the hedge and were lost to the sight of the
parental mansion.

Harry and Tommy were not famed for gentleness within the immediate
precincts of their respective homes, but it would have delighted the
heart of any philanthropist to see the kindly manner in which they
arranged for the pleasures of the helpless babes. With smiling faces
and playful words and gentle wiles they led them within the arbour,
and then, under pretence of giving them some of those sudden jumps in
which infants rejoice, they raised them from the ground. Tommy held
Zacariah across his arm with his baby moon-face smiling up at the
cobwebs on the arbour roof, and Harry, with a mighty effort, raised
the cherubic Zerubbabel aloft.

Each nerved himself for a great endeavour, Harry to give, Tommy to
endure a shock, and then the form of Zerubbabel was seen whirling
through the air round Harry's glowing and determined face. There was a
sickening crash and the arm of Tommy yielded visibly.

The pasty face of Zerubbabel had fallen fair on that of Zacariah, for
Tommy and Harry were by this time artists of too great experience to
miss so simple a mark. The putty-like noses collapsed, the putty-like
cheeks became for a moment flattened, and when in an instant more they
parted, the faces of both were dabbled in gore. Immediately the
firmament was rent with a series of such yells as might have awakened
the dead. Forthwith from the house of Bubb came the echoes in parental
cries and footsteps. As the sounds of scurrying feet rang through the
mansion, Harry cried to Tommy: 'They will be on us soon. Let us cut to
the roof of the stable and draw up the ladder.'

Tommy answered by a nod, and the two boys, regardless of consequences,
and bearing each a twin, ascended to the roof of the stable by means
of a ladder which usually stood against the wall, and which they
pulled up after them.

As Ephraim Bubb issued from his house in pursuit of his lost darlings,
the sight which met his gaze froze his very soul. There, on the coping
of the stable roof, stood Harry and Tommy renewing their game. They
seemed like two young demons forging some diabolical implement, for
each in turn the twins were lifted high in air and let fall with
stunning force on the supine form of its fellow. How Ephraim felt none
but a tender and imaginative father can conceive. It would be enough
to wring the heart of even a callous parent to see his children, the
darlings of his old age--his own beloved twins--being sacrificed to
the brutal pleasure of unregenerate youths, without being made
unconsciously and helplessly guilty of the crime of fratricide.

Loudly did Ephraim and also Sophonisba, who, with dishevelled locks,
had now appeared upon the scene, bewail their unhappy lot and shriek
in vain for aid; but by rare ill-chance no eyes save their own saw the
work of butchery or heard the shrieks of anguish and despair. Wildly
did Ephraim, mounting on the shoulders of his spouse, strive, but in
vain, to scale the stable wall.

Baffled in every effort, he rushed into the house and appeared in a
moment bearing in his hands a double-barrelled gun, into which he
poured the contents of a shot pouch as he ran. He came anigh the
stable and hailed the murderous youths: 'Drop them twins and come down
here or I'll shoot you like a brace of dogs.'

'Never!' exclaimed the heroic two with one impulse, and continued
their awful pastime with a zest tenfold as they knew that the agonized
eyes of parents wept at the cause of their joy.

'Then die!' shrieked Ephraim, as he fired both barrels, right--left,
at the hackers.

But, alas! love for his darlings shook the hand that never shook
before. As the smoke cleared off and Ephraim recovered from the kick
of his gun, he heard a loud twofold laugh of triumph and saw Harry and
Tommy, all unhurt, waving in the air the trunks of the twins-the fond
father had blown the heads completely off his own offspring.

Tommy and Harry shrieked aloud in glee, and after playing catch with
the bodies for some time, seen only by the agonized eyes of the
infanticide and his wife, flung them high in the air.

Ephraim leaped forward to catch what had once been Zacariah, and
Sophonisba grabbed wildly for the loved remains of her Zerubbabel.

But the weight of the bodies and the height from which they fell were
not reckoned by either parent, and from being ignorant of a simple
dynamical formula each tried to effect an object which calm, common
sense, united with scientific knowledge, would have told them was
impossible. The masses fell, and Ephraim and Sophonisba were stricken
dead by the falling twins, who were thus posthumously guilty of the
crime of parricide.

An intelligent coroner's jury found the parents guilty of the crimes
of infanticide and suicide, on the evidence of Harry and Tommy, who
swore, reluctantly, that the inhuman monsters, maddened by drink, had
killed their offspring by shooting them into the air out of a
cannon---since stolen--whence like curses they had fallen on their own
heads; and that then they had slain themselves suis manibus with their
own hands..Accordingly Ephraim and Sophonisba were denied the solace
of Christian burial, and were committed to the earth with 'maimed
rites', and had stakes driven through their middles to pin them down
in their unhallowed graves till the crack of doom.

Harry and Tommy were each rewarded with national honours and were
knighted, even at their tender years.

Fortune seemed to smile upon them all the long after-years, and they
lived to a ripe old age, hale of body, and respected and beloved of
all.

Often in the golden summer eves, when all nature seemed at rest, when
the oldest cask was opened and the largest lamp was lit, when the
chestnuts glowed in the embers and the kid turned on the spit, when
their great-grandchildren pretended to mend fictional armour and to
trim an imaginary helmet's plume, when the shuttles of the good wives
of their grandchildren went flashing each through its proper loom,
with shouting and with laughter they were accustomed to tell the tale
of THE DUALITISTS; OR, THE DEATH DOOM OF THE DOUBLE BORN.



THE END



Project Gutenberg Australia


