
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: The Gland Men of the Island
Author: Malcolm Afford
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0603581.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: July 2006
Date most recently updated: November 2015

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au




The Gland Men of the Island
Malcolm Afford

First published in Wonder Stories, Vol. 2, No. 8 January 1931

*

CHAPTER I


To many who read my account of our amazing adventure on the island of
the Gland Men, it will serve as just another illustration of how
devious is the path of science. It will illustrate also how, from the
darkness that girds it round, terrible possibilities loom black and
menacing, terrifying those daring enough to wander from the beaten
track.

Another, and I fear greater, section of my readers may harbour no such
sentiments, labelling the whole as a tissue of preposterous lies, but
to those who condemn me, I say this. Take the facts--meagre, garbled--
as they appeared in the newspapers and attempt to account for them in
any other way. There is only one answer. It is impossible.

The intimate details were far too terrifying and astounding to permit
of the facts being published verbatim, and it was mainly due to the
newspaper's reticence that something bordering on a world-wide panic
was averted.

Doctor Bruce Clovelly, DD., F. R. C. S., will, of course, need no
introduction, for his recent surgical triumphs in glanding have made
his name almost a by-word, and it is with Guy Follansbee that we must
concern ourselves. Follansbee, as I knew him in my days as laboratory
assistant to the doctor--one of those singularly fortunate individuals
who know exactly what they want and how to get it without offending a
single soul--inclined to be cynical, yet straight as the proverbial
string. He had inherited from his father an insatiable desire for
adventure and an income that ran into I forget how many figures. Being
a man of somewhat simple philosophy, he used the latter to appease the
former.

It had taken our combined arguments, practised often and over long
periods, to make the doctor even consider such a thing as recreation
and I had experienced the hardest task of my life in getting him from
his chambers in Gower Street, to which he clung like Diogenes to his
wooden cavern. Even after his actual transplanting on to his opulent
friend's yacht, the Silver Lady, he took his enforced holiday like a
small boy takes his medicine, but as the illimitable miles of
sparkling water grew between our vessel and his stuffy chambers, he
turned about to enjoy himself.

We were midway between the Solomons and Santa Cruz Islands when the
queer affair began. The morning had been oppressively calm and
Follansbee, the doctor and myself had taken the electric launch to
examine the rock fauna that flourished so prolifically hereabouts. It
was characteristic of the doctor that he could, when required, produce
inexhaustible stores of unexpected knowledge on the most out-of-the-
way subjects; and though I had never before heard him mention marine
growths, here he was expounding in his most didactic manner to his
slightly amused companion.

Having little taste in such matters, I was reclining upon the
collapsible canvas chair, smoking a cigarette, and occasionally
dipping my hand into the water, in order to convince myself that it
would not emerge dyed blue. Whether, rocked by the gentle motion of
the boat, I fell into a semi-doze or whether the change swept down so
quickly that its coming was unnoticed, I cannot say. But I remember
that I suddenly jumped to my feet and called my companions' attention
to the unpleasant condition of the weather.

In the east, the sun, flattened to a disc of unhealthy brown, was
gradually giving way to a dense bank of cloud that rushed down with
the rapidity of a drop curtain. The water had lost its turquoise hue
and undulated in a long oily swell that was strangely suggestive of
hidden power underneath. Everywhere a heavy, pall-like silence hung
over the face of Nature, fraught with an indescribable sensation of
impending danger. Now and again there sounded, very faint and far-off,
a curious humming sob, as of some gigantic beast in an agony of
torture.

"Without the slightest intention of being a first-class Jonah," it was
Follansbee's first remark as he boarded the launch. "I should say that
we were in for something extra in the way of dirty weather."

Doctor Clovelly shrugged his shoulders. "I should have expected
something like this to happen," he said irritably. "We should have
never left the yacht. What are our chances worth if it catches us in
the open sea?"

The explorer snapped finger and thumb. "Just that," he said grimly.
"The only thing possible is to cut for the nearest island. With the
weather like this the storm may be on us in five minutes, but on the
other hand it may hang off for hours." He swung the wheel as he spoke
and the launch cut through the swell with a curious sucking motion. "But
the Lord help us," it was Follansbee speaking again, "if it brings
typhoon in its wake."



I LEANED over the side and glanced at the approaching island. Through
the haze, I discerned the woods that flanked the shining stretch of
silver sand, unsullied by mark or impression, the thick vegetation
that grew, tangled and luxurious, down to the water's edge. Here was a
tumble-down native hut, raising its battered head above the mass of
tropic greenery, there a sturdy giant palm, the trunk hidden from view
by the enveloping folds of some flaming parasite. As we neared the
beach, I saw that the land sloped sharply into rolling hillocks, cut
and serried by deep gullies whose black, forbidding extremities were
lost beneath the shadow of the higher mountains.

I turned to our host. "Does it possess a name?" I queried.

He shook his head. "Probably one of the numerous islands that stud the
Polynesia like stars in the Milky Way. They are here today and gone
tomorrow, thrust up by some volcanic eruption, sucked under the sea by
a tidal wave or some similar undersea disturbance."

"I sincerely hope that it remains stable during our occupation," I
remarked. Then the launch grounded on the shore and I jumped out to
aid Follansbee to beach it high and dry. This done, we took our first
close look at the island, our enforced landing place.

As we stood on the clean fringe of sand, the hush of the elements was
even more apparent. Not a leaf moved in the thick humid heat, not a
bird flew or animal moved. It seemed as though all Nature was waiting
breathlessly for the opening of the cataclysm. But for the low rumble
of the breakers, we might have trod another planet, some long-dead
world; and the thick sand, deadening our footsteps, gave us a peculiar
disembodied sensation that was unpleasant in the extreme. It was
Follansbee who broke the silence. "No good cooling our heels on this
beach," he said. "Under the circumstances, I think it would be worth
our while to do a little exploring. That track through the trees seems
to suggest unlimited possibilities." He broke off and pointed to where
a worn track wound its way through the undergrowth.

"At least," remarked the doctor, as we made our way toward it, "we
cannot claim to be true Crusoes. Someone has used this path pretty
frequently--and not so long ago, if we are to judge by its
appearance."

"Animals--?" I suggested.

"Much too narrow," interjected Follansbee. "Then again, the beasts
have no object in coming here; there is no water to drink, nothing to
eat and from my experience of animals, they generally shun the
seabeach." He glanced at the dry rotted grass. "No, my sonny, that
track was made by one thing only--a number of men walking in single
file."

I looked blankly at the waste of matted undergrowth and stunted trees,
"But where on earth did they go?" I asked.

"That," was the reply, "is what we are going to find out."

In single file we followed the circuitous path for over a mile,
Follansbee leading, his grey eyes gleaming, the doctor next and I
bringing up the rear. Through virgin greenery that walled us on either
side, so thick that one seemed to be treading some matted corridor we
went on; beneath wild and tangled growth through which the sickly
light scarcely penetrated, over young lush leafage that overlay and
half disguised the dank rottenness of the older vegetation, through
which loathsome creeping things scuttled as we approached, things
hideous and detestable to look upon.

The last portion of our journey was terrible. Here a fair-sized stream
had become bogged by matted reeds and the spread of water was rapidly
turning the surrounding country into a poisonous swamp. Clouds of
insects hung over the black evil-smelling pools, some huge as wasps,
with bodies of every conceivable hue and blend, some whose sting was
death, others bred in the fever areas, carrying with them their dread
legacy. The sibilant hum was discernable quite a distance away, and it
sounded eerily out of place in that region of silence and decay.

Suddenly, with the abruptness that was almost startling, the forest
ended and we saw ahead of us a flat plain. We were just about to step
out on to the wide clearing, when Follansbee, who was leading, uttered
a cry of amazement, stiffened and stood stock still. He was staring at
some scene below him on the plain, and as we approached, he turned and
finger on lip, pointed. Stepping quietly, we drew alongside him and I
choked down the gasp that rose in my throat.

We were looking on a wide barren area of land, in the centre of which
was a cluster of iron buildings. That they were tenanted was obvious
by the thin trail of smoke that curled its way from the chimneys. One
edifice, slightly isolated from the rest, was surrounded by a high
wooden stockade, pierced at intervals by loopholes.



The Creatures of the Island



AS we watched, thunderstruck by our discovery, from one side of the
stockade came a troupe of figures. There seemed no doubt that they
were men, but such men as I have never before set eyes upon. They were
of enormous stature, most of them being over eight feet in height.
They moved with a peculiar lumbering gait, that was vaguely suggestive
of something that I could not place. Their arms, swinging at their
sides seemed absurdly out of proportion to their bodies, and the great
hands clasped tightly upon an object that, at the distance looked like
an axe.

Each wore a kind of khaki shirt and breeches, with leather leggings
that reached from instep to knee. A sun helmet took the place of a hat
and as one turned away from us, I noticed a peculiar irregular blotch
upon the back of the shirt. At first, I took this to be some personal
damage, but a further glance showed me that each wore a similar
adornment. At the distance, however, it was impossible to distinguish
the outline. "By Gad," exclaimed Follansbee, as he unslung his
glasses. "We seem to have stumbled on a modern Brobdingnag. Thank
Heaven for that storm."

The doctor was already examining the monsters, so after a scrutiny,
the explorer passed his glasses to me. I adjusted the powerful lens to
my sight, and the approaching creatures leapt into my field of vision.

If, at a distance, these creatures looked unprepossessing, they seemed
doubly so at close quarters. The lens picked out every detail with
horrifying clearness, the broad, hunched shoulders, the long muscular
arms, covered with coarse black hair, the slouching movement, caused,
I now perceived, by the ridiculously short bandy legs. As one stopped
to converse with his neighbour, he turned and the ragged blotch on his
shirt took definite shape. I started again, thinking that my eyes were
playing me tricks. The shape was that of a five-clawed dragon, reared
in the act of striking. It was either stamped or sewn on in black
cloth.

But it was the features that drew the eye and held it in sheer horror,
so hideously repulsive were they. The tiny head, with its wide
slobbering mouth, the wicked red eyes and the flat coarse nostrils
inspired one with a thrill of disgust and loathing. The low receding
forehead and the forward position of the ears showed that, were they
humans, they were of a very low scale of civilization.

"My God!" I heard Clovelly gasp. "Are they man or beast?"

I opened my mouth to answer, when from behind there came a rustle of
disturbed undergrowth. I swung around, but there was nothing to
account for the sound, when, acting on some unknown impulse, I glanced
up into the tangle of branches above. A cry of horror burst from my
lips, for there above us, silent and motionless as the surrounding
forest, crouched four of those hideous creatures that we had been
watching. How long they had sat there, their blood-shot eyes
contemplating our movements, will never be known, for as I sighted
them, they became galvanized into life. With guttural screams they
sprang upon us, and I was just about to run for my life, when one
gathered me beneath his arm like a bundle of hay, and, with a curious
wabbling stride, made for the walled-in building.




CHAPTER II

A Place of Terror


IN an incredibly short space of time, we had reached the high
partition. Here the creatures paused and shouting something in the
guttural tongue, pointed to the gate, then to his companions in the
rear. In my awkward position, I was unable to glimpse the one to whom
he spoke, but it was obviously the guardian of the portal, for even as
I screwed my neck to breaking point, the obstacle swung back, and we
passed through.

I judged, by the stamp of the feet behind, that my colleagues were
likewise captives, and by the sounds of struggle, that they were not
submitting so tamely as I. Perhaps I was unfortunate in possessing a
particularly irascible gaoler, for my puny efforts at escape had
resulted in nothing more than a cuff across the face that nearly took
my head off. Maybe it was just a gentle reminder that he would stand
for no nonsense, but it served to quiet me beyond further resistance.

We traversed a slight dip and breasting the slope, came to the main
residence. It was much more pretentious than the outbuildings, with
neatly laid paths and flowerbeds, though the blooms could not be
called healthy. Across the roof were looped slender wires, standing
clear against the coppery sky, terminating in twin aerial poles. It
strengthened my conviction that we had reached the headquarters of
this amazing island.

Four wooden steps led us into a wide hallway, carpeted with rush
mats, that strewed the floor at regular intervals. A number of doors,
dimly discernible in the uncertain light, opened off this passage,
whose extremity was lost in the prevailing gloom.

It was here that my guard at last set me down and turning, signed to
his companions to do likewise. I smoothed my rumpled apparel into
something approaching order and turning, beheld Follansbee, as
imperturbable as ever, in the act of lighting a cigarette. Clovelly,
seemed still stunned with amazement and he looked at me with eyes that
hinted a thousand questions.

Before he had time to utter a word, one of the creatures wheeled
around and disappeared into one of the rooms. As he opened the door, I
became aware of a peculiar odor--sweet, sickly--that emanated from
behind it. For just a second it eluded me, then as it grew stronger, I
recognized it immediately--chloroform.

I glanced at Clovelly, and smiled wryly. He was sniffing the air like
a thoroughbred, his professional instincts aroused. I noticed the
slender white fingers quiver like the antennae of some giant insect,
itching for the scalpel or the forceps.

Seeing my interest, he opened his mouth to speak, but what he meant to
say will never be known. Suddenly, tearing jaggedly across the
stillness, there came a horrifying shriek of some poor soul in mortal
agony. Higher and higher it rose, in shrill cadence, then at the
highest note it ceased abruptly, to die away in a gurgling mumble,
then silence--thick--enveloping--sinister--

I am not easily frightened, but an icy horror gripped my heart.
Clovelly was white to the lips and even Follansbee was shaken out of
his customary equanimity. Our huge guardians seemed absolutely unmoved
by the horrid experience, not an emotion was discernable upon their
animal countenances, they were as devoid of expression as a rubber
doll.

At that moment the door re-opened and our guide appeared. Taking
advantage of the diversion, I crossed to the half-open door and
essayed to peep inside. I was almost there when one of the creatures
sprang forward and with an angry grunt, grasped my arm and with such
force that I cried out. Our huge guide turned quickly and looking
questioningly at his subordinate (as I took the other to be) fired a
volley of unintelligible jargon at him. Suddenly the creature released
me as though I had become red-hot and a look of something akin to
deference crossed the bestial face. But I hardly noticed this, for my
head was buzzing with a new discovery. The opening and shutting of the
door had afforded me a momentary glimpse beyond--a fleeting vision of
a modern operating theatre, the tables, instruments and assistants
showing spotlessly clean in the bright artificial light.

One of the creatures crossed to a portion of the wall opposite the
door and pressing on it, moved his hands in a curious circular manner.

The reason for this was plainly obvious the next moment, for there
came the sound of a metallic click and a section of the wall swung
back to reveal a door, set flush in the woodwork. With more haste than
ceremony, we were thrust through this door, it clicked behind us--and
for the first time since our capture, we were left alone.



BUT we had no desire to converse. We were struck silent by the
extraordinary appearance of the singular apartment in which we found
ourselves. I can close my eyes now, and recall every feature of that
bizarre apartment as though it were yesterday, so indelibly are the
details engraved on my mind.

It was circular in shape and lined with books from floor to ceiling,
the reds and golds of the bindings reflecting the light from the
mosaic-shaded lamp that hung in the center of the room. Beneath this
was a huge bowl of roses, the colours shading from one extreme to the
other. Some there were so dark as to appear almost black, to vivid
scarlet and flaming yellow, to others so delicately tinted as to truly
rival the shy blush of the maiden. They filled the room with a heavy,
exotic perfume and as I gazed, one of the flowers, fullblown in that
superheated atmosphere, burst slowly and the creamy petals drifted
slowly--one by one--lightly as thistledown--onto the rich red carpet
on the floor.

Behind this great bouquet was a square block of perfectly grained
black marble, flanked on either side by fantastically wrought incense
burners. Poised on the marble base was a five-clawed dragon, in the
act of striking, carved from solid ivory with the meticulous care that
characterizes the oriental artist. So cleverly was it wrought that the
object seemed to possess a personality that was both fascinating, yet
repellent. It was wickedly beautiful in its own way, and it recalled
to me similar emotions when I had first handled a Renaissance
stiletto.

Directly opposite the carving, the books ended abruptly, to recommence
at an interval of about three feet wide. Across the aperture was hung
a heavy plush curtain, crimson with golden edging, and worked with
poppies and roses. It fell in heavy folds that hung motionless in the
still air, exuding an influence of the obscene and the unmentionable.

I turned and something caused me to rub my eyes. Of the door we had
entered, there was no sign. Save for the curtained aperture, the book-
lined walls continued in an unbroken line around the room. Hardly able
to believe the evidence of my own eyes, I walked up and ran my fingers
over them. My hand encountered bindings--red--gold---that winked
mockingly in the vari-coloured radiance.

The choice of books in themselves was remarkable. The titles covered a
wide range from the transcendental and metaphysical and all manner of
works on the processes and oddities of the human thought seemed to be
assembled there. They ranged from the days of black magic to psycho-
therapeutics of the modern analytical school.

There were volumes by Zaasman and Jung, together with other foreign
scientists on the morbid phenomena of the brain.

Interested in spite of myself, I took down one book in German, a
tongue with which I am fairly conversant, but after a hurried glance
returned it hastily to its position.

It was a study of Dementia Praecox and its plates of naked German
lunatics almost turned my stomach, quite unused as I was to the German
scientific treatment of the more repellent disorders of life.

At the end of the highest row were a number of volumes touching on the
influence of suggestion on the human mind. They ranged from the early
investigations of Bertrand and of James Braid to the more recent
studies of auto-suggestion by Coue and other modern French writers in
this line of thought.

"By Jove, Follansbee," the doctor's softly spoken remark brought me
round like a shot. "You wanted adventure, you craved something
different--well, you've got it, with a vengeance."


A Narrow Escape


THE big explorer shrugged his shoulders. "There are more things in
Heaven and Earth, my dear Horatio--," he quoted. "We seem to have
stumbled fairly into the latest six shilling sensationalism." He
glanced at the watch on his wrist, "By the Lord Harry, it's almost ten
o'clock. I could tackle the proverbial leg of an iron pot, I'm that
peckish. I sincerely hope someone puts in an appearance shortly," he
broke off and glanced round the room. "Who owns this musical comedy
apartment, anyway?"

The doctor paced the room, his hands locked behind his back. "Do you
know," he said, as he drew abreast of us, "I rather fancy that we are
on the eve of a momentous discovery. Taking the curious events in
their sequence, we have the finding of the Islands, the well-worn path
through the woods of an apparently uninhabited island and our
discovery of the giant creatures that eventually captured us. Add to
that the fact that there is installed here something in the form of an
operating theatre--so much is plain by the use of chloroform--and we
are left to arrive at only one conclusion."

"Why," I broke in, "behind that door from whence the ether fumes
emanated, is an operating theatre, up-to-date and modern in every
respect. Though I caught just a glimpse as the door opened, I
recognized the Newington naphtha flares, and they have yet to be
installed in the Prince's Hospital. Evidently, whoever uses the room
insists on every known appliance."

Clovelly nodded absently. "Exactly. It bears out my theory that before
we leave this island, we are going to learn that science, in the hands
of the unscrupulous, can do quite so much harm as it can do good." He
turned to me. "You, Huxley, with your medical knowledge, can you not
glimpse at what is taking place here?"

I shook my head and coloured slightly. "I can perceive nothing more
than is apparent to all of us. In some manner, the ruler or owner of
this island has possessed himself of some secret formula for the
making of supermen. This he does by some delicate operation, for the
elaborately equipped operating room and the modern Blood Filter are
both necessary in the course of the metamorphosis."

"And have you no idea of how this transformation is effected?"

"Not the slightest, but I know enough to be aware that he has a
tremendous power for good or ill. Just how he intends to use it is a
matter for conjecture."

The doctor turned to Follansbee, but that gentleman was gazing
intently at the curtained-off aperture. He closed his eyes tight and
shook his head. "Either I'm going clean blind batty or my eyes have
developed the shakes, but I'm certain that I saw that curtain move. I
was just standing here when--look, there now, do you see it?" he broke
off abruptly and pointed a finger at the gently moving cloth.

We stared as if fascinated at the slowly writhing folds, as it twisted
and coiled itself into thick pleats, to belly out like a sail in the
sea breeze and then resolve into tiny undulations that rippled across
the crimson surface. But the culmination came when from behind it
there arose a peculiar coughing grunt, followed by a gasp of someone
or something struggling for breath.

"What fresh deviltry is this?" muttered the explorer uneasily. He
raised his voice. "Anyone there?" he called.

There was no answer, but I for one was hardly surprised. It was not
enough for Follansbee, though. He squared his broad shoulders and
clenched his fists. "I say," he called again, "is anyone there behind
that curtain?"

But the silence of the weird circular chamber was unbroken. The
curtains were motionless now. Another rose bloom, a flower almost dead
black, fell to pieces. Almost mechanically, I counted the falling
petals--one--two--three.

The big watcher paused just one second, then with chin jutting
ominously, he strode toward the aperture. I could not but admire the
stark courage of the man, facing unarmed a danger, increased a
thousandfold because of its indefinable quality. Though my heart beat
suspiciously fast, I stepped up beside him and we were almost to the
curtain when an unlooked-for contingency occurred.

"I would advise you, gentlemen, to leave things that do not concern
you, untouched. The consequences of spying are sometimes painful in
the extreme."


THE voice was suave and modulated, but it possessed the quality of a
revolver shot, it could not have startled us more. We whirled as if
stung and gazed with wide eyes at the author.

He was standing a little in rear of Dr. Clovelly, and his manner of
entry was a matter for conjecture. Certainly none of us had heard him,
but as he was standing where I presumed the secret entrance to be
situated, I judged that he had achieved egress in like manner.

It needed only a second's scrutiny to place the man as an Oriental,
but he was clothed in a neat fitting grey suit and shod with smart,
square-toed patent shoes. His skin was smooth and butter-yellow and a
pair of large tortoise-shell glasses bridged his nose, the huge pebbles
making the eyes absurdly out of proportion with the rest of the
countenance. He wore his hair long and brushed back off a high
intellectual forehead. He spoke with just a slightest trace of accent,
a metallic enunciation of the consonant "r"--a trait which
characterises even the most educated of Chinamen.

"I trust, gentlemen, that you will excuse the somewhat rough handling.
Strangers are not welcome on the island of Ho Ming, especially white
strangers."

As the insolent voice ceased, a thin ironical smile curved the thin
lips, revealing two rows of yellow teeth. But there was no humour in
the narrow-lidded, purple-black eyes, for in their inky depths there
lurked the cruel passionless look of one who had gazed too long on
agony and suffering to feel the sorrow and pity of it all. They
reminded me of the loathsome orbs of a hooded cobra.

Follansbee was first to recover from his surprise. "If we are not
asking too much," he asked quietly, "may I enquire just where we are
and what relation you bear to all this." He waved his hand around the
bizarre apartment.

With all the slow dignity of his race, the Chinaman raised his hand.
"I will explain in my own time," he said blandly. "It is I who give
orders now and you will obey--" He smiled at the angry Follansbee--
"No! When steps will be taken to make you obey. We of Hankow have many
methods of curing obstinancy."

Dr. Clovelly started forward. "We are British subjects," he cried. "If
you harm us in any manner, the government will blow your island to
Glory and you will end your career with a rope around your neck."

The Chinaman bowed and spread his hands. "If it eases you to entertain
such delusions, Dr. Clovelly, by all means do so. But you have
evidently forgotten the necessity of communicating your unfortunate
position to your Government."

"How do you know my name?"

"I know many things, for I am the chosen ruler of the People of the
Ming Dragon. You have arrived at a most opportune moment--" the
Oriental broke off abruptly. "Gentleman, I have a proposition to put
before you."

He walked over to the black marble dais and seated himself thereon.
For a moment he sat thus, seeming deep in thought, then he raised his
eyes and glanced at each of us in turn.

"Now," he began, "I want you to hold no delusions as to your position
on this island. You are my Prisoners, for me to do with you as I whim.
But you are all men who have achieved some fame in your respective
professions and I have no desire to rob the world of your talents.
So--I offer this truce."

He turned in his seat and directed a long slender finger at the
doctor. "I know you, Clovelly, as one of the greatest of living
authorities on the gland-grafting treatment. Your studies with
Steinach in Vienna, when you unearthed the Cod Bone method proved to
me that you had the business of glanding and rejuvenation at your
fingertips. Mr. James Huxley, your assistant, needs no introduction to
me, nor does your friend, Mr. Follansbee.

"You have, no doubt, been rightfully bewildered over the strange
creatures that inhabit this place, hesitating to categorise them as
either man or beast. Let me set your mind at rest, and inform you that
they are neither and yet both. That is to say, they possess the
characteristics both animal and human, because they are of a scale of
civilization that is intermediate. They eat, walk, talk and work,
possess the strength of ten men, live to an almost prodigious age, and
lastly, possess a certain immunity from sickness and disease. They are
my Gland Men and are the latest triumph of modern science."

The monotonous tones ceased and the speaker, taking from his pocket an
inlaid case, extracted a cigarette. I blinked my eyes and breathed
hard, thoroughly convinced that I was mad or dreaming. The coloured
shade stained the floor with its dancing hues, the rose-scented air
seemed charged with the dominant personality of the owner. The scratch
of a match recalled me and I saw the smoke curl through the nostrils
of the Oriental, as he lay back and surveyed us with his narrow
oblique eyes lowered to mere slits.




CHAPTER III


A Gigantic Scheme

"Now, gentlemen, behind this is a story of patience and attention to
detail that can only be achieved by one in search of an ideal. Up on
the slopes of the White Headed Mountain, on the Western border of
Tibet, there stands a Lamasery known as the `Brothers of the Golden
Khan[.’] It is the holy of holies, this desolate edifice, for in its
sacred precincts there dwells the Most Illustrious Deity, the Grand
Lama Dalai. He is a beautiful youth, with skin as soft as a maiden and
limbs muscular and symmetrical. Though he has attained the
distinguished age of two hundred years, he has the appearance of an
unsullied youth, a fit spectacle for the thousands of devout Chinamen
who yearly visited the shrine, leaving it richer by gifts and money.

"Now, my father entered that Lamasery as a youth, not because of any
religious urgings, but because he regarded the permanent youth of
their Deity to be nothing more than a gigantic hoax to attract money
and notoriety to their shrine. He knew that the priests must possess
some miraculous secret of preserving eternal youth and he meant to
obtain that formula, cost what it may. That the task was no sinecure
was obvious, but he had the patience and perseverance that only one of
the East can inherit.

"For forty long years, my father lived with the priests, and he was
just on the point of achieving his life's desire, when he was betrayed
by a treacherous servant. He was caught and after a year of endless
torture eventually made his escape. He fled to Hankow, where I was
studying surgery and delivered into my hands the sacred tomes
containing the great secret formula. Further information I could not
receive, for amongst other things, the Lama priests had torn my
father's tongue from his mouth, thus making him dumb forever.

"Then followed a reign of terror for us. My father and I flew from
place to place, but nowhere could we escape the watchful eye of the
vengeful priests, who, by that time, had discovered the missing
volumes. At length, I evolved a plan by which we would be free from
further persecution. I personally sought an interview with the Great
Emperor Dragon, the great Shem Sing, and laid my plans before him. He
was delighted with the idea, and not only gave orders that I should be
protected, but also agreed to finance the scheme in view.

"One of the chapters in the book dealt extensively with that branch of
anatomy known as the Endocrine Glands. As you gentlemen are aware,
this is but a newly discovered phase of surgery, but to the Holy
Brothers, it had been old knowledge. There is nothing in this earth so
strange and fantastic as the history of those obscure bodily organs
that mean more than life to us.

"Amongst other things, the two most frequently mentioned were the
thyroid, that shield-like gland astride our Adam's apple and the
pituitary, hanging from the base of our brain by a hollow stem. The
pituitary controls our growth, but the thyroid controls everything
that makes our life worth while.

"Children with deficient thyroids--from atrophy, removal or injury--
become things horrible to look upon, glibbering idiotic dwarfs--heavy
featured and twisted in body. Cretins they are called, for they never
metamorphose into normal adults. Hence the importance of the obscure
organ.

"But the Brethren experimented on aquatic larvae. They caught a
tadpole and removed its thyroid. It never became a frog, but remained
a tadpole for the remainder of its existence. On the other hand, they
gorged a tadpole with thyroxin, and almost immediately it changed to a
frog. I say changed, gentlemen, not grew--because the tadpole did not
grow. The frog, fully developed, remained only as large as a tadpole.
Thyroxin feeding produces two results, it hastens metamorphosis, but
retards growth.

"With this information, my father and myself started out upon our
momentous scheme. We obtained the thyroid from an ape and transferred
it to that of a three-months-old baby. Almost immediately the child
began to exhibit simian characteristics--then the body began to alter
shape. But the child grew no larger than the day the gland was
transferred and it was to overcome this difficulty that we set
ourselves.

"Now the growth, or pituitary gland is not a vital organ, but a normal
gland is essential to normal life. An operation on the pituitary is
enormously difficult--for one thing, it is only as big as the tip of
the little finger and it is so near the centre of the head that it is
next to impossible to localize. But we finally overcame this
difficulty and all was ready for the final experiment."


[“]THIS was the scheme in mind. If a grafted thyroid could transform a
child to an ape, would it not be possible to transplant the glands of
an anthropoid to that of a growing human? An operation on the
pituitary would overcome the difference in growth and the finished
product would possess the strength and power of an anthropoid and the
intelligence and appearance of a human being.

"Such was the scheme that occurred to me. Luckily I was possessed of
twelve sisters, and each, in turn gave their lives for science. Still
we were unsuccessful, the creatures of our experiments being things
hideous and fearful to look upon, that were killed as soon as tested.
Then our faithful servants professed themselves willing to give their
lives. Three there were and by a strange freak of Fate, it was the
last attempt that was successful. We achieved a huge beast, such as
you see here today, and it was this creature that we took to the
Emperor as proof of our good faith. Then we outlined to him our
momentous scheme.

"What a great thing it would be for our decadent empire could we but
manufacture an army of these Gland Men. They would be immune from
hurts and outlive the strongest of soldiers. Again, they would seek
for nothing in return, fighting but to appease their brutal instincts.
With an army such as these, we could wipe the entire White Race from
the world and restore China to her rightful position as Mistress of
the World. The magnificence of the scheme fairly dazzled me, such
prodigious possibilities did it possess.

"Here you see the great scheme in embryo. Thanks to the magnificent
generosity of the Emperor, we have unlimited facilities for the great
scheme in progress."

Once more he paused, and the hard black eyes, alight with the fire of
fanaticism, gleamed and sparkled like wet anthracite coal. He leaned
forward and waved a thin yellow hand in our direction.

"White men," he said, "Here[x] is an undoubted truth. In a decade this
colony will be a serious menace to your white civilization--and in
fifty years we will sweep you off the earth. China will return to her
rightful position, and the world will bow down to the despised
Chinaman."

"Really," Follansbee's coolness was superb, "And[x] if we whites are
considered such a nonentity, why expound to such a length to us?"

The light died out of the Oriental's countenance and the eyes narrowed
perceptibly. He inhaled deeply on his cigarette and as the smoke
curled through the flat nostrils, the pungent odour hung in wisps on
the heavily scented air.

"My Gland Men," he murmured, so softly that the purring voice was
scarcely heard, "lack but two things. One--the method of human speech,
and the other--of paramount importance--is their sexlessness. It is
upon you gentlemen that I rely for the rectification of those surgical
errors."

Dr. Clovelly took a step forward. "And if we refuse?"

The Oriental shrugged his shoulders. "I have just attended to two
operations this morning," he replied meaningly, "and in the advent of
your refusal, I will attend three more tomorrow morning."

"Do you mean that you operate here?"

"Certainly. Why not? We have every facility of modern science, and a
laboratory that is the last word in the up-to-date."

"But--but--" babbled Dr. Clovelly, amazedly, "Your supplies--and
chemicals." Ho Ming gave an upward gesture of his hands.

"Wireless," he explained. "A call to our base will bring a ship load
of supplies within a few days. That is what has cut that path through
the undergrowth."

"But your--er--patients do not recover immediately. You must have a
hospital, or something of the kind?"

"If you consent to my proposition, Dr. Clovelly, I will make
arrangements for you to be shown over my island as soon as it is
possible."


CLOVELLY spread his hands helplessly. "Under the circumstances," he
acquiesced, "we can do nothing but submit. But you must promise that
we meet with no treachery."

The Chinaman inclined his head. "Have no fear of that," he assured us.
"And now I shall show you around. You shall see that this is no wild
dream of mine. It has taken years to accrue the knowledge and effects,
but it is all to the one purpose."

With his quick, silent walk, he crossed over to the crimson curtain
and pausing before it, spoke for some moments in the pure liquid Ho
Man dialect. From inside there came a rustle of silken garments and
suddenly, as we listened, there arose again that evil voiceless
murmuring that we had heard on the previous occasion. Ho Ming turned
to and waved a hand in the direction of the curtained aperture.

"My illustrious Father--The Great Bald One--The Learned Wong K'tai,
who first wrested the priceless formula from the Lama pigs and to
whose patience and saintly perseverance, this island owes its
existence."

So that was the solution of the peculiar sounds, and I was about to
pace forward, when Ho Ming, with a peculiar smile held out restraining
arm. He then picked up a slim ivory wand, and with a quick movement
stabbed it at the curtain. Immediately there came a Szz and a bright
flash as something shot through the air, but so quick--so unexpected--
was the whole action that I did not have time to glimpse the object.
The next moment the Chinaman, with a bland smile, moved forward and
held aside the curtains.

The room into which we looked could not have been more than six feet
square, but screened on all sides as it was by rich hangings, it gave
the illusion of depths that was very cleverly carried out. The black
velvet hangings were worked with a bewildering array of birds and
flowers, in colours both rare and wonderful. Scarlet parrots, blue
peacocks were entwined with crimson poppies and roses of every shade
and hue. Gaudy though it undoubtedly was, there was nothing in it to
offend the eye, for the colours were blended with the skill of an
expert.

In the center of the room, in a huge chair that almost enveloped the
slight form, sat the oldest Chinaman I have ever set eyes on. He was
thin to emaciation and the rich purple robe he wore hung in folds
about his skinny frame. His head, bowed slightly with the weight of
years, was as bald as an egg and the long beard that hung from his
chin was white as the driven snow. The face was seamed with a thousand
wrinkles and only the beady eyes, sunk deep in the lined countenance,
gave a hint of vitality. He sat motionless, like some grotesque idol,
a fit parent to this place of sinister secrets.

Ho Ming entered the room and pausing before the chair, fell upon his
knees. For some moments, there was a silence, then slowly, like one in
a trance, one claw-like hand, yellow as ivory, was raised in salute.
For a second it remained poised, then, as though its owner lacked
strength to hold it in place, it fell limply back onto the chair. Ho
Ming rose to his feet.

"The great One salutes you, and wishes you well. Gentlemen, you may
consider yourselves doubly honoured."

He re-crossed the room and as he made his way through the doorway, the
curtain dropped behind him. Synonymous with it came the swish and the
flash, and the Oriental with quick movement touched a portion of the
woodwork. Immediately the object came to rest and for the first time
we saw it. It was a blade, some six inches wide and the width of the
doorway, a blade razor-edged and weighted at the top. It ran down
between the door-posts on a concealed wire, very much on the principle
of the French device, the guillotine, at an almost incredible speed.
The Oriental released it, and it disappeared into a slot in the floor.

"Quite Chinese," he purred. "Borrowed from the palaces of the
Emperors. By the way," he turned to Follansbee, "It was as well that I
arrived when I did, this morning, for had you stepped across the
threshold, you would have been cleft in half." He walked to the book-
lined wall and moved his hands in the circular manner we had noticed
before. With a click of concealed machinery, the section swung back,
and we filed into the dimly lit passage. "Now," our guide cautioned
us, "Keep[x] close to me and offer no resistance, no matter what
happens."




CHAPTER IV


Awaiting the Storm

THE contrast between the brightly lit room and the semi-darkness of
the passage was so great that for some moments I could perceive
nothing, far less distinguish any objects. The luminous dial of my
watch told me that it was just past the noon hour and I could not but
help reflecting that we had certainly spent a crowded hour. It seemed
incredible that all our strange adventures had been compassed in such
a short space of time; already we seemed to have spent months on the
island, and England and Prince Alfred's Hospital seemed very far away.

Gradually, as my eyes became accustomed to the light, I made out the
various doors leading from the strange apartment. The Oriental Ho Ming
took the lead and we others trailed behind him. At the end of the
passage he paused before a door.

"This," our guide explained with a gesture, "is the laboratory. Here
it is that the serum is compounded that speeds up our workers and
helps them to overcome the laziness that they inherit from the
anthropoid side of their nature. Adrenin, obtained as you know, from
the adrenals near the kidneys, forms a large percentage of the serum.
Adrenin is the greatest and most natural stimulant known to mankind."

He threw open the door and we surveyed a long low room, with wooden
benches running the entire length. Upon these were placed a
heterogeneous collection of scientific instruments--microscopes,
galvanometers and centrifuges. Everything was scrupulously clean and
three assistants in spotless overalls hovered silently about the room.
Ho Ming gave a sharp order and immediately one of the men crossed to
the bench and procured a test tube half-full of some dirty brown
liquid. This he placed in his master's hand.

"This is the inoculation serum," explained the Chinaman. "You must
understand that the ape-glands are incredibly strong and that if left
to themselves, must ultimately reduce their owner to a state of
bestial idiocy. To prevent this, an injection of the serum is
necessary at least once a week. The result of the adrenin in the blood
is at once apparent. It speeds up the sluggish heart beat, drives
fatigue from the muscles, and prepares the body for emergency
function. A very simple formula," he returned the tube to its place as
he spoke, "I discovered it something like two years ago."

He closed the door and we retraced our steps along the passage.
"Removal of the thyroids and parathyroids necessitates cutting away
certain portions of the larynx," he was explaining to the doctor. "We
tried cutting through the windpipe into the cricoid cartilage--" and
he rambled away into the realms of surgery with Clovelly listening
delighted and entranced.

I took advantage of his immersion to drop back with Follansbee. "What
do you think of it all, anyway?" I muttered.

He surveyed me for a moment, his grey eyes lighted humorously. "Two
things strike me with perturbing force. One is that our Oriental
friend is a loyal fanatic and means every word he says. The other is
that we are in the very devil of a hole and I don't mind telling you
young fellow, that just at present, I fail to see the tiniest loophole
of escape."

"Do you think the man is mad?" I murmured, having digested the
somewhat disturbing statement of the other.

Follansbee shrugged his shoulders--"He may be," he assented. "There is
no doubt that he is clever--and cleverness and insanity often go hand
in hand."

I glanced to where the two men were holding excited converse. "I do
believe that Dr. Clovelly is really enjoying himself," I remarked
softly. "He's hanging on to the Chinaman's words as though they were
pearls of great price."

The other man smiled, a trifle grimly. "I think that the doctor will
be quite safe," he returned. "It's little us that's worrying this
child. You see, we may be guests of honor for as long as the childish
vanity of our hosts continues, but one day, they'll run short of raw
material, and then--" he made an expressive gesture.

I was about to reply, when the Chinaman paused with his hand on
another door. He regarded us suspiciously as we walked up together and
his voice was as sweet as honey as he observed.

"Do not linger behind, my friends," he glanced over his shoulder as he
spoke. "There are many strange things in the abode of Ho Ming. Fingers
that claw and grasp, hands that tear and break. It is very foolish to
stray behind."


WITH that he pushed the door and as it swung open, we glimpsed a well-
lighted apartment, with twin rows of beds running along either side.
Around two of the nearest, white screens were placed and from behind
one of these a faint moaning emanated. The air was charged with the
acrid tang of carbolic and as before, everything spoke of scrupulous
attention to detail.

"My hospital," it was explained. "My patients come here from the
operating tables and from here they emerge to the outbuildings, to do
their allotted share among their fellows. There is no intervening
period, which we know as convalescence. A week in hospital is long
enough for the newly grafted gland to function. Then sunlight, fresh
air and hard work do the rest. It is amazingly simple."

"But," I interpolated, "Where do you get your material to work on? It
must come rather hard to find men willing to sacrifice themselves to
this sort of Roman holiday."

"Convicts from the State Prisons furnish us with much work," was the
cold reply. "Murderers, servants, and occasionally a few are pressed
into service by my assistants, who form a modern equivalent to your
old-time press-gang."

I grinned a trifle rudely. "Bang goes your dream of world revolution,"
I returned, "if that is how you progress. After weeding your prisons
clear of undesirable characters the _magnum opus_ will languish and
finally die of insufficient means of support."

Ho Ming turned his unfathomable black eyes upon me. "Presumptous
fool," he said, coldly. "China now possesses an army of six thousand
men, drilled and perfect in the art of war. As soon as circumstances
will allow sufficient serum will be despatched and under the treatment
of my assistants, every soldier will become a Gland Man. After that
every man who enters the army will be likewise glanded, and in time we
shall possess an entire army of these supermen."

I raised no more questions, for if the Oriental was insane, there was
assuredly method in his madness. In fact the gigantic scheme was too
complete, and for the first time, the true meaning of this man's
insane dream chilled me with its appalling possibilities. The doctor's
voice broke in on my reflections.

"And are all your operations successful?" he asked. "In such a
delicate business as this, one would think the failures outweighed the
successes."

Ho Ming looked at the speaker, his eyes alight with a peculiar gleam.
"Yes," he said, slowly, "we do have failures, in spite of our
precautions. Before you see them, I warn you--they are not pretty to
look upon."

He led the way through a side door and we found ourselves once more in
the day light. The weather had changed completely since our sojourn
inside. The sky, brassy before, was now almost clear, the hard blue
sullied by a thick band of black clouds that spread themselves like
some ebon canopy across the eastern sky. Little puffs of wind stirred
the dust and dried leaves at our feet, whirling them into the blue.
The atmosphere was thick and heavy, so heavy indeed, that some
difficulty was experienced in breathing, and the sun poured down with
a fierce heat that was almost unbearable. The silence was broken
intermittently by a low sibilant hum.

Follansbee glanced curiously around him. "It's coming," he said
appreciatively, "It's coming, and by Heaven, I pity this place if it
strikes it."

We skirted the main building and passed through the high wooden
stockade till we reached the outbuildings. Some little way further on,
we could perceive a number of the queer inhabitants engaged in
erecting a new structure. They swung the huge tree-trunks as though
they were light sticks and in an amazingly short time, the central
framework was raised.

We passed a long building, constructed of rough[-]hewn timbers,
containing a number of small cubicles. Each separate room had its
neatly folded mattress and shining eating utensils. The place
contained no comforts whatever--just the bare necessities of living,
and was obviously the domestic quarters of the strange beings that Ho
Ming called his Gland Men.


The Revenge of Nature


A PECULIAR smell was predominant here increasing in strength as we
made our way onward. Everyone is familiar with the loathsome, animal
smell that is prevalent wherever beasts are incarcerated. It emanated
from a tiny hillock, built over an underground cellar. A gate led us
down about a dozen steps cut in the earth and brought us up before a
massive iron door, with a barred grating set in the top. The snapping
and snarling of animals came clearly to our ears, and the words of the
Oriental "they are not good to look upon" took on fresh significance.

The Chinaman, who was in the lead, stepped forward and sliding back
the grating motioned me up. I peered in, scarcely knowing what to
expect, and hardly had I taken one brief glimpse when I recoiled was a
gasp of horror. Even Dante, in [his]journey through the innermost
Hells, could scarcely have viewed such horrible creatures as haunted
that underground pit.

There must have been over a dozen of them--loathsome--terrible. Some
twisted beyond any semblance of recognition, others with stunted
bodies and bloated appendages growing in various parts of their
anatomy; They stood silent as I glimpsed them, looking at me mildly
with their bloodshot eyes, gesticulating with their crooked, shrunken
limbs. But the crowning horror was the undeniable fact that once these
things had been men, even as you and I, living--hating--breathing.

As I stumbled up the stairs, sick with horror, I was joined by the
Oriental, who stood watching me with a sardonic smile on his lips. I
did not speak, but stood there, drinking in the thick air in thirsty
gulps. And then suddenly it happened.

It began by the sunlight fading, and glancing up, I saw that the
monstrous black cloud had overshadowed almost all the sky, leaving
only a portion over the sea, that glowed eerily with an uncanny elfin
radiance. The low intermittent humming had risen in cadence and was
coming nearer every second. A patter of feet made me swing round, and
there, his face white with terror, was one of the overalled
assistants. He stepped up to the Chinaman and poured forth a string of
incoherent language, that for a moment[dele] eluded even his countryman.
Then I saw Ho Ming's face turn a sickly green, his eyes protruded, and
he barked back a question into the other's face, and I distinctly
heard the name K'tai. Then without a word, Ho Ming turned on his heel
and, side by side, the two raced for the main building as fast as they
could move, leaving me standing wide-eyed with amazement.

A moment later I was joined by my companions, and to them I explained
the sudden departure of the Chinaman. As I spoke, several big drops of
rain commenced to fall, and Dr. Clovelly glanced anxiously at [the]
sky. "Hullo!" he ejaculated[.] "Here's that storm that you promised us,
Follansbee."

But that gentleman jumped to his feet as though he had been stung.
"Storm be damned," he exclaimed, "That 'storm' is a number one size
typhoon, and it is heading this way. I give it five seconds to strike
the island."


THE terrific upheaval of Nature lasted three hours, and to us
adventurers, crouched in the groaning swaying forest, it was the final
[denouement] of our astounding adventures on the Island of the Gland
Men. Towards evening the hurricane dropped, but the rain poured down
with unbridled fury, sweeping and lashing the vegetation before it.
Such a deluge it is almost impossible to describe, rather it was as
though the skies had opened and the seven seas poured their waters
through the gap. Even in the thick of the matted vegetation, we were
drenched to the skin, and it was almost dark when we eventually
crawled forth from our shelter and took our last look at the Island.
The downpour had abated somewhat, but it still swept in our faces with
the sting of a whip-lash, and at length, wet, half-blinded and weighed
down by the weight of our sodden garments, we gazed at what had once
been the realization of a fanatic's dream.

Such a scene of destruction and chaos beggars description. The sturdy
buildings had been swept away like match boxes before a summer breeze.
The heaps of wood and iron were still faintly smouldering and when I
remembered the volatile chemicals that were ranged along the shelves,
I [perceived] that combustion must have wrecked quite as many of the
edifices as the howling typhoon.

There was the half-erected framework, now splintered and scattered.
There too, the poor dumb beasts that had once been men. The cataclysm
had burst upon them before their bestial minds had time to realize its
significance. The rain swept mercilessly down on the inanimate hairy
bodies, as though gloating in its power over mere mortals.

The high stockade was, by some miracle, still standing in places. In
other places it [gaped] open, showing the destruction within the walls.
Here the bodies were piled, corpses torn, scratched and bitten,
telling of the panic that must have enveloped the community, as it
fought for freedom. I wondered if any of the hideous denizens of the
underground pit had escaped, but a glance assured me. The ruins of the
main building were piled feet high over the vault of horror.

Of Ho Ming there was no sign. It was impossible that he had lived
through the chaos that had enveloped the Island, but it was hardly
probable that everyone was dead. We, to be sure, only owed our lives
to our sheltered positions, but there might have been others.

The Island must have been situated in the very centre of the
catastrophe; otherwise there was no manner of accounting for the
terrible amount of damage. It seemed strange--ironical--that the toil
and labour of a decade should thus be destroyed in a few hours. The
Chinaman's scheme had been a marvel of completeness, but the best-laid
plans--.

We retraced our steps in silence, each one a little chastened by the
tragedy that we had passed through. We were nearly to the beach when I
put the question.

"What made the Chinaman rush away like he did?" I asked Follansbee.
"He turned a sickly colour and went for his life."

"Didn't you say that you heard his father's name mentioned?" the big
man asked. "Well, it's obvious that the servant told him of the coming
storm and he rushed off to comfort and protect his father. The
paternal reverence is very strongly developed in the Oriental races,
and he evidently cared for nothing as long as his father was safe.
Recollect that all he had was made possible by the sacrifice of his
parents."

We had reached the electric launch, beached high and dry where we had
left it. As we swung it round, I voiced the unspoken question of the
trio.

"Will anyone believe us?" I ruminated, "when we tell them where we
have been and what we have seen? I very much doubt that I would, were
a person to recount to me the--"

I broke off suddenly. The ground beneath our feet was shivering and
heaving, and for a moment, I doubted the evidence of my eyes. The next
moment it was still again, and I was about to ridicule the idea when
Follansbee grasped me by the arm.

"Did you feel that?" he said. "For God's sake, get that launch on the
water. There is going to be a lot of funny things happen here before
long. Come on."

In less than twenty minutes we were in sight of the ship once more and
then it was that Follansbee made the final remark.

"Not a word about our adventures," he warned, "I'll get Sparks to
radio Port Moresby for a destroyer to clean up that Island. I suppose
that it will be necessary to give them a bare outline."

And I turned to see the foreshore of the Island, still brooding and
sinister, disappearing into the tropical night.

There is but one incident worth while recording, however, and it took
the form of a radiogram that Follansbee received after his detailing
the story to the Naval Authorities at Port Moresby.

"Searched water for some time in latitude given. Find no trace of
Island. Suspect some elaborate hoax. Am temporarily dropping matter."

What is the explanation of that message. Can it be, as Follansbee
informed me, that Ho Ming made his headquarters on one of these roving
islands that are never in the same place for any length of time? Were
the mysterious tremors we felt forerunners of another upheaval?

And if that is so, I often pause to think of the misguided genius that
lies fathoms deep in the ocean and the terrible formula that must
remain a secret till the sea gives up its dead.

* * *

SCIENTISTS admit that we are now on the verge of great discoveries in biology.
We are just learning what we human beings are and what the forces are that
control us. Why are some men small and others tall; why are some witty, clever,
strong and successful and others dull, stupid and apparently without purpose or
energy in life? The answer of the biologist is: Glands--little reservoirs
of strange fluids, the fluids that course through our blood and determine our
destiny. This seems almost magical--that for example a few drops of an
unknown fluid can determine a man’s entire destiny. Yet it has been proved to
be true.

What a world we will have then when we finally discover how to control these
glands and make them do for us what we will! We may have a nation of supermen
or a nation of strong, stupid, slavish servants. It will all depend on who
controls the glands. The author of this exciting tale was a professor of
medicine himself and his science is not only exact but his story most
thrilling.

THE END

Project Gutenberg Australia


