

Project Gutenberg Australia


Title: The Spiral Stone
Author: Arthur Willis Colton
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0605381.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: August 2006
Date most recently updated: August 2006

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


The Spiral Stone
Arthur Willis Colton




The graveyard on the brow of the hill was white with snow. The marbles
were white, the evergreens black. One tall spiral stone stood
painfully near the centre. The little brown church outside the gates
turned its face in the more comfortable direction of the village.

Only three were out among the graves: "Ambrose Chillingworth, aetat
30, 1675"; "Margaret Vane, aetat 19, 1839"; and "Thy Little One, O
God, aetat 2," from the Mercer Lot. It is called the "Mercer Lot," but
the Mercers are all dead or gone from the village.

The Little One trotted around busily, putting his tiny finger in the
lettering and patting the faces of the cherubs. The other two sat on
the base of the spiral, which twisted in the moonlight over them.

"I wonder why it is?" Margaret said. "Most of them never come out at
all. We and the Little One come out so often. You were wise and
learned. I knew so little. Will you tell me?"

"Learning is not wisdom," Ambrose answered. "But of this matter it was
said that our containment in the grave depended on the spirit in which
we departed. I made certain researches. It appeared by common report
that only those came out whom desperate sin tormented, or labors
incomplete and great desire at the point of death made restless. I had
doubts the matter were more subtle, the reasons of it reaching out
distantly." He sighed faintly, following with his eyes, tomb by tomb,
the broad white path that dropped down the hillside to the church. "I
desired greatly to live."

"I too. Is it because we desired it so much, then? But the Little
One---"

"I do not know," he said.

The Little One trotted gravely here and there, seeming to know very
well what he was about, and presently came to the spiral stone. The
lettering on it was new, and there was no cherub. He dropped down
suddenly on the snow with a faint whimper. His small feet came out
from under his gown, as he sat upright gazing at the letters with
round, troubled eyes, and up to the top of the monument, for the
solution of some unstated problem.

"The stone is but newly placed," said Ambrose, "and the new-comer
would seem to be of those who rest in peace."

They went and sat down on either side of him, on the snow. The
peculiar cutting of the stone, with spirally ascending lines, together
with the moon's illusion, gave it a semblance of motion. Something
twisted and climbed continually, and vanished continually from the
point. But the base was broad, square, and heavily lettered: "John
Mareschelli Vane."

"Vane? That was thy name," said Ambrose.

1890. AETAT 72.

AN EMINENT CITIZEN, A PUBLIC BENEFAC-

TOR AND WIDELY ESTEEMED. .

FOR THE LOVE OF HIS NATIVE PLACE RE-

TURNED TO LAY HIS DUST THEREIN.

THE JUST MADE PERFECT.

"It would seem he did well and rounded his labors to a goodly end,
lying down among his kindred as a sheaf that is garnered in the
autumn. He was fortunate."

And Margaret spoke, in the thin, emotionless voice which those who are
long in the graveyard use: "He was my brother."

"Thy brother?" said Ambrose.

The Little One looked up and down the spiral with wide eyes. The other
two looked past it into the deep white valley, where the river,
covered with ice and snow, was marked only by the lines of skeleton
willows and poplars. A night wind, listless but continual, stirred the
evergreens. The moon swung low over the opposite hills, and for a
moment slipped behind a cloud.

"Says it is not so, 'For the Love of his Native Place'?" murmured
Ambrose.

And as the moon came out, there leaned against the pedestal, pointing
with a finger at the epitaph, one that seemed an old man, with bowed
shoulders and keen, restless face, but in his manner cowed and weary.

"It is a lie," he said slowly. "I hated it, Margaret. I came because
Ellen Mercer called me."

"Ellen isn't buried here."

"Not here?"

"Not here."

"Was it you, then, Margaret? Why?"

"I didn't call you."

"Who then?" he shrieked. "Who called me?"

The night wind moved on monotonously, and the moonlight was
undisturbed, like glassy water.

"When I came away," she said, "I thought you would marry her. You
didn't, then? But why should she call you?"

"I left the village suddenly!" he cried. "I grew to dread and then to
hate it. I buried myself from the knowledge of it, and the memory of
it was my enemy. I wished for a distant death, and these fifty years
have heard the summons to come and lay my bones in this graveyard. I
thought it was Ellen. You, sir, wear an antique dress; you have been
long in this strange existence. Can you tell who called me? If not
Ellen, where is Ellen?" He wrung his hands, and rocked to and fro.

"The mystery is with the dead as with the living," said Ambrose. "The
shadows of the future and the past come among us. We look in their
eyes, and understand them not. Now and again there is a call even
here, and the grave is henceforth untenanted of its spirit. Here, too,
we know a necessity which binds us, which speaks not with audible
voice and will not be questioned."

"But tell me," moaned the other, "does the weight of sin depend upon
its consequences? Then what weight do I bear? I do not know whether it
was ruin or death, or a thing gone by and forgotten. Is there no
answer here to this?"

"Death is but a step in the process of life," answered Ambrose. "I
know not if any are ruined or anything forgotten. Look up, to the
order of the j, stars, and handwriting on the wall of the firmament.
But who hath read it? Mark this night wind, a still small voice. But
what speaketh it? The earth is clothed in white garments as a bride.
What mean the ceremonials of the seasons? The will from without is
only known as it is manifested. Nor does it manifest where the
consequences of the deed end or its causes began. Have they any end or
a beginning? I can not answer you."

"Who called me, Margaret?"

And she said again monotonously:

"I didn't call you."

The Little One sat between Ambrose and Margaret, chuckling to himself
and gazing up at the new-comer, who suddenly bent forward and looked
into his eyes, with a gasp.

"What is this?" he whispered.

"'Thy Little One, O God, aetat 2, from the Mercer Lot," returned
Ambrose gently.

"He is very quiet. Art not neglecting thy business, Little One? The
lower walks are unvisited to-night."

"They are Ellen's eyes!" cried the other; moaning and rocking. "Did
you call me? Were you mine?"

"It is written, 'Thy Little One, O God,'" murmured Ambrose.

But the Little One only curled his feet up under his gown, and now
chuckled contentedly.



THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia


