

Project Gutenberg Australia


Title: The True Story of A Vampire and more
Author: Eric Stenbock
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0606601.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: August 2006
Date most recently updated: August 2006

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


The True Story of A Vampire and more
Eric Stenbock



TABLE OF CONTENTS

The True Story of A Vampire
The Other Side: A Breton Legend



THE TRUE STORY OF A VAMPIRE

Vampire stories are generally located in Styria; mine is also. Styria
is by no means the romantic kind of place described by those who have
certainly never been there. It is a flat, uninteresting country, only
celebrated for its turkeys, its capons, and the stupidity of its
inhabitants. Vampires generally arrive at night, in carriages drawn by
two black horses.

Our Vampire arrived by the commonplace means of the railway train, and
in the afternoon.

You must think I am joking, or perhaps that by the word "Vampire" I
mean a financial vampire.

No, I am quite serious. The Vampire of whom I am speaking, who laid
waste our hearth and home, was a real vampire.

Vampires are generally described as dark, sinister-looking, and
singularly handsome. Our Vampire was, on the contrary, rather fair,
and certainly was not at first sight sinister-looking, and though
decidedly attractive in appearance, not what one would call singularly
handsome.

Yes, he desolated our home, killed my brother--the one object of my
adoration--also my dear father. Yet, at the same time, I must say that
I myself came under the spell of his fascination, and, in spite of
all, have no ill-will towards him now.

Doubtless you have read in the papers passim of "the Baroness and her
beasts." It is to tell how I came to spend most of my useless wealth
on an asylum for stray animals that I am writing this.

I am old now; what happened then was when I was a little girl of about
thirteen. I will begin by describing our household. We were Poles: our
name was Wronski: we lived in Styria, where we had a castle. Our
household was very limited. It consisted, with the exclusion of
domestics, of only my father, our governess--a worthy Belgian named
Mademoiselle Vonnaert--my brother, and myself. Let me begin with my
father: he was old and both my brother and I were children of his old
age. Of my mother I remember nothing: she died in giving birth to my
brother, who was only one year, or not as much, younger than in self.
Our father was studious, continually occupied in reading books,
chiefly on recondite subjects and in all kinds of unknown languages.

He had a long white beard, and wore habitually a black velvet skull-
cap.

How kind he was to us! It was more than I could tell. Still it was not
I who was the favourite.

His whole heart went out to Gabriel--Gabryel as we spelt it in Polish.
He was always called by the Russian abbreviation Gavril--I mean, of
course, my brother, who had a resemblance to the only portrait of my
mother, a slight chalk sketch which hung in my father's study. But I
was by no means jealous: my brother was and has been the only love of
my life. It is for his sake that I am now keeping in Westbourne Park a
home for stray cats and dogs.

I was at that time, as I said before, a little girl; my name was
Carmela. My long tangled hair was always all over the place, and never
would combed straight. I was not pretty--at least, looking at a
photograph of me at that time. I do not think I could describe myself
as such. Yet at the same time, when I look at the photograph, I think
my expression may have been pleasing to some people: irregular
features, large mouth, and large wild eyes.

I was by way of being naughty--not so naughty Gabriel in the opinion
of Mlle Vonnaert. Mlle Vonnaert. I may intercalate, was a wholly
excellent person, middle-aged, who really did speak good French,
although she was a Belgian, and could also make herself understood in
German, which, as you may or may not know, is the current language of
Styria.

I find it difficult to describe my brother Gabriel; there was
something about him strange and superhuman, or perhaps I should rather
say praeterhuman, something between the animal and the divine. Perhaps
the Greek idea of the Faun might illustrate what I mean: but that will
not do either. He had large, wild, gazelle-like eyes: his hair, like
mine, was in a perpetual tangle--that point he had in common with me,
and indeed, as I afterwards heard, our mother having been of gipsy
race, it will account for much of the innate wildness there was in our
natures. I was wild enough, but Gabriel was much wilder. Nothing would
induce him to put on shoes and stockings, except on Sundays--when he
also allowed his hair to be combed, but only by me. How shall I
describe the grace of that lovely mouth, shaped verily "en arc
d'amour." I always think of the text in the Psalm, "Grace is shed
forth on thy lips, therefore has God blessed thee eternally"--lips
that seemed to exhale the very breath of life. Then that beautiful,
lithe, living, elastic form!

He could run faster than any deer: spring like a squirrel to the
topmost branch of a tree: he might have stood for the sign and symbol
of vitality itself. But seldom could he be induced by Mlle Vonnaert to
learn lessons; but when he did so, he learnt with extraordinary
quickness. He would play upon every conceivable instrument, holding a
violin here, there, and everywhere except the right place:
manufacturing instruments for himself out of reeds--even sticks. Mlle
Vonnaert made futile efforts to induce him to learn to play the piano.
I suppose he was what was called spoilt, though merely in the
superficial sense of the word. Our father allowed him to indulge in
every caprice.

One of his peculiarities, when quite a little child, was horror at the
sight of meat. Nothing on earth would induce him to taste it. Another
thing which was particularly remarkable about him was his
extraordinary power over animals. Everything seemed to come tame to
his hand. Birds would sit on his shoulder. Then sometimes Mlle
Vonnaert and I would lose him in the woods--he would suddenly dart
away. Then we would find him singing softly or whistling to himself,
with all manner of woodland creatures around him--hedgehogs, little
foxes, wild rabbits, marmots, squirrels, and such like. He would
frequently bring these things home with him and insist on keeping
them. This strange menagerie was the terror of poor Mlle Vonnaert's
heart. He chose to live in a little room at the top of a turret; but
which, instead of going upstairs, he chose to reach by means of a very
tall chestnut-tree, through the window. But in contradiction of all
his, it was his custom to serve every Sunday Mass in the parish
church, with hair nicely combed and with white surplice and red
cassock. He looked as demure and tamed as possible. Then came the
element of the divine. What an expression of ecstasy there was in
those glorious eyes!

Thus far I have not been speaking about the Vampire. However, let me
begin with my narrative at last. One day my father had to go to the
neighbouring town--as he frequently had. This time he returned
accompanied by a guest. The gentleman, he said, had missed his train,
through the late arrival of another at our station, which was a
junction, and he would therefore, as trains were not frequent in our
parts, have had to wait there all night. He had joined in conversation
with my father in the too-late-arriving train from the town: and had
consequently accepted my father's invitation to stay the night at our
house. But of course, you know, in those out-of-the-way parts we are
almost patriarchal in our hospitality.

He was announced under the name of Count Vardalek--the name being
Hungarian. But he spoke German well enough: not with the monotonous
accentuation of Hungarians, but rather, if anything, with a slight
Slavonic intonation. His voice was peculiarly soft and insinuating. We
soon afterwards found that he could talk Polish, and Mlle Vonnaert
vouched for his good French.

Indeed he seemed to know all languages. But let me give my first
impressions. He was rather tall with fair wavy hair, rather long,
which accentuated a certain effeminacy about his smooth face.

His figure had something--I cannot say what--serpentine about it. The
features were refined; and he had long, slender, subtle, magnetic-
looking hands, a somewhat long sinuous nose, a graceful mouth, and an
attractive smile, which belied the intense sadness of the expression
of the eyes. When he arrived his eyes were half closed--indeed they
were habitually so--so that I could not decide their colour. He looked
worn and wearied. I could not possibly guess his age.

Suddenly Gabriel burst into the room: a yellow butterfly was clinging
to his hair. He was carrying in his arms a little squirrel. Of course
he was barelegged as usual. The stranger looked up at his approach;
then I noticed his eves. They were green: they seemed to dilate and
grow larger. Gabriel stood stock-still, with a startled look, like
that of a bird fascinated by a serpent.

But nevertheless he held out his hand to the newcomer Vardalek, taking
his hand--I don't know why I noticed this trivial thing--pressed the
pulse with his forefinger. Suddenly Gabriel darted from the room and
rushed upstairs, going to his turret-room this time by the staircase
instead of the tree. I was in terror what the Count might think of
him. Great was my relief when he came down in his velvet Sunday suit,
and shoes and stockings. I combed his hair, and set him generally
right.

When the stranger came down to dinner his appearance had somewhat
altered; he looked much younger. There was an elasticity of the skin,
combined with a delicate complexion, rarely to be found in a man.
Before, he had struck me as being very pale.

Well, at dinner we were all charmed with him, especially my father. He
seemed to be thoroughly acquainted with all my father's particular
hobbies. Once, when my father was relating some of his military
experiences, he said something about a drummer-boy who was wounded in
battle. His eyes opened completely again and dilated: this time with a
particularly disagreeable expression, dull and dead, yet at the same
time animated by some horrible excitement. But this was only
momentary.

The chief subject of his conversation with my father was about certain
curious mystical books which my father had just lately picked up, and
which he could not make out, but Vardalek seemed completely to
understand. At dessert-time my father asked him if he were in a great
hurry to reach his destination: if not, would he not stay with us a
little while: though our place was out of the way, he would find much
that would interest him in his library.

He answered, "I am in no hurry. I have no particular reason for going
to that place at all, and if I can be of service to you in deciphering
these books, I shall be only too glad." He added with a smile which
was bitter, very very bitter: "You see I am a cosmopolitan, a wanderer
on the face of the earth."

After dinner my father asked him if he played the piano. He said,
"Yes, I can a little," and he sat down at the piano. Then he played a
Hungarian csardas--wild, rhapsodic, wonderful.

That is the music which makes men mad. He went on in the same strain.

Gabriel stood stock-still by the piano, his eyes dilated and fixed,
his form quivering. At last he said very slowly, at one particular
motive--for want of a better word you may call it the relâche of a
csardas, by which I mean that point where the original quasi-slow
movement begins again--"Yes, I think I could play that."

Then he quickly fetched his fiddle and self-made xylophone, and did,
actually alternating the instruments, render the same very well
indeed.

Vardalek looked at him, and said in a very sad voice, "Poor child! you
have the soul of music within you."

I could not understand why he should seem to commiserate instead of
congratulate Gabriel on what certainly showed an extraordinary talent.

Gabriel was shy even as the wild animals who were tame to him. Never
before had he taken to a stranger. Indeed, as a rule, if any stranger
came to the house by any chance, he would hide himself, and I had to
bring him up his food to the turret chamber. You may imagine what was
my surprise when I saw him walking about hand in hand with Vardalek
the next morning, in the garden, talking lively with him, and showing
his collection of pet animals, which he had gathered from the woods,
and for which we had had to fit up a regular zoological gardens. He
seemed utterly under the domination of Vardalek. What surprised us was
(for otherwise we liked the stranger, especially for being kind to
him) that he seemed, though not noticeably at first--except perhaps to
me, who noticed everything with regard to him--to be gradually losing
his general health and vitality. He did not become pale as yet; but
there was a certain languor about his movements which certainly there
was by no means before.

My father got more and more devoted to Count Vardalek. He helped him
in his studies: and my father would hardly allow him to go away, which
he did sometimes--to Trieste, he said: he always came back, bringing
us presents of strange Oriental jewellery or textures.

I knew all kinds of people came to Trieste, Orientals included. Still,
there was a strangeness and magnificence about these things which I
was sure even then could not possibly have come from such a place as
Trieste, memorable to me chiefly for its necktie shops.

When Vardalek was away, Gabriel was continually asking for him and
talking about him. Then at the same time he seemed to regain his old
vitality and spirits. Vardalek always returned looking much older,
wan, and weary. Gabriel would rush to meet him, and kiss him on the
mouth. Then he gave a slight shiver: and after a little while began to
look quite young again.

Things continued like this for some time. My father would not hear of
Vardalek's going away permanently. He came to be an inmate of our
house. I indeed, and Mlle Vonnaert also, could not help noticing what
a difference there was altogether about Gabriel. But my father seemed
totally blind to it.

One night I had gone downstairs to fetch something which I had left in
the drawing-room. As I was going up again I passed Vardalek's room. He
was playing on a piano, which had been specially put there for him,
one of Chopin's nocturnes, very beautifully: I stopped, leaning on the
banisters to listen.

Something white appeared on the dark staircase. We believed in ghosts
in our part. I was transfixed with terror, and clung to the
ballisters. What was my astonishment to see Gabriel walking slowly
down the staircase, his eyes fixed as though in a trance! This
terrified me even more than a ghost would. Could I believe my senses?
Could that be Gabriel?

I simply could not move. Gabriel, clad in his long white night-shirt,
came downstairs and opened the door. He left it open. Vardalek still
continued playing, but talked as he played.

He said--this time speaking in Polish--Nie umiem wyrazic jak ciechi
kocham--"My darling, I fain would spare thee: but thy life is my life,
and I must live, I who would rather die. Will God not have any mercy
on me? Oh! Oh! life; oh, the torture of life!" Here he struck one
agonized and strange chord, then continued playing softly, "O,
Gabriel, my beloved! my life, yes life--oh, why life? I am sure this
is but a little that I demand of thee. Sorely thy superabundance of
life can spare little to one who is already dead. No, stay," he said
now almost harshly, "what must be, must be!"

Gabriel stood there quite still, with the same fixed vacant
expression, in the room. He was evidently walking in his sleep.
Vardalek played on: then said, "Ah!" with a sign of terrible agony.
Then very gently, "Go now, Gabriel; it is enough." And Gabriel went
out of the room and ascended the staircase at the same slow pace, with
the same unconscious stare. Vardalek struck the piano, and although he
did not play loudly, it seemed as though the strings would break. You
never heard music so strange and so heart-rending!

I only know I was found by Mlle Vonnaert in the morning, in an
unconscious state, at the foot of the stairs. Was it a dream after
all? I am sure now that it was not. I thought then it might be, and
said nothing to anyone about it. Indeed, what could I say?

Well, to let me cut a long story short, Gabriel, who had never known a
moment's sickness in his life, grew ill: and we had to send to Gratz
for a doctor, who could give no explanation of Gabriel's strange
illness. Gradual wasting away, he said: absolutely no organic
complaint. What could this mean?

My father at last became conscious of the fact that Gabriel was ill.
His anxiety was fearful. The last trace of grey faded from his hair,
and it became quite white. We sent to Vienna for doctors.

But all with the same result.

Gabriel was generally unconscious, and when conscious, only seemed to
recognize Vardalek, who sat continually by his bedside, nursing him
with the utmost tenderness.

One day I was alone in the room: and Vardalek cried suddenly, almost
fiercely, "Send for a priest at once, at once," he repeated. "It is
now almost too late!"

Gabriel stretched out his arms spasmodically, and put them round
Vardalek's neck. This was the only movement he had made, for some
time. Vardalek bent down and kissed him on the lips.

I rushed downstairs: and the priest was sent for. When I came back
Vardalek was not there. The priest administered extreme unction. I
think Gabriel was already dead, although we did not think so at the
time.

Vardalek had utterly disappeared; and when we looked for him he was
nowhere to be found; nor have I seen or heard of him since.

My father died very soon afterwards: suddenly aged, and bent down with
grief. And so the whole of the Wronski property came into my sole
possession. And here I am, an old woman, generally laughed at for
keeping, in memory of Gabriel, an asylum for stray animals--and--
people do not, as a rule, believe in Vampires!



THE OTHER SIDE: A BRETON LEGEND

À la joyouse Messe noire.

NOT that I like it, but one does feel so much better after it--"oh,
thank you, Mère Yvonne, yes just a little drop more." So the old
crones fell to drinking their hot brandy and water (although of course
they only took it medicinally, as a remedy for their rheumatics), all
seated round the big fire and Mère Pinquèle continued her story.

"Oh, yes, then when they get to the top of the hill, there is an altar
with six candles quite black and a sort of something in between, that
nobody sees quite clearly, and the old black ram with the man's face
and long horns begins to say Mass in a sort of gibberish nobody
understands, and two black strange things like monkeys glide about
with the book and the cruets--and there's music too, such music. There
are things the top half like black cats, and the bottom part like men
only their legs are all covered with close black hair, and they play
on the bag-pipes, and when they come to the elevation, then--" Amid
the old crones there was lying on the hearth-rug, before the fire, a
boy whose large lovely eyes dilated and whose limbs quivered in the
very ecstacy of terror.

"Is that all true, Mère Pinquèle?" he said.

"Oh, quite true, and not only that, the best part is yet to come; for
they take a child and--." Here Mère Pinquèle showed her fang-like
teeth.

"Oh! Mère Pinquèle, are you a witch too?"

"Silence, Gabriel," said Mère Yvonne, "how can you say anything so
wicked? Why, bless me, the boy ought to have been in bed ages ago."

Just then all shuddered, and all made the sign of the cross except
Mère Pinquèle, for they heard that most dreadful of dreadful sounds--
the howl of a wolf, which begins with three sharp barks and then lifts
itself up in a long protracted wail of commingled cruelty and despair,
and at last subsides into a whispered growl fraught with eternal
malice.

There was a forest and a village and a brook, the village was on one
side of the brook, none had dared to cross to the other side. Where
the village was, all was green and glad and fertile and fruitful; on
the other side the trees never put forth green leaves, and a dark
shadow hung over it even at noon-day, and in the night-time one could
hear the wolves howling--the were-wolves and the wolf-men and the men-
wolves, and those very wicked men who for nine days in every year are
turned into wolves; but on the green side no wolf was ever seen, and
only one little running brook like a silver streak flowed between.

It was spring now and the old crones sat no longer by the fire but
before their cottages sunning themselves, and everyone felt so happy
that they ceased to tell stories of the "other side." But Gabriel
wandered by the brook as he was wont to wander, drawn thither by some
strange attraction mingled with intense horror.

His schoolfellows did not like Gabriel; all laughed and jeered at him,
because he was less cruel and more gentle of nature than the rest, and
even as a rare and beautiful bird escaped from a cage is hacked to
death by the common sparrows, so was Gabriel among his fellows.
Everyone wondered how Mère Yvonne, that buxom and worthy matron, could
have produced a son like this, with strange dreamy eyes, who was as
they said "pas comme les autres gamins." His only friends were the
Abbé Félicien whose Mass he served each morning, and one little girl
called Carmeille, who loved him, no one could make out why.

The sun had already set, Gabriel still wandered by the brook, filled
with vague terror and irresistible fascination. The sun set and the
moon rose, the full moon, very large and very clear, and the moonlight
flooded the forest both this side and "the other side," and just on
the "other side" of the brook, hanging over, Gabriel saw a large deep
blue flower, whose strange intoxicating perfume reached him and
fascinated him even where he stood.

"If I could only make one step across," he thought, "nothing could
harm me if I only plucked that one flower, and nobody would know I had
been over at all," for the villagers looked with hatred and suspicion
on anyone who was said to have crossed to the "other side," so summing
up courage he leapt lightly to the other side of the brook. Then the
moon breaking from a cloud shone with unusual brilliance, and he saw,
stretching before him, long reaches of the same strange blue flowers
each one lovelier than the last, till, not being able to make up his
mind which one flower to take or whether to take several, he went on
and on, and the moon shone very brightly and a strange unseen bird,
somewhat like a nightingale, but louder and lovelier, sang, and his
heart was filled with longing for he knew not what, and the moon shone
and the nightingale sang. But on a sudden a black cloud covered the
moon entirely, and all was black, utter darkness, and through the
darkness he heard wolves howling and shrieking in the hideous ardour
of the chase, and there passed before him a horrible procession of
wolves (black wolves with red fiery eyes), and with them men that had
the heads of wolves and wolves that had the heads of men, and above
them flew owls (black owls with red fiery eyes), and bats and long
serpentine black things, and last of all seated on an enormous black
ram with hideous human face the wolf-keeper on whose face was eternal
shadow; but they continued their horrid chase and passed him by, and
when they had passed the moon shone out more beautiful than ever, and
the strange nightingale sang again, and the strange intense blue
flowers were in long reaches in front to the right and to the left.
But one thing was there which had not been before, among the deep blue
flowers walked one with long gleaming golden hair, and she turned once
round and her eyes were of the same colour as the strange blue
flowers, and she walked on and Gabriel could not choose but follow.
But when a cloud passed over the moon he saw no beautiful woman but a
wolf, so in utter terror he turned and fled, plucking one of the
strange blue flowers on the way, and leapt again over the brook and
ran home.

When he got home Gabriel could not resist showing his treasure to his
mother, though he knew she would not appreciate it; but when she saw
the strange blue flower, Mère Yvonne turned pale and said, "Why child,
where hast thou been? sure it is the witch flower"; and so saying she
snatched it from him and cast it into the corner, and immediately all
its beauty and strange fragrance faded from it and it looked charred
as though it had been burnt. So Gabriel sat down silently and rather
sulkily, and having eaten no supper went up to bed, but he did got
sleep but waited and waited till all was quiet within the house. Then
he crept downstairs in his long white night-shirt and bare feet on the
square cold stones and picked hurriedly up the charred and faded
flower and put it in his warm bosom next his heart, and immediately
the flower bloomed again lovelier than ever, and he fell into a deep
sleep, but through his sleep he seemed to hear a soft low voice
singing underneath his window in a strange language (in which the
subtle sounds melted into one another), but he could distinguish no
word except his own name.

When he went forth in the morning to serve Mass, he still kept the
flower with him next his heart. Now when the priest began Mass and
said "Intriobo ad altare Dei," then said Gabriel "Qui nequiquam
laetificavit juventutem meam." And the Abbé Félicienturned round on
hearing this strange response, and he saw the boy's face deadly pale,
his eyes fixed and his limbs rigid, and as the priest looked on him
Gabriel fell fainting to the floor, so the sacristan had to carry him
home and seek another acolyte for the Abbé Félicien.

Now when the Abbé Félicien came to see after him, Gabriel felt
strangely reluctant to say anything about the blue flower and for the
first time he deceived the priest.

In the afternoon as sunset drew nigh he felt better and Carmeille came
to see him and begged him to go out with her into the fresh air. So
they went out hand in hand, the dark haired, gazelle-eyed boy, and the
fair wavy haired girl, and something, he knew not what, led his steps
(half knowingly and yet not so, for he could not but walk thither) to
the brook, and they sat down together on the bank.

Gabriel thought at least he might tell his secret to Carmeille, so he
took out the flower from his bosom and said, "Look here, Carmeille,
hast thou seen ever so lovely a flower as this?" but Carmeille turned
pale and faint and said, "Oh, Gabriel what is this flower? I but
touched it and I felt something strange come over me. No, no, I don't
like its perfume, no there's something not quite right about it, oh,
dear Gabriel, do let me throw it away," and before he had time to
answer, she cast it from her, and again all its beauty and fragrance
went from it and it looked charred as though it had been burnt. But
suddenly where the flower had been thrown on this side of the brook,
there appeared a wolf, which stood and looked at the children.

Carmeille said, "What shall we do," and clung to Gabriel, but the wolf
looked at them very steadfastly and Gabriel recognized in the eyes of
the wolf the strange deep intense blue eyes of the wolf-woman he had
seen on the "other side," so he said, "Stay here, dear Carmeille, see
she is looking gently at us and will not hurt us."

"But it is a wolf," said Carmeille, and quivered all over with fear,
but again Gabriel said languidly, "She will not hurt us." Then
Carmeille seized Gabriel's hand in an agony of terror and dragged him
along with her till they reached the village, where she gave the alarm
and all the lads of the village gathered together. They had never seen
a wolf on this side of the brook, so they excited themselves greatly
and arranged a grand wolf hunt for the morrow, but Gabriel sat
silently apart and said no word.

That night Gabriel could not sleep at all nor could he bring himself
to say his prayers; but he sat in his little room by the window with
his shirt open at the throat and the strange blue flower at his heart
and again this night he heard a voice singing beneath his window in
the same soft, subtle, liquid language as before--

Ma zála liral va jé Cwamûlo zhajéla je Cárma urádi el javé Járma,
symai,--carmé--Zhála javály thra je al vú al vlaûle va azré Safralje
vairálje va já? Cárma serâja Lâja lâja Luzhà!

And as he looked he could see the silvern shadows slide on the
limmering light of golden hair, and the strange eyes gleaming dark
blue through the night and it seemed to him that he could not but
follow; so he walked half clad and bare foot as he was with eyes fixed
as in a dream silently down the stairs and out into the night.

And ever and again she turned to look on him with her strange blue
eyes full of tenderness and passion and sadness beyond the sadness of
things human--and as he foreknew his steps led him to the brink of the
brook. Then she, taking his hand, familiarly said, "Won't you help me
over Gabriel?"

Then it seemed to him as though he had known her all his life--so he
went with her to the "other side" but he saw no one by him; and
looking again beside him there were two wolves. In a frenzy of terror,
he (who had never thought to kill any living thing before) seized a
log of wood lying by and smote one of the wolves on the head.

Immediately he saw the wolf-woman again at his side with blood
streaming from her forehead, staining her wonderful golden hair, and
with eyes looking at him with infinite reproach, she said--"Who did
this?"

Then she whispered a few words to the other wolf, which leapt over the
brook and made its way towards the village, and turning again towards
him she said, "Oh Gabriel, how could you strike me, who would have
loved you so long and so well." Then it seemed to him again as though
he had known her all his life but he felt dazed and said nothing--but
she gathered a dark green strangely shaped leaf and holding it to her
forehead, she said--"Gabriel, kiss the place all will be well again."
So he kissed as she had bidden him and he felt the salt taste of blood
in his mouth and then he knew no more.

Again he saw the wolf-keeper with his horrible troupe around him, but
this time not engaged in the chase but sitting in strange conclave in
a circle and the black owls sat in the trees and the black bats hung
downwards from the branches. Gabriel stood alone in the middle with a
hundred wicked eyes fixed on him. They seemed to deliberate about what
should be done with him, speaking in that same strange tongue which he
had heard in the songs beneath his window. Suddenly he felt a hand
pressing in his and saw the mysterious wolf-woman by his side. Then
began what seemed a kind of incantation where human or half human
creatures seemed to howl, and beasts to speak with human speech but in
the unknown tongue. Then the wolf-keeper whose face was ever veiled in
shadow spake some words in a voice that seemed to come from afar off,
but all he could distinguish was his own name Gabriel and her name
Lilith. Then he felt arms enlacing him.

Gabriel awoke--in his own room--so it was a dream after all--but what
a dreadful dream. Yes, but was it his own room? Of course there was
his coat hanging over the chair--yes but--the Crucifix--where was the
Crucifix and the benetier and the consecrated palm branch and the
antique image of Our Lady perpetuae salutis, with the little ever-
burning lamp before it, before which he placed every day the flowers
he had gathered, yet had not dared to place the blue flower.

Every morning he lifted his still dream-laden eyes to it and said Ave
Maria and made the sign of the cross, which bringeth peace to the
soul--but how horrible, how maddening, it was not there, not at all.
No surely he could not be awake, at least not quite awake, he would
make the benedictive sign and he would be freed from this fearful
illusion--yes but the sign, he would make the sign--oh, but what was
the sign? Had he forgotten? or was his arm paralyzed? No he could not
move. Then he had forgotten--and the prayer--he must remember that.
A--vae--nunc--mortis--fructus. No surely it did not run thus--but
something like it surely--yes, he was awake he could move at any
rate--he would reassure himself--he would get up-he would see the grey
old church with the exquisitely pointed gables bathed in the light of
dawn, and presently the deep solemn bell would toll and he would run
down and don his red cassock and lace-worked cotta and light the tall
candles on the altar and wait reverently to vest the good and gracious
Abbé Félicien, kissing each vestment as he lifted it with reverent
hands.

But surely this was not the light of dawn; it was like sunset! He
leapt from his small white bed, and a vague terror came over him, he
trembled and had to hold on to the chair before he reached the window.
No, the solemn spires of the grey church were not to be seen--he was
in the depths of the forest; but in a part he had never seen before--
but surely he had explored every part, it must be the "other side." To
terror succeeded a languor and lassitude not without charm--passivity,
acquiescence, indulgence--he felt, as it were, the strong caress of
another will flowing over him like water and clothing him with
invisible hands in an impalpable garment; so he dressed himself almost
mechanically and walked downstairs, the same stairs it seemed to him
down which it was his wont to run and spring. The broad square stones
seemed singularly beautiful and irridescent with many strange
colours--how was it he had never noticed this before--but he was
gradually losing the power of wondering--he entered the room below--
the wonted coffee and bread-rolls were on the table.

"Why Gabriel, how late you are to-day" The voice was very sweet but
the intonation strange--and there sat Lilith, the mysterious wolf-
woman, her glittering gold hair tied in a loose knot and an embroidery
whereon she was tracing strange serpentine patterns, lay over the lap
of her maize coloured garment--and she looked at Gabriel steadfastly
with her wonderful dark blue eyes and said, "Why, Gabriel, you are
late to-day" and Gabriel answered, "I was tired yesterday, give me
some coffee."

A dream within a dream--yes, he had known her all his life, and they
dwelt together; had they not always done so? And she would take him
through the glades of the forest and gather for him flowers, such as
he had never seen before, and tell him stories in her strange, low
deep voice, which seemed ever to be accompanied by the faint vibration
of strings, looking at him fixedly the while with her marvellous blue
eyes.

Little by little the flame of vitality which burned within him seemed
to grow fainter and fainter, and his lithe lissom limbs waxed
languorous and luxurious--yet was he ever filled with a languid
content and a will not his own perpetually overshadowed him.

One day in their wanderings he saw a strange dark blue flower like
unto the eyes of Lilith, and a sudden half remembrance flashed through
his mind.

"What is this blue flower?" he said, and Lilith shuddered and said
nothing; but as they went a little further there was a brook--the
brook he thought, and felt his fetters falling off him, and he
prepared to spring over the brook; but Lilith seized him by the arm
and held him back with all her strength, and trembling all over she
said, "Promise me Gabriel that you will not cross over." But he said,
"Tell me what is this blue flower, and why you will not tell me?" And
she said, "Look Gabriel at the brook." And he looked and saw that
though it was just like the brook of separation it was not the same,
the waters did not flow.

As Gabriel looked steadfastly into the still waters it seemed to him
as though he saw voices--some impression of the Vespers for the Dead.
"Hei mihi quia incolatus sum," and again "De profundis clamavi ad
te"--oh, that veil, that overshadowing veil! Why could he not hear
properly and see, and why did he only remember as one looking through
a threefold semi-transparent curtain. Yes they were praying for him--
but who were they? He heard again the voice of Lilith in whispered
anguish, "Come away!"

Then he said, this time in monotone, "What is this blue flower, and
what is its use?"

And the low thrilling voice answered, "it is called 'lûli uzhûri,' two
drops pressed upon the face of the sleeper and he will sleep."

He was as a child in her hand and suffered himself to be led from
thence, nevertheless he plucked listlessly one of the blue flowers,
holding it downwards in his hand. What did she mean? Would the sleeper
wake? Would the blue flower leave any stain? Could that stain be wiped
off?

But as he lay asleep at early dawn he heard voices from afar off
praying for him--the Abbé Félicien, Carmeille, his mother too, then
some familiar words struck his ear: "Libera mea porta inferi." Mass
was being said for the repose of his soul, he knew this. No, he could
not stay, he would leap over the brook, he knew the way--he had
forgotten that the brook did not flow. Ah, but Lilith would know--what
should he do? The blue flower--there it lay close by his bedside--he
understood now; so he crept very silently to where Lilith lay asleep,
her long hair glistening gold, shining like a glory round about her.
He pressed two drops on her forehead, she sighed once, and a shade of
præternatural anguish passed over her beautiful face. He fled--terror,
remorse, and hope tearing his soul and making fleet his feet. He came
to the brook--he did not see that the water did not flow--of course it
was the brook for separation; one bound, he should be with things
human again. He leapt over and--

A change had come over him--what was it? He could not tell--did he
walk on all fours? Yes surely. He looked into the brook, whose still
waters were fixed as a mirror, and there, horror, he beheld himself;
or was it himself? His head and face, yes; but his body transformed to
that of a wolf. Even as he looked he heard a sound of hideous mocking
laughter behind him. He turned round--there, in a gleam of red lurid
light, he saw one whose body was human, but whose head was that of a
wolf, with eyes of infinite malice; and, while this hideous being
laughed with a loud human laugh, he, essaying to speak, could only
utter the prolonged howl of a wolf.

But we will transfer our thoughts from the alien things on the "other
side" to the simple human village where Gabriel used to dwell. Mère
Yvonne was not much surprised when Gabriel did not turn up to
breakfast--he often did not, so absent-minded was he; this time she
said, "I suppose he has gone with the others to the wolf hunt." Not
that Gabriel was given to hunting, but, as she sagely said, "there was
no knowing what he might do next." The boys said, "Of course that muff
Gabriel is skulking and hiding himself, he's afraid to join the wolf
hunt; why, he wouldn't even kill a cat," for their one notion of
excellence was slaughter--so the greater the game the greater the
glory. They were chiefly now confined to cats and sparrows, but they
all hoped in after time to become generals of armies.

Yet these children had been taught all their life through with the
gentle words of Christ--but alas, nearly all the seed falls by the
wayside, where it could not bear flower or fruit; how little these
know the suffering and bitter anguish or realize the full meaning of
the words to those, of whom it is written "Some fell among thorns."

The wolf hunt was so far a success that they did actually see a wolf,
but not a success, as they did not kill it before it leapt over the
brook to the "other side," where, of course, they were afraid to
pursue it. No emotion is more inrooted and intense in the minds of
common people than hatred and fear of anything "strange."

Days passed by but Gabriel was nowhere seen--and Mère Yvonne began to
see clearly at last how deeply she loved her only son, who was so
unlike her that she had thought herself an object of pity to other
mothers--the goose and the swan's egg. People searched and pretended
to search, they even went to the length of dragging the ponds, which
the boys thought very amusing, as it enabled them to kill a great
number of water rats, and Carmeille sat in a corner and cried all day
long. Mère Pinquèle also sat in a corner and chuckled and said that
she had always said Gabriel would come to no good. The Abbé Félicien
looked pale and anxious, but said very little, save to God and those
that dwelt with God.

At last, as Gabriel was not there, they supposed he must be nowhere--
that is dead. (Their knowledge of other localities being so limited,
that it did not even occur to them to suppose he might be living
elsewhere than in the village.) So it was agreed that an empty
catafalque should be put up in the church with tall candles round it,
and Mère Yvonne said all the prayers that were in her prayer book,
beginning at the beginning and ending at the end, regardless of their
appropriateness--not even omitting the instructions of the rubrics.
And Carmeille sat in the corner of the little side chapel and cried,
and cried. And the Abbé Félicien caused the boys to sing the Vespers
for the Dead (this did not amuse them so much as dragging the pond),
and on the following morning, in the silence of early dawn, said the
Dirge and the Requiem--and this Gabriel heard.

Then the Abbé Félicien received a message to bring the Holy Viaticum
to one sick. So they set forth in solemn procession with great
torches, and their way lay along the brook of separation.

Essaying to speak he could only utter the prolonged howl of a wolf--
the most fearful of all bestial sounds. He howled and howled again--
perhaps Lilith would hear him! Perhaps she could rescue him? Then he
remembered the blue flower--the beginning and end of all his woe. His
cries aroused all the denizens of the forest--the wolves, the wolf-
men, and the men-wolves. He fled before them in an agony of terror--
behind him, seated on the black ram with human face, was the wolf-
keeper, whose face was veiled in eternal shadow. Only once he turned
to look behind--for among the shrieks and howls of bestial chase he
heard one thrilling voice moan with pain. And there among them he
beheld Lilith, her body too was that of a wolf, almost hidden in the
masses of her glittering golden hair, on her forehead was a stain of
blue, like in colour to her mysterious eyes, now veiled with tears she
could not shed.

The way of the Most Holy Viaticum lay along the brook of separation.
They heard the fearful howlings afar off, the torch bearers turned
pale and trembled--but the Abbé Félicien, holding aloft the Ciborium,
said "They cannot harm us."

Suddenly the whole horrid chase came in sight. Gabriel sprang over the
brook, the Abbé Félicien held the most Blessed Sacrament before him,
and his shape was restored to him and he fell down prostrate in
adoration. But the Abbé Félicien still held aloft the Sacred Ciborium,
and the people fell on their knees in the agony of fear, but the face
of the priest seemed to shine with divine effulgence. Then the wolf-
keeper held up in his hands the shape of something horrible and
inconceivable--a monstrance to the Sacrament of Hell, and three times
he raised it, in mockery of the blessed rite of Benediction. And on
the third time streams of fire went forth from his fingers, and all
the "other side" of the forest took fire, and great darkness was over
all.

All who were there and saw and heard it have kept the impress thereof
for the rest of their lives--nor till in their death hour was the
remembrance thereof absent from their minds. Shrieks, horrible beyond
conception, were heard till nightfall--then the rain rained.

The "other side" is harmless now--charred ashes only; but none dares
to cross but Gabriel alone--for once a year for nine days a strange
madness comes over him.



THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia


