

Project Gutenberg Australia



Title: The Assyrian Rejuvenator
Author: Clifford Ashdown
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0607781.txt
Language:  English
Date first posted: October 2006
Date most recently updated: October 2006

This eBook was produced by: Malcolm Farmer

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: The Assyrian Rejuvenator
Author: Clifford Ashdown





As six o'clock struck the procession of the un-dined began to stream
beneath the electric arcade which graces the entrance to Cristiani's.
The doors swung unceasingly; the mirrors no longer reflected a mere
squadron of tables and erect serviettes; a hum of conversation now
mingled with the clatter of knives and the popping of corks; and the
brisk scurry of waiters' slippers replaced the stillness of the
afternoon.

Although the restaurant had been crowded some time before he arrived, Mr
Romney Pringle had secured his favourite seat opposite the feminine
print after Gainsborough, and in the intervals of feeding listened to a
selection from Mascagni through a convenient electrophone, price
sixpence in the slot. It was a warm night for the time of year, a muggy
spell having succeeded a week of biting north-east wind, and as the
evening wore on the atmosphere grew somewhat oppressive, more
particularly to those who had dined well. Its effects were not very
visible on Pringle, whose complexion (a small port-wine mark on his
right cheek its only blemish) was of that fairness which imparts to its
fortunate possessor the air of youth until long past forty; especially
in a man who shaves clean, and habitually goes to bed before two in the
morning.

As the smoke from Pringle's havana wreathed upwards to an extractor, his
eye fell, not for the first time, upon a diner at the next table. He was
elderly, probably on the wrong side of sixty, but with his erect figure
might easily have claimed a few years' grace, while the retired soldier
spoke in his scrupulous neatness, and in the trim of a carefully tended
moustache. He had finished his dinner some little time, but remained
seated, studying a letter with an intentness more due to its subject
than to its length, which Pringle could see was by no means excessive.
At last, with a gesture almost equally compounded of weariness and
disgust, he rose and was helped into his overcoat by a waiter, who held
the door for him in the obsequious manner of his kind.

The languid attention which Pringle at first bestowed on his neighbour
had by this time given place to a deeper interest, and as the
swing-doors closed behind the old gentleman, he scarcely repressed a
start, when he saw lying beneath the vacant table the identical letter
which had received such careful study. His first impulse was to run
after the old gentleman and restore the paper, but by this time he had
disappeared, and the waiter being also invisible, Pringle sat down and
read:


'The Assyrian Rejuvenator Co.,
     82, Barbican, E.C. April 5th

'Dear Sir--We regret to hear of the failure of the "Rejuvenator" in your
hands. This is possibly due to your not having followed the directions
for its use sufficiently closely, but I must point out that we do not
guarantee its infallible success. As it is an expensive preparation, we
do not admit the justice of your contention that our charges are
exorbitant. In any case we cannot entertain your request to return the
whole or any part of the fees. Should you act upon your threat to take
proceedings for the recovery of the same, we must hold your good self
responsible for any publicity which may follow your trial of the
preparation.

                Yours faithfully,
                  Henry Jacobs,
                    Secretary.

Lieut.-Col. Sandstream,
272, Piccadilly, W.


To Pringle this businesslike communication hardly seemed to deserve so
much consideration as Colonel Sandstream had given it, but having read
and pondered it over afresh, he walked back to his chambers in
Furnival's Inn.

He lived at No. 33, on the left as you enter from Holborn, and anyone
who, scaling the stone stairs, reached the second floor, might observe
on the entrance to the front set of chambers the legend, 'Mr Romney
Pringle, Literary Agent'. According to high authority, the reason of
being of the literary agent is to act as a buffer between the ravening
publisher and his prey. But although a very fine oak bureau with
capacious pigeon-holes stood conspicuously in Pringle's sitting-room, it
was tenanted by no rolls of MS, or type-written sheets. Indeed, little
or no business appeared to be transacted in the chambers. The buffer was
at present idle, if it could be said to have ever worked! It was
'resting' to use the theatrical expression.

Mr Pringle was an early riser, and as nine o'clock chimed the next
morning from the brass lantern-clock which ticked sedately on a mantel
unencumbered by the usual litter of a bachelor's quarters, he had
already spent some time in consideration of last night's incident, and a
further study of the letter had only served thoroughly to arouse his
curiosity, and decided him to investigate the affair of the mysterious
'Rejuvenator'. Unlocking a cupboard in the bottom of the bureau, he
disclosed a regiment of bottles and jars. Sprinkling a few drops from
one on to a hare's-foot, he succeeded, with a little friction, in
entirely removing the port-wine mark from his cheek. Then from another
phial he saturated a sponge and rubbed it into his eyebrows, which
turned in the process from their original yellow to a jetty black. From
a box of several, he selected a waxed moustache (that most facile
article of disguise), and having attached it with a few drops of
spirit-gum, covered his scalp with a black wig, which, as is commonly
the case, remained an aggressive fraud in spite of the most assiduous
adjustment. Satisfied with the completeness of his disguise, he sallied
out in search of the offices of the 'Assyrian Rejuvenator', affecting a
military bearing which his slim but tall and straight-backed figure
readily enabled him to assume.

'My name is Parkins--Major Parkins,' said Pringle, as he opened the door
of a mean-looking room on the second floor of No. 82, Barbican. He
addressed an oleaginous-looking gentleman, whose curly locks and beard
suggested the winged bulls of Nineveh, and who appeared to be the sole
representative of the concern. The latter bowed politely, and handed him
a chair.

'I have been asked,' Pringle continued, 'by a friend who saw your
advertisement to call upon you for some further information.'

Now the subject of rejuvenation being a delicate one, especially where
ladies are concerned, the business of the company was mainly transacted
through the post. So seldom, indeed, did a client desire a personal
interview, that the Assyrian-looking gentleman jumped to the conclusion
that his visitor was interested in quite another matter.

'Ah yes! You refer to "Pelosia",' he said briskly. 'Allow me to read you
an extract from the prospectus.'

And before Pringle could reply he proceeded to read from a small leaflet
with unctuous elocution:

'Pelosia. The sovereign remedy of Mud has long been used with the
greatest success in the celebrated baths of Schwalbach and Franzensbad.
The proprietors of Pelosia having noted the beneficial effect which many
of the lower animals derive from the consumption of earth with their
food, have been led to investigate the internal uses of mud. The success
which has crowned the treatment of some of the longest-standing cases of
dyspepsia (the disease so characteristic of this neurotic age), has
induced them to admit the world at large to its benefits. To thoroughly
safeguard the public, the proprietors have secured the sole right to the
alluvial deposits of a stream remote from human habitation, and
consequently above any suspicion of contamination. Careful analysis has
shown that the deposit in this particular locality, consisting of finely
divided mineral particles, practically free from organic admixture, is
calculated to give the most gratifying results. The proprietors are
prepared to quote special terms for public institutions.'

'Many thanks,' said Pringle, as the other momentarily paused for breath;
'but I think you are under a slight misapprehension. I called on you
with reference to the "Assyrian Rejuvenator". Have I mistaken the
offices?'

'Pray excuse my absurd mistake! I am secretary of the "Assyrian
Rejuvenator Company", who are also the proprietors of "Pelosia".' And in
evident concern he regarded Pringle fixedly.

It was not the first time he had known a diffident person to assume an
interest in the senility of an absent friend, and he mentally decided
that Pringle's waxed moustache, its blue-blackness speaking loudly of
hair-dye, together with the unmistakable wig, were evidence of the
decrepitude for which his new customer presumably sought the Company's
assistance.

'Ours, my dear sir,' he resumed, leaning back in his chair, and placing
the tips of his fingers in apposition--'Ours is a world-renowned
specific for removing the ravages which time effects in the human frame.
It is a secret which has been handed down for many generations in the
family of the original proprietor. Its success is frequently remarkable,
and its absolute failure is impossible. It is not a drug, it is not a
cosmetic, yet it contains the properties of both. It is agreeable and
soothing to use, and being best administered during the hours of sleep
does not interfere with the ordinary avocations of every-day life. The
price is so moderate--ten and sixpence, including the Government
stamp--that it could only prove remunerative with an enormous sale. If
you--ah, on behalf of your friend!--would care to purchase a bottle, I
shall be most happy to explain its operation.'

Mr Pringle laid a half sovereign and a sixpence on the table, and the
secretary, diving into a large packing-case which stood on one side,
extracted a parcel. This contained a cardboard box adorned with a
representation of Blake's preposterous illustration to 'The Grave', in
which a centenarian on crutches is hobbling into a species of banker's
strongroom with a rocky top, whereon is seated a youth clothed in
nothing, and with an ecstatic expression.

'This,' said Mr Jacobs impressively, 'is the entire apparatus!' And he
opened the box, displaying a moderate-sized phial and a spirit-lamp with
a little tin dish attached. 'On retiring to rest, a teaspoonful of the
contents of the bottle is poured into the receptacle above the lamp,
which is then lighted, and the preparation being vaporized is inhaled by
the patient. It is best to concentrate the thoughts on some object of
beauty whilst the delicious aroma sooths the patient to sleep.'

'But how does it act?' inquired the Major a trifle impatiently.

'In this way,' replied the imperturbable secretary. 'Remember that the
appearance of age is largely due to wrinkles; that is to say, to the
skin losing its elasticity and fulness--so true is it that beauty is
only skin-deep.' Here he laughed gaily. 'The joints grow stiff from loss
of their natural tone, the figure stoops, and the vital organs decline
their functions from the same cause. In a word, old age is due to a loss
of <i>elasticity</i>, and that is the very property which the "Rejuvenator"
imparts to the system, if inhaled for a few hours daily.'

Mr Pringle diplomatically succeeded in maintaining his gravity while the
merits of the "Rejuvenator" were expounded, and it was not until he had
bidden Mr Jacobs a courteous farewell, and was safely outside the
office, that he allowed the fastening of his moustache to be disturbed
by an expansive grin.

About nine o'clock the same evening the housekeeper of the Barbican
offices was returning from market, her thoughts centred on the savoury
piece of fried fish she was carrying home for supper.

'Mrs Smith?' said a man's voice behind her, as she produced her
latch-key.

'My name's 'Odges,' she replied unguardedly, dropping the key in her
agitation.

'You're the housekeeper, aren't you?' said the stranger, picking up the
key and handing it to her politely.

'Lor', sir! You did give me a turn,' she faltered.

'Very sorry, I'm sure. I only want to know where I can find Mr Jacobs,
of the "Assyrian Rejuvenator Company".'

'Well, sir, he told me I wasn't to give his address to anyone. Not that
I know it either, sir, for I always send the letters to Mr Weeks.'

'I'll see you're not found fault with. I know he won't mind your telling
me.' A sovereign clinked against the latch-key in her palm.

For a second she hesitated, then her eye caught the glint of the gold,
and she fell.

'All I know, sir, is that when Mr Jacobs is away I send the letters--and
a rare lot there are--to Mr Newton Weeks, at the Northumberland Avenue
Hotel.'

'Is he one of the firm?'

'I don't know, sir, but there's no one comes here but Mr Jacobs.'

'Thank you very much, and good night,' said the stranger; and he strode
down Barbican, leaving Mrs Hodges staring at the coin in her hand as if
doubting whether, like fairy gold, it might not disappear even as she
gazed.

The next day Mr Jacobs received a letter at his hotel:


                                                         'April 7th

'Sir--My friend Col. Sandstream informs me he has communicated with the
police, and has sworn an information against you in respect of the
moneys you have obtained from him, as he alleges, by false pretences.
Although I am convinced that his statements are true, a fact which I can
more readily grasp after my interview with you today, I give you this
warning in order that you may make your escape before it is too late. Do
not misunderstand my motives; I have not the slightest desire to save
you from the punishment you so richly deserve. I am simply anxious to
rescue my old friend from the ridiculous position he will occupy before
the world should he prosecute you.

                   Your obedient servant,
                       Joseph Parkins, Major.
Newton Weeks, Esq.,
Northumberland Avenue Hotel.'


Mr Jacobs read this declaration of war with very mixed feelings.

So his visitor of yesterday was the friend of Colonel Sandstream!
Obviously come to get up evidence against him. Knowing old dog, that
Sandstream! But then how had they run him to earth? That looked as if
the police had got their fingers in the pie. Mrs Hodges was discreet.
She would never have given the address to any but the police. It was
annoying, though, after all his precautions; seemed as if the game was
really up at last. Well, it was bound to come some day, and he had been
in tighter places before. He could hardly complain; the 'Rejuvenator'
had been going very well lately. But suppose the whole thing was a
plant--a dodge to intimidate him?

He read the letter through again. The writer had been careful to omit
his address, but it seemed plausible enough on the face of it. Anyhow,
whatever the major's real motive might be, he couldn't afford to neglect
the warning, and the one clear thing was that London was an unhealthy
place for him just at present. He would pack up, so as to be ready for
all emergencies, and drive round to Barbican and reconnoitre. Then, if
things looked fishy, he could go to Cannon Street and catch the 11.5
Continental. He'd show them that Harry Jacobs wasn't the man to be
bluffed out of his claim!

Mr Jacobs stopped his cab some doors from the "Rejuvenator" office, and
was in the act of alighting when he paused, spellbound at the apparition
of Pringle. The latter was loitering outside No. 82, and as the cab drew
up he ostentatiously consulted a large pocket-book, and glanced several
times from its pages to the countenance of his victim as if comparing a
description. Attired in a long overcoat, a bowler hat, and wearing thick
boots of a constabulary pattern to the nervous imagination of Mr Jacobs,
he afforded startling evidence of the police interest in the
establishment; and this idea was confirmed when Pringle, as if satisfied
with his scrutiny, drew a paper from the pocket-book and made a movement
in his direction. Without waiting for further developments, Mr Jacobs
retreated into the cab and hoarsely whispered through the trap-door,
'Cannon Street as hard as you can go!'

The cabman wrenched the horse's head round. He had been an interested
spectator of the scene, and sympathised with the evident desire of his
fare to escape what appeared to be the long arm of the law. At this
moment a 'crawling' hansom came up, and was promptly hailed by Pringle.

'Follow that cab and don't lose it on any account!' he cried, as he
stood on the step and pointed vigorously after the receding hansom.

While Mr Jacobs careered down Barbican, his cabman looked back in time
to observe this expressive pantomime, and with the instinct of a true
sportsman lashed the unfortunate brute into a hand-gallop. But the
observant eye of a policeman checked this moderate exhibition of speed
just as they were rounding the sharp corner into Aldersgate Street, and
had not a lumbering railway van intervened Pringle would have caught him
up and brought the farce to an awkward finish. But the van saved the
situation. The moment's respite was all that the chase needed, and in
response to the promises of largesse, frantically roared by Mr Jacobs
through the trap-door, he was soon bounding and bumping over the wood
pavement with Pringle well in the rear.

Then ensued a mad stampede down Aldersgate Street.

In and out, between the crowded files of vans and 'buses, the two cabs
wound a zig-zag course; the horses slipping and skating over the greasy
surface, or ploughing up the mud as their bits skidded them within
inches of a collision. In vain did policemen roar to them to stop--the
order fell on heedless ears. In vain did officious boys wave
intimidating arms, or make futile grabs at the harness of the apparent
runaways. Did a cart dart unexpectedly from out a side street, the
inevitable disaster failed to come off. Did an obstacle loom dead ahead
of them, it melted into thin air as they approached. Triumphantly they
piloted the narrowest of straits, and dashed unscathed into St
Martin's-le-Grand.

There was a block in Newgate Street, and the cross traffic was stopped.
Mr Jacobs' hansom nipped through a temporary gap, grazing the pole of an
omnibus, and being lustily anathematised in the process. But Pringle's
cabman, attempting to follow, was imperiously waved back by a policeman.

'No go, I'm afraid, sir!' was the man's comment, as they crossed into St
Paul's Churchyard after a three minutes' wait. 'I can't see him
nowhere.'

'Never mind,' said Pringle cheerfully. 'Go to Charing Cross telegraph
office.'

There he sent the following message:

'To Mrs Hodges, 82, Barbican. Called away to country. Mr Weeks will take
charge of office--Jacobs.'

About two the same afternoon, Pringle, wearing the wig and moustache of
Major Parkins, rang the housekeeper's bell at 82.

'I'm Mr Weeks,' he stated, as Mrs Hodges emerged from the bowels of the
earth. 'Mr Jacobs has had to leave town, and has asked me to take charge
of the office.'

'Oh yes, sir! I've had a telegram from Mr Jacobs to say so. You know the
way up, I suppose.'

'I think so. But Mr Jacobs forgot to send me the office key.'

'I'd better lend you mine, then, sir, till you can hear from Mr Jacobs.'
She fumbled in her voluminous pocket. 'I hope nothing's the matter with
him?'

'Oh dear no! He found he needed a short holiday, that's all,' Pringle
reassured her, and taking the key from the confiding woman he climbed to
the second floor.

Sitting down at the secretarial desk, he sent a quick glance round the
office. A poor creature, that Jacobs, he reflected, for all his
rascality, or he wouldn't have been scared so easily. And he drew a
piece of wax from his pocket and took a careful impression of the key.

He had not been in possession of the 'Rejuvenator' offices for very long
before he discovered that Mr Jacobs' desire to break out in a fresh
place had proved abortive. It will be remembered that on the occasion of
his interview with that gentleman, Mr Jacobs assumed that Pringle's
visit had reference to 'Pelosia', whose virtues he extolled in a leaflet
composed in his own very pronounced style. A large package in the office
Pringle found to contain many thousands of these effusions, which had
apparently been laid aside for some considerable time. From the absence
in the daily correspondence of any inquiries thereafter, it was clear
that the public had failed to realize the advantages of the internal
administration of mud, so that Mr Jacobs had been forced to stick to the
swindle that was already in existence. After all, the latter was a
paying concern--eminently so! Besides, the patent-medicine trade is
rather overdone.

The price of the 'Assyrian Rejuvenator' was such as to render the early
cashing of remittances an easy matter. Ten-and-sixpence being a sum for
which the average banker demurs to honour a cheque, the payments were
usually made in postal orders; and Pringle acquired a larger faith in
Carlyle's opinion of the majority of his fellow-creatures as he cashed
the previous day's takings at the General Post Office on his way up to
Barbican each morning. The business was indeed a flourishing one, and
his satisfaction was only alloyed by the probability of some legal
interference, at the instance of Colonel Sandstream, with the further
operations of the Company. But for the present Fortune smiled, and
Pringle continued energetically to despatch parcels of the 'Rejuvenator'
in response to the daily shower of postal orders. In this indeed he had
little trouble, for he had found many gross of parcels duly packed and
ready for posting.

One day while engaged in the process, which had grown quite a mechanical
one by that time, he listened absently to a slow but determined step
which ascended the stairs and paused on the landing outside. Above, on
the third floor, was an importer of cigars made in Germany, and the
visitor evidently delayed the further climb until he had regained his
wind. Presently, after a preliminary pant or two, he got under weigh
again, but proceeded only as far as the 'Rejuvenator' door, to which he
gave a peremptory thump, and, opening it, walked in without further
ceremony.

There was no need for him to announce himself. Pringle recognized him at
first glance, although he had never seen him since the eventful evening
at Cristiani's restaurant.

'I'm Colonel Sandstream!' he growled, looking round him savagely.

'Delighted to see you, sir,' said Pringle with assurance. 'Pray be
seated,' he added politely.

'Who am I speaking to?'

'My name is Newton Weeks. I am----'

'I don't want to see <i>you!</i>' interrupted the Colonel testily. 'I want to
see the secretary of this concern. I've no time to waste either.'

'I regret to say that Mr Jacobs----'

'Ah, yes! That's the name. Where is he?' again interrupted the old
gentleman.

'Mr Jacobs is at present out of town.'

'Well, I'm not going to run after him. When will he be here again?'

'It is quite impossible for me to tell. But I was just now going to say
that as the managing director of the company I am also acting as
secretary during Mr Jacobs' absence.'

'What do you say your name is?' demanded the other, still ignoring the
chair which Pringle had offered him.

'Newton Weeks.'

'Newton Weeks,' repeated the Colonel, making a note of the name on the
back of an envelope.

'Managing director,' added Pringle suavely.

'Well, Mr Weeks, if you represent the <i>company</i>--' this with a
contemptuous glance from the middle of the room at his
surroundings--'I've called with reference to a letter you've had the
impertinence to send me.'

'What was the date of it?' inquired Pringle innocently.

'I don't remember!' snapped the Colonel.

'May I ask what was the subject of the correspondence?'

'Why, this confounded "Rejuvenator" of yours, of course!'

'You see we have a very large amount of correspondence concerning the
"Rejuvenator", and I'm afraid unless you have the letter with you----'

'I've lost it or mislaid it somewhere.'

'That is unfortunate! Unless you can remember the contents I fear it
will be quite impossible for <i>me</i> to do so.'

'I remember them well enough! I'm not likely to forget them in a hurry.
I asked you to return me the money your "Rejuvenator", as you call it,
has cost me, because it's been quite useless, and in your reply you not
only refused absolutely, but hinted that I dare not prosecute you.'

As Pringle made no reply, he continued more savagely: 'Would you like to
hear my candid opinion of you?'

'We are always pleased to hear the opinion of our clients.'

Pringle's calmness only appeared to exasperate the Colonel the more.

'Well, sir, you shall have it. I consider that letter the most impudent
attempt at blackmail that I have ever heard of!' He ground out the words
from between his clenched teeth in a voice of concentrated passion.

'Blackmail!' echoed Pringle, allowing an expression of horror to occupy
his countenance.

'Yes, sir! Blackmail!' asseverated the Colonel, nodding his head
vigorously.

'Of course,' said Pringle, with a deprecating gesture, 'I am aware that
some correspondence has passed between us, but I cannot attempt to
remember every word of it. At the same time, although you are pleased to
put such an unfortunate construction upon it, I am sure there is some
misunderstanding in the matter. I must positively decline to admit that
there has been any attempt on the part of the company of such a nature
as you allege.'

'Oh! so you don't admit it, don't you? Perhaps you won't admit taking
pounds and pounds of my money for your absurd concoction, which hasn't
done me the least little bit of good in the world--nor ever will! And
perhaps you won't admit refusing to return me my money? Eh? Perhaps you
won't admit daring me to take proceedings because it would show up what
an ass I've been! Don't talk to me, sir! Haugh!'

'I'm really very sorry that this unpleasantness has arisen,' began
Pringle, 'but----'

'Pleasant or unpleasant, sir, I'm going to stop your little game! I
mislaid your letter or I'd have called upon you before this. As you're
the managing director I'm better pleased to see you than your precious
secretary. Anyhow, I've come to tell you that you're a set of swindlers!
Of swindlers, sir!'

'I can make every allowance for your feelings,' said Pringle, drawing
himself up with an air of pained dignity, 'but I regret to see a holder
of His Majesty's commission so deficient in self-control.'

'Like your impertinence, sir!' vociferated the veteran. 'I'll let the
money go, and I'll prosecute the pair of you, no matter what it costs
me! Yes, you, and your rascally secretary too! I'll go and swear an
information against you this very day!' He bounced out of the room, and
explosively snorted downstairs.

Pringle followed in the rear, and reached the outer door in time to hear
him exclaim, 'Mansion House Police Court,' to the driver of a motor-cab,
in which he appropriately clanked and rumbled out of sight.

Returning upstairs, Pringle busied himself in making a bonfire of the
last few days' correspondence. Then, collecting the last batch of postal
orders, he proceeded to cash them at the General Post Office, and walked
back to Furnival's Inn. After all, the farce couldn't have lasted much
longer.

Arrived at Furnival's Inn, Pringle rapidly divested himself of the wig
and moustache, and, assuming his official port-wine mark, became once
more the unemployed literary agent.

It was now half-past one, and, after lunching lightly at a near
restaurant, he lighted a cigar and strolled leisurely eastward.

By the time he reached Barbican three o'clock was reverberating from St
Paul's. He entered the private bar of a tavern nearly opposite, and sat
down by a window which commanded a view of No. 82.

As time passed and the quarters continued to strike in rapid succession,
Pringle felt constrained to order further refreshment; and he was
lighting a third cigar before his patience was rewarded. Happening to
glance up at the second floor window, he caught a glimpse of a strange
man engaged in taking a momentary survey of the street below.

The march of events had been rapid. He had evidently resigned the
secretaryship not a moment too soon!

Not long after the strange face had disappeared from the window, a
four-wheeled cab stopped outside the tavern, and an individual wearing a
pair of large blue spectacles, and carrying a Gladstone bag, got out and
carefully scrutinized the offices of the 'Rejuvenator'. Mr Jacobs, for
it was he, did not intend to be caught napping this time.

At length, being satisfied with the normal appearance of the premises,
he crossed the road, and to Pringle's intense amusement, disappeared
into the house opposite. The spectator had not long to wait for the next
act of the drama.

About ten minutes after Mr Jacobs' disappearance, the man who had looked
out of the window emerged from the house and beckoned to the waiting
cab. As it drew up at the door, a second individual came down the steps,
fast-holding Mr Jacobs by the arm. The latter, in very crestfallen
guise, re-entered the vehicle, being closely followed by his captor; and
the first man having taken his seat with them, the party adjourned to a
destination as to which Pringle had no difficulty in hazarding a guess.
Satisfying the barmaid, he sallied into the street. The 'Rejuvenator'
offices seemed once more to be deserted, and the postman entered in the
course of his afternoon round. Pringle walked a few yards up the street
and then, crossing as the postman re-appeared, turned back and entered
the house boldly. Softly mounting the stairs, he knocked at the door.
There was no response. He knocked again more loudly, and finally turned
the handle. As he expected, it was locked securely, and, satisfied that
the coast was clear, he inserted his own replica of the key and entered.
The books tumbled on the floor in confused heaps, the wide-open and
empty drawers, and the overturned packing-cases, showed how thoroughly
the place had been ransacked in the search for compromising evidence.
But Pringle took no further interest in these things. The letter-box was
the sole object of his attention. He tore open the batch of
newly-delivered letters, and crammed the postal orders into his pockets;
then, secreting the correspondence behind a rifled packing-case, he
silently locked the door.

As he strolled down the street, on a last visit to the General Post
Office, the two detectives passed him on their way back in quest of the
'Managing Director'.


THE END



Project Gutenberg Australia


