
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: The Man of Science (1892)
Author: Jerome K Jerome
* A Project Gutenberg Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0800791.txt
Language:  English
Date first posted: August 2008
Date most recently updated: August 2008

Project Gutenberg Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: The Man of Science (1892)
Author: Jerome K Jerome



I met a man in the Strand one day that I knew very well, as I thought,
though I had not seen him for years. We walked together to Charing
Cross, and there we shook hands and parted. Next morning, I spoke of
this meeting to a mutual friend, and then I learnt, for the first time,
that the man had died six months before.

The natural inference was that I had mistaken one man for another, an
error that, not having a good memory for faces, I frequently fall into.
What was remarkable about the matter, however, was that throughout our
walk I had conversed with the man under the impression that he was that
other dead man, and, whether by coincidence or not, his replies had
never once suggested to me my mistake.

As soon as I finished, Jephson, who had been listening very
thoughtfully, asked me if I believed in spiritualism "to its fullest
extent."

"That is rather a large question," I answered. "What do you mean by
'spiritualism to its fullest extent'?"

"Well, do you believe that the spirits of the dead have not only the
power of revisiting this earth at their will, but that, when here, they
have the power of action, or rather, of exciting to action? Let me put a
definite case. A spiritualist friend of mine, a sensible and by no means
imaginative man, once told me that a table, through the medium of which
the spirit of a friend had been in the habit of communicating with him,
came slowly across the room towards him, of its own accord, one night as
he sat alone, and pinioned him against the wall. Now can any of you
believe that, or can't you?"

"I could," Brown took it upon himself to reply; "but, before doing so, I
should wish for an introduction to the friend who told you the story.
Speaking generally," he continued, "it seems to me that the difference
between what we call the natural and the supernatural is merely the
difference between frequency and rarity of occurrence. Having regard to
the phenomena we are compelled to admit, I think it illogical to
disbelieve anything we are unable to disprove."

"For my part," remarked MacShaughnassy, "I can believe in the ability of
our spirit friends to give the quaint entertainments credited to them
much easier than I can in their desire to do so."

"You mean," added Jephson, "that you cannot understand why a spirit, not
compelled as we are by the exigencies of society, should care to spend
its evenings carrying on a laboured and childish conversation with a
room full of abnormally uninteresting people."

"That is precisely what I cannot understand," MacShaughnassy agreed.

"Nor I, either," said Jephson. "But I was thinking of something very
different altogether. Suppose a man died with the dearest wish of his
heart unfulfilled, do you believe that his spirit might have power to
return to earth and complete the interrupted work?"

"Well," answered MacShaughnassy, "if one admits the possibility of
spirits retaining any interest in the affairs of this world at all, it
is certainly more reasonable to imagine them engaged upon a task such as
you suggest, than to believe that they occupy themselves with the
performance of mere drawing-room tricks. But what are you leading up
to?"

"Why, to this," replied Jephson, seating himself straddle-legged across
his chair, and leaning his arms upon the back. "I was told a story this
morning at the hospital by an old French doctor. The actual facts are
few and simple; all that is known can be read in the Paris police
records of sixty-two years ago.

"The most important part of the case, however, is the part that is not
known, and that never will be known.

"The story begins with a great wrong done by one man unto another man.
What the wrong was I do not know. I am inclined to think, however, it
was connected with a woman. I think that, because he who had been
wronged hated him who had wronged him with a hate such as does not often
burn in a man's brain, unless it be fanned by the memory of a woman's
breath.

"Still that is only conjecture, and the point is immaterial. The man who
had done the wrong fled, and the other man followed him. It became a
point-to-point race, the first man having the advantage of a day's
start. The course was the whole world, and the stakes were the first
man's life.

"Travellers were few and far between in those days, and this made the
trail easy to follow. The first man, never knowing how far or how near
the other was behind him, and hoping now and again that he might have
baffled him, would rest for a while. The second man, knowing always just
how far the first one was before him, never paused, and thus each day
the man who was spurred by Hate drew nearer to the man who was spurred
by Fear.

"At this town the answer to the never-varied question would be:--

"'At seven o'clock last evening, M'sieur.'

"'Seven--ah; eighteen hours. Give me something to eat, quick, while the
horses are being put to.'

"At the next the calculation would be sixteen hours.

"Passing a lonely chalet, Monsieur puts his head out of the window:--

"'How long since a carriage passed this way, with a tall, fair man
inside?'

"'Such a one passed early this morning, M'sieur.'

"'Thanks, drive on, a hundred francs apiece if you are through the pass
before daybreak.'

"'And what for dead horses, M'sieur?'

"'Twice their value when living.'

"One day the man who was ridden by Fear looked up, and saw before him
the open door of a cathedral, and, passing in, knelt down and prayed. He
prayed long and fervently, for men, when they are in sore straits,
clutch eagerly at the straws of faith. He prayed that he might be
forgiven his sin, and, more important still, that he might be pardoned
the consequences of his sin, and be delivered from his adversary; and a
few chairs from him, facing him, knelt his enemy, praying also.

"But the second man's prayer, being a thanksgiving merely, was short, so
that when the first man raised his eyes, he saw the face of his enemy
gazing at him across the chair-tops, with a mocking smile upon it.

"He made no attempt to rise, but remained kneeling, fascinated by the
look of joy that shone out of the other man's eyes. And the other man
moved the high-backed chairs one by one, and came towards him softly.

"Then, just as the man who had been wronged stood beside the man who had
wronged him, full of gladness that his opportunity had come, there burst
from the cathedral tower a sudden clash of bells, and the man, whose
opportunity had come, broke his heart and fell back dead, with that
mocking smile still playing round his mouth.

"And so he lay there.

"Then the man who had done the wrong rose up and passed out, praising
God.

"What became of the body of the other man is not known. It was the body
of a stranger who had died suddenly in the cathedral. There was none to
identify it, none to claim it.

"Years passed away, and the survivor in the tragedy became a worthy and
useful citizen, and a noted man of science.

"In his laboratory were many objects necessary to him in his researches,
and, prominent among them, stood in a certain corner a human skeleton.
It was a very old and much-mended skeleton, and one day the
long-expected end arrived, and it tumbled to pieces.

"Thus it became necessary to purchase another.

"The man of science visited a dealer he well knew--a little
parchment-faced old man who kept a dingy shop, where nothing was ever
sold, within the shadow of the towers of Notre Dame.

"The little parchment-faced old man had just the very thing that
Monsieur wanted--a singularly fine and well-proportioned 'study.' It
should be sent round and set up in Monsieur's laboratory that very
afternoon.

"The dealer was as good as his word. When Monsieur entered his
laboratory that evening, the thing was in its place.

"Monsieur seated himself in his high-backed chair, and tried to collect
his thoughts. But Monsieur's thoughts were unruly, and inclined to
wander, and to wander always in one direction.

"Monsieur opened a large volume and commenced to read. He read of a man
who had wronged another and fled from him, the other man following.
Finding himself reading this, he closed the book angrily, and went and
stood by the window and looked out. He saw before him the sun-pierced
nave of a great cathedral, and on the stones lay a dead man with a
mocking smile upon his face.

"Cursing himself for a fool, he turned away with a laugh. But his laugh
was short-lived, for it seemed to him that something else in the room
was laughing also. Struck suddenly still, with his feet glued to the
ground, he stood listening for a while: then sought with starting eyes
the corner from where the sound had seemed to come. But the white thing
standing there was only grinning.

"Monsieur wiped the damp sweat from his head and hands, and stole out.

"For a couple of days he did not enter the room again. On the third,
telling himself that his fears were those of a hysterical girl, he
opened the door and went in. To shame himself, he took his lamp in his
hand, and crossing over to the far corner where the skeleton stood,
examined it. A set of bones bought for three hundred francs. Was he a
child, to be scared by such a bogey!

"He held his lamp up in front of the thing's grinning head. The flame of
the lamp flickered as though a faint breath had passed over it.

"The man explained this to himself by saying that the walls of the house
were old and cracked, and that the wind might creep in anywhere. He
repeated this explanation to himself as he recrossed the room, walking
backwards, with his eyes fixed on the thing. When he reached his desk,
he sat down and gripped the arms of his chair till his fingers turned
white.

"He tried to work, but the empty sockets in that grinning head seemed to
be drawing him towards them. He rose and battled with his inclination to
fly screaming from the room. Glancing fearfully about him, his eye fell
upon a high screen, standing before the door. He dragged it forward, and
placed it between himself and the thing, so that he could not see
it--nor it see him. Then he sat down again to his work. For a while he
forced himself to look at the book in front of him, but at last, unable
to control himself any longer, he suffered his eyes to follow their own
bent.

"It may have been an hallucination. He may have accidentally placed the
screen so as to favour such an illusion. But what he saw was a bony hand
coming round the corner of the screen, and, with a cry, he fell to the
floor in a swoon.

"The people of the house came running in, and lifting him up, carried
him out, and laid him upon his bed. As soon as he recovered, his first
question was, where had they found the thing--where was it when they
entered the room? and when they told him they had seen it standing where
it always stood, and had gone down into the room to look again, because
of his frenzied entreaties, and returned trying to hide their smiles, he
listened to their talk about overwork, and the necessity for change and
rest, and said they might do with him as they would.

"So for many months the laboratory door remained locked. Then there came
a chill autumn evening when the man of science opened it again, and
closed it behind him.

"He lighted his lamp, and gathered his instruments and books around him,
and sat down before them in his high-backed chair. And the old terror
returned to him.

"But this time he meant to conquer himself. His nerves were stronger
now, and his brain clearer; he would fight his unreasoning fear. He
crossed to the door and locked himself in, and flung the key to the
other end of the room, where it fell among jars and bottles with an
echoing clatter.

"Later on, his old housekeeper, going her final round, tapped at his
door and wished him good-night, as was her custom. She received no
response, at first, and, growing nervous, tapped louder and called
again; and at length an answering 'good-night' came back to her.

"She thought little about it at the time, but afterwards she remembered
that the voice that had replied to her had been strangely grating and
mechanical. Trying to describe it, she likened it to such a voice as she
would imagine coming from a statue.

"Next morning his door remained still locked. It was no unusual thing
for him to work all night and far into the next day, so no one thought
to be surprised. When, however, evening came, and yet he did not appear,
his servants gathered outside the room and whispered, remembering what
had happened once before.

"They listened, but could hear no sound. They shook the door and called
to him, then beat with their fists upon the wooden panels. But still no
sound came from the room.

"Becoming alarmed, they decided to burst open the door, and, after many
blows, it gave way, and they crowded in.

"He sat bolt upright in his high-backed chair. They thought at first he
had died in his sleep. But when they drew nearer and the light fell upon
him, they saw the livid marks of bony fingers round his throat; and in
his eyes there was a terror such as is not often seen in human eyes."

Brown was the first to break the silence that followed. He asked me if I
had any brandy on board. He said he felt he should like just a nip of
brandy before going to bed. That is one of the chief charms of Jephson's
stories: they always make you feel you want a little brandy.



THE END.


Project Gutenberg Australia
