
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: The Tomb of Sarah
Author: F G (Frederick George) Loring (1869-1951)
* A Project Gutenberg Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0801001.txt
Language:  English
Date first posted: September 2008
Date most recently updated: September 2008

Project Gutenberg Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: The Tomb of Sarah
Author: F G (Frederick George) Loring (1869-1951)

From "Pall Mall Magazine", December, 1900



My father was the head of a celebrated firm of church restorers and
decorators about sixty years ago. He took a keen interest in his work,
and made an especaal study of any old legends or family histories that
came under his observation. He was necessarily very well read and
thoroughly well posted in all questions of folklore and medieval legend.
As he kept a careful record of every case he investigated the manuscripts
he left at his death have a special interest. From amongst them I have
selected the following, as being a particularly weird and extraordinary
experience. In presenting it to the public I feel it is superfluous to
apologize for its supernatural character.

MY FATHER'S DIARY

1841 .--June 17th. Received a commission from my old friend Peter Grant
to enlarge and restore the chancel of his church at Hagarstone, in the
wilds of the West Country.

July 5th. Went down to Hagarstone with my head man, Somers. A very long
and tiring journey.

July 7th. Got the work well started. Be old church is one of special
interest to the antiquarian, and I shall endeavour while restoring it to
alter the existing arrangements as little as possible. One large tomb,
however, must be moved bodily ten feet at least to the southward.
Curiously enough, there is a somewhat forbidding inscription upon it in
Latin, and I am sorry that this particular tomb should have to be moved.
It stands amongst the graves of the Kenyons, an old family which has been
extinct in these parts for centuries. The inscriptaon on it runs thus:

SARAH.
1630.
FOR THE SAKE OF THE DEAD AND THE WELFARE
OF THE LIVING, LET THIS SEPULCHRE REMAIN
UNTOUCHED AND ITS OCCUPANT UNDISTURBED TILL
THE COMING OF CHRIST.
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, THE SON, AND
THE HOLY GHOST.

July 8th. Took counsel with Grant concerning the 'Sarah Tomb'. We are both
very loth to disturb it, but the ground has sunk so beneath it that the
safety of the church is in danger; thus we have no choice. However, the
work shall be done as reverently as possible under our own direction.

Grant says there is a legend in the neighbourhood that it is the tomb of
the last of the Kenyons, the evil Countess Sarah, who was murdered in
1630. She lived quite alone in the old castle, whose ruins still stand
three miles from here on the road to Bristol. Her reputation was an evil
one even for those days. She was a witch or were-woman, the only
companion of her solitude being a familiar in the shape of a huge Asiatic
wolf. This creature was reputed to seize upon children, or failing these,
sheep and other small animals, and convey them to the castle, where the
Countess used to suck their blood. It was popularly supposed that she
could never be killed. This, however, proved a fallacy, since she was
strangled one day by a mad peasant woman who had lost two children, she
declaring that they had both been seized and carried off by the
Countess's familiar. This is a very interesting story, since it points to
a local superstition very similar to that of the Vampire, existing in
Slavonic and Hungarian Europe.

The tomb is built of black marble, surmounted by an enormous slab of the
same material. On the slab is a magnificent group of figures. A young and
handsome woman reclines upon a couch; round her neck is a piece of rope,
the end of which she holds in her hand. At her side is a gigantic dog
with bared fangs and lolling tongue. The face of the reclining figure is
a cruel one: the corners of the mouth are curiously lifted, showing the
sharp points of long canine or dog teeth. The whole group, though
magnificently executed, leaves a most unpleasant sensation.

If we move the tomb it will have to be done in two pieces, the covering
slab first and then the tomb proper. We have decided to remove the
covering slab tomorrow.

July 9th. 6 p.m. A very strange day.

By noon everything was ready for lifting off the covering stone, and
after the men's dinner we started the jacks and pulleys. The slab lifted
easily enough, though if fitted closely into its seat and was further
secured by some sort of mortar or putty, which must have kept the
interior perfectly air-tight.

None of us were prepared for the horrible rush of foul, mouldy air that
escaped as the cover lifted clear of its seating. And the contents that
gradually came into view were more startling still. There lay the fully
dressed body of a woman, wizened and shrunk and ghastly pale as
if from starvation. Round her neck was a loose cord, and, judging by the
scars still visible, the story of death of strangulation was true
enough.

The most horrible part, however, was the extraordinary freshness of the
body. Except for the appearance of starvation, life might have been only
just extinct. The flesh was soft and white, the eyes were wide open and
seemed to stare at us with a fearful understanding in them. The body
itself lay on mould, without any pretence to coffin or shell.

For several moments we gazed with horrible curiosity, and then it became
too much for my workmen, who implored us to replace the covering slab.
That, of course, we would not do; but I set the carpenters to work at
once to make a temporary cover while we moved the tomb to its new
position. This is a long job, and will take two or three days at least.

July 9th. Just at sunset we were startled by the howling of, seemingly,
every dog in the village. It lasted for ten minutes or a quarter of an
hour, and then ceased as suddenly as it began. This, and a curious mist
that has risen round the church, makes me feel rather anxious about the
'Sarah Tomb'. According to the best-established traditions of the
Vampire-haunted countries, the disturbance of dogs or wolves at sunset
is supposed to indicate the presence of one of these fiends, and local
fog is always considered to be a certain sign. The Vampire has the power
of producing it for the purpose of concealing its movements near its
hiding-place at any time.

I dare not mention or even hint my fears to the Rector, for he is, not
unnaturally perhaps, a rank disbeliever in many things that I know, from
experience, are not only possible but even probable. I must work this out
alone at first, and get his aid without his knowing in what direction he
is helping me. I shall now watch till midnight at least.

10.15 p.m. As I feared and half expected. Just before ten there was
another outburst of the hideous howling. It was commenced most distinctly
by a particularly horrible and blood-curdling wail from the vicinity of
the churchyard. The chorus lasted only a few minutes, however, and at the
end of it I saw a large dark shape, like a huge dog, emerge from the fog
and lope away at a rapid canter towards the open country. Assuming this
to be what I fear, I shall see it return soon atter midnight.

12.30 p.m. I was right. Almost as midnight struck I saw the beast
returning. It stopped at the spot where the fog seemed to commence,
and lifting its head, gave tongue to that partacularly horrible long-drawn
wail that I had noticed as preceding the outburst earlier in the evening.

Tomorrow I shall tell the Rector what I have seen; and if, as I expect,
we hear of some neighbouring sheepfold having been raided, I shall get
him to watch with me for this nocturnal marauder. I shall also examine
the 'Sarah Tomb' for something which he may notice without any previous
hint from me.

July 10th. I found the workmen this morning much disturbed in mind about
the howling of the dogs. 'We doan't like it, zur,' one of them said to
me--'we doan't like it; there was summat abroad last night that was
unholy.' Bey were still more uncomfortable when the news came round that
a large dog had made a raid upon a flock of sheep, scattering them far
and wide, and leaving three of them dead with torn throats in the field.

When I told the Rector of what I had seen and what was being said in the
village, he immediately decided that we must try and catch or at least
identify the beast I had seen. 'Of course,' said he, 'it is some dog
lately imported into the neighbourhood, for I know of nothing about here
nearly as large as the animal you describe, though its size may be due to
the deceptive moonlight.'

This afternoon I asked the Rector, as a favour, to assist me in lifting
the temporary cover that was on the tomb, giving as an excuse the reason
that I wished to obtain a portion of the curious mortar with which it had
been sealed. After a slight demur he consented, and we raised the lid. If
the sight that met our eyes gave me a shock, at least it appalled Grant.

'Great God!' he exclaimed; 'the woman is alive!'

And so it seemed for a moment. The corpse had lost much of its starved
appearance and looked hideously fresh and alive. It was still wrinkled
and shrunken, but the lips were firm, and of the rich red hue of health.
The eyes, if possible, were more appalling than ever, though fixed and
staring. At one corner of the mouth I thought I noticed a slight
dark-coloured froth, but I said nothing about it then.

'Take your piece of mortar, Harry,' gasped Grant, 'and let us shut the
tomb again. God help me! Parson though I am, such dead faces frighten
mc!'

Nor was I sorry to hide that terrible face again; but I got my bit of
mortar, and I have advanced a step towards the solution of the mystery.
This afternoon the tomb was moved several feet towards its new position,
but it will be two or three days yet before we shall be ready to replace
the slab.

10.15 p.m. Again the same howling at sunset, the same fog enveloping the
church, and at ten o'clock the same great beast slipping silently out
into the open country. I must get the Rector's help and watch for its
return. But precautions we must take, for if things are as I
believe, we take our lives in our hands when we venture Out into the
night to waylay the--Vampire. Why not admit it at once? For that the
beast I have seen as the Vampire of that evil thing in the tomb I can
have no reasonable doubt.

Not yet come to its full strength, thank Heaven! after the starvation
of nearly two centuries, for at present it can only maraud as wolf
apparently. But, in a day or two, when full power returns, that dreadful
woman an new strength and beauty will be able to leave her refuse' Then
it would not be sheep merely that would satisfy her disgusting lust for
blood, but victims that would yield their life-blood without a murmur to
her caressing touch--victims that, dying of her foul embrace, themselves
must become Vampires in their turn to prey on others.

Mercifully my knowledge gives me a safeguard; for that little piece
of mortar that I rescued today from the tomb contains a portion of the
Sacred Host, and who holds it, humbly and firmly believing in its virtue,
may pass safely through such an ordeal as I intend to submit myself and
the Rector to tonight.

12.30 p.m. Our adventure is over for the present, and we are back safe.

After writing the last entry recorded above, I went off to find Grant and
tell him that the marauder was out on the prowl again. 'But, Grant,' I
said, 'before we start out tonight I must insist that you will let me
prosecute this affair in my own way; you must promise to put yourself
completely under my orders, without asking any questions as to the why
and wherefore.'

After a little demur, and some excusable chaff on his part at the serious
view I was taking of what he called a 'dog hunt', he gave me his promise.
I then told him that we were to watch tonight and try and track the
mysterious beast, but not to interfere with it in any way. I think, in
spite of his jests, that I impressed him with the fact that there might
be, after all, good reason for my precautions.

It was just after eleven when we stepped out into the still night.

Our first move was to try and penetrate the dense fog round the church,
but there was something so chilly about it, and a faant smell so
disgustingly rank and loathsome, that neither our nerves nor our
stomachs were proof against it. Instead, we stationed ourselves in the
dark shadow of a yew tree that commanded a good view of the wicket
entrance to the churchyard.

At midnight the howling of the dogs began again, and in a few minutes we
saw a large grey shape, with green eyes shinang like lamps, shamble
swiftly down the path towards us.

The Rector started forward, but I laid a firm hand upon his arm and
whispered a warning 'Remember!' Then we both stood very still and watched
as the great beast cantered swiftly by. It was real enough, for we could
hear the clicking of its nails on the stone flags. It passed within a few
yards of us, and seemed to be nothing more nor less than a great grey
wolf, thin and gaunt, with bristling hair and dripping jaws. It stopped
where the mist commenced, and turned round. It was truly a horrible
sight, and made one's blood run cold. The eyes burnt like fires, the
upper lip was snarling and raised, showing the great canine teeth, while
round the mouth clung and dripped a dark-coloured froth.

It raised its head and gave tongue to its long wailing howl, which was
answered from afar by the village dogs. After standing for a few moments
it turned and disappeared into the thickest part of the fog.

Very shortly afterwards the atmosphere began to clear, and within ten
minutes the mist was all gone, the dogs in the village were silent, and
the night seemed to reassume its normal aspect. We examined the spot
where the beast had been standing and found, plainly enough upon the
stone flags, dark spots of froth and saliva.

'Well, Rector,' I said, 'will you admit now, in view of the things you
have seen today, in consideration of the legend, the woman in the tomb,
the fog, the howling dogs, and, last but not least, the mysterious beast
you have seen so close, that there is something not quite normal in it
all? Will you put yourself unreservedly in my hands and help me, whatever
I may do, to first make assurance doubly sure, and finally take the
necessary steps for putting an end to this horror of the night?' I saw
that the uncanny influence of the night was strong upon him, and wished
to impress it as much as possible.

'Needs must,' he replied, 'when the Devil drives: and in the face of what
I have seen I must believe that some unholy forces are at work. Yet, how
can they work in the sacred precincts of a church? Shall we not call
rather upon Heaven to assist us in our need.'

'Grant,' I said solemnly, 'that we must do, each in his own way. God
helps those who help themselves, and by His help and the light of my
knowledge we must fight this battle for Him and the poor lost soul
within.'

We then returned to the rectory and to our rooms, though I have sat up to
write this account while the scene is fresh in my mind.

July 11th. Found the workmen again very much disturbed in their minds,
and full of a strange dog that had been seen during the night by several
people, who had hunted it. Farmer Stotman, who had been watching his
sheep (the same flock that had been raided the night before), had
surprised it over a fresh carcass and tried to drive it off, but its
size and fierceness so alarmed him that he had beaten a hasty retreat
for a gun. When he returned the animal was gone, though he found that
three more sheep from his flock were dead and torn.

The 'Sarah Tomb' was moved today to its new position; but it was a long,
heavy business, and there was not time to replace the covering slab. For
this I was glad, as in the prosaic light of day the Rector almost
disbelieves the events of the night, and is prepared to think everything
to have been magnified and distorted by our imagination.

As, however, I could not possibly proceed with my war of extermination
against this foul thing without assistance, and as there is nobody else
I can rely upon, I appealed to him for one more night--to convince him
that it was no delusion, but a ghastly, horrible truth, which must be
fought and conquered for our own sakes, as well as that of all those
living in the neighbourhood.

'Put yourself in my hands, Rector,' I said, 'for tonight at least. Let us
take those precautions which my study of the subject tells me arc the
right ones. Tonight you and I must watch in the church; and I feel
assured that tomorrow you will be as convinced as I am, and be equally
prepared to take those awful steps which I know to be proper, and I must
warn you that we shall find a more startling change in the body lying
there than you noticed yesterday.'

My words came true; for on raising the wooden cover once more the rank
stench of a slaughterhouse arose, making us feel positively sick. There
lay the Vampire, but how changed from the starved and shrunken corpse we
saw two days ago for the first time! The wrinkles had almost disappeared,
the flesh was firm and full, the crimson lips grinned horribly over the
long pointed teeth, and a distinct smear of blood had trickled down one
corner of the mouth. We set our teeth, however, and hardened our hearts.
Then we replaced the cover and put what we had collected into a safe
place in the vestry. Yet even now Grant could not believe that there was
any real or pressing danger concealed in that awful tomb, as he raised
strenuous objections to am apparent desecration of the body without
further proof. This he shall have tonight. God grant that I am not
taking too much on myself. If there is any truth in old legends it would
be easy enough to destroy the Vampire now; but Grant will not have it.

I hope for the very best of this night's work, but the danger in waiting is
very great.

6 p.m. I have prepared everything: the sharp knives, the pointed stake,
fresh garlic, and the wild dog-roses. All these I have taken and
concealed in the  vestry, where we can get at them when our solemn vigil
commences.

If either or both of us die with our fearful task undone, lei those
reading my record see that this is done. I lay it upon them as a solemn
obligation. 'That the Vampire be pierced through the heart with the
stake, then let the Burial Service be read over the poor clay at last
released from its doom. Thus shall the Vampire cease to be, and a lost
soul rest.'

July 12th. All is over. After the most terrible night of watching and
horror one Vampire at least will trouble the world no more. But how
thankful should we be to a merciful Providence that that awful tomb was
not disturbed by anyone not having the knowledge necessary to deal with
its dreadful occupant! I write this with no feelings of self-complacency,
but simply with a great gratitude for the years of study I have been able
to devote to this special subject.

And now to my tale.

Just before sunset last night the Rector and I locked ourselves into the
church, and took up our position in the pulpit. It was one of those
pulpits, to be found in some churches, which is entered from the vestry,
the preacher appearing at a good height through an arched opening in the
wall. This gave us a sense of security (which we felt we needed), a good
view of the interior, and direct access to the implements which I had
concealed in the vestry.

The sun set and the twilight gradually deepened and faded. There was, so
far, no sign of the usual fog, nor any howling of the dogs. At nine
o'clock the moon rose, and her pale light gradually flooded the aisles,
and still no sign of any kind from the 'Sarah Tomb'. The Rector had asked
me several times what he might expect, but I was determined that no words
or thought of mine should influence him, and that he should be convinced
by his own senses alone.

By half-past ten we were both getting very tired, and I began to think
that perhaps after all we should see nothing that night. However, soon
after eleven we observed a light mist rising from the 'Sarah Tomb'. It
seemed to scintillate and sparkle as it rose, and curled in a sort of
pillar or spiral.

I said nothing, but I heard the Rector give a sort of gasp as he clutched
my arm feverishly. 'Great Heaven!' he whispered, 'it is taking shape.'

And, true enough, in a very few moments we saw standing erect by the tomb
the ghastly figure of the Countess Sarah!

She looked thin and haggard still, and her face was deadly white; but the
crimson lips looked like a hideous gash in the pale cheeks, and her eyes
glared like red coals in the gloom of the church.

It was a fearful thing to watch as she stepped unsteadily down the aisle,
staggering a little as if from weakness and exhaustion. This was
perhaps natural, as her body must have suffered much physically from her
long incarcerataon, in spite of the unholy forces which kept it fresh
and well.

We watched her to the door, and wondered what would happen; but
it appeared to present no difficulty, for she melted through it and and
disappeared.

'Now, Grant,' I said, 'do you believe?'

'Yes,' he replied, 'I must. Everything is in your hands, and I will obey
your commands to the letter, if you can only instruct me how to rid
my poor people of this unnameable terror.'

'By God's help I will,' said I; 'but you shall be vet more convinced
first, for we have a terrible work to do, and much to answer for in the
future, before we leave the church again this morning. And now to work,
for in its present weak state the Vampire will not wander far, but may
return at any time, and must not find us unprepared.'

We stepped down from the pulpit and, taking dog-roses and garlic from the
vestry, proceeded to the tomb. I arrived first and, throwing off the
wooden cover, cried, 'Look! it is empty!' There was nothing there! Nothing
except the impress of the body in the loose damp mould!

I took the flowers and laid them in a circle round the tomb, for legend
teaches us that Vampires will not pass over these particular blossoms if
they can avoid it.

Then, eight or ten feet away, I made a circle on the stone pavement.
large enough for the Rector and myself to stand in, and within the circle
I placed the implements that I had brought into the church with me.

'Now,' I said, 'from this circle, which nothing unholy can step across,
you shall see the Vampire face to face, and see her afraid to cross that
other circle of garlic and dog-roses to regain her unholy refuge. But on
no account step beyond the holy place you stand in, for the Vampire has a
fearful strength not her own, and, like a snake, can draw her victim
willingly to his own destruction.'

Now so far my work was done, and, calling the Rector, we stepped into the
Holy Circle to await the Vampire's return.

Nor was this long delayed. Presently a damp, cold odour seemed to pervade
the church, which made our hair bristle and flesh to creep. And then
down the aisle with noiseless feet came That whach we watched for.

I heard the Rector mutter a prayer, and I held him tightly by the arm,
for he was shivering violently.

Long before we could distinguish the features we saw the glowing eyes and
the crimson sensual mouth. She went straight to her tomb, but stopped
short when she encountered my flowers. She walked right round
the tomb seeking a place to enter, and as she walked she saw us. A spasm
of diabolical hate and fury passed over her face; but it quickly
vanished, and a smile of love, more devilish still, took its place. She
stretched out her arms towards us. Ben we saw that round her mouth
gathered a bloody froth, and from under her lips long pointed teeth
gleamed and champed.

She spoke: a soft soothing voice, a voice that carried a spell with it,
and affected us both strangely, particularly the Rector. I wished to test
as far as possible, without endangering our lives, the Vampire's power.

Her voice had a soporific effect, which I resisted easily enough, but
which seemed to throw the Rector into a sort of trance. More than this:
it seemed to compel him to her in spite of his efforts to resist.

'Come!' she said--'come! I give sleep and peace--sleep and peace--sleep
and peace.'

She advanced a little towards us; but not far, for I noted that the
Sacred Circle seemed to keep her back like an iron hand.

My companion seemed to become demoralized and spellbound. He tried to
step forward and, finding me detain him, whispered, 'Harry, let go! I
must go! She is calling me! I must! I must! Oh, help me! help me!' And he
began to struggle.

It was time to finish.

'Grant!' I cried, in a loud, firm voice, 'in the name of all that you
hold sacred, have done and the man!' He shuddered violently and gasped,
'Where am I?' Ben he remembered, and clung to me convulsively for a
moment.

At this a look of damnable hate changed the smiling face before us, and
with a sort of shriek she staggered back.

'Back!' I cried: 'back to your unholy tomb! No longer shall you molest
the suffering world! Your end is near.'

It was fear that now showed itself in her beautiful face (for it was
beautiful in spite of its horror) as she shrank back, hack and over the
circlet of flowers, shivering as she did so. At last, with a low mournful
cry, she appeared to melt hack again into her tomb.

As she did so the first gleams of the rising sun lit up the world, and I
knew all danger was over for the day.

Taking Grant by the arm, I drew him with me out of the circle and led him
to the tomb. There lay the Vampire once more, still in her living death as
we had a moment before seen her in her devilish life. But in the eyes
remained that awful expression of hate, and cringing, appalling fear.

Grant was pulling himself together.

'Now,' I said, 'will you dare the last terrible act and rid the world for
ever of this horror?'

'By God!' he said solemnly, 'I will. Tell me what to do.'

'Help me to lift her out of her tomb. She can harm us no more,' I
replied.

With averted faces we set to our terrible task, and laid her out upon
the flags.

'Now,' I said, 'read the Burial Service over the poor body, and then
let us give it its release from this living hell that holds it.'
Reverently the Rector read the beautiful words, and reverently I
made the necessary responses. When it was over I took the stake and,
without giving myself time to think, plunged it with all my strength
through the heart.

As though really alive, the body for a moment writhed and kicked
convulsively, and an awful heart-rending shriek woke the silent
church; then all was still.

Then we lifted the poor body back; and, thank God! the consolation that
legend tells is never denied to those who have to do such awful work as
ours came at last. Over the face stole a great and solemn peace; the
lips lost their crimson hue, the prominent sharp teeth sank back into
the mouth, and for a moment we saw before us the calm, pale face of a
most beautiful woman, who smiled as she slept. A few minutes more, and
she faded away to dust before our eyes as we watched. We set to work and
cleaned up every trace of our work, and then departed for the rectory.
Most thankful were we to step out of the church, with its horrible
associations, into the rosy warmth of the summer morning.

With the above end the notes in my father's diary, though a few days
later this further entry occurs:

July 15th. Since the 12th everything has been quiet and as usual. We
replaced and sealed up the 'Sarah Tomb' this morning. The workmen were
surprised to find the body had disappeared, but took it to be the
natural result of exposing it to the air.

One odd thing came to my ears today. It appears that the child of
one of the villagers strayed from home the night of the 11th inst., and
was found asleep in a coppice near the church, very pale and quite
exhausted. There were two small marks on her throat, which have
since disappeared.

What does this mean? I have, however, kept it to myself, as, now that the
Vampire is no more, no further danger either to that child or any other
is to be apprehended. It is only those who die of the Vampire's embrace
that become Vampires at death in their turn.



THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia
