
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: The Blue Daffodil
Author: Fred M White
* A Project Gutenberg Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 1600041.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: February 2016
Date most recently updated: February 2018

Produced by: Maurie Mulcahy

Project Gutenberg Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg Australia Licence which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: The Blue Daffodil
Author: Fred M White

*
The Blue Daffodil

By

FRED M. WHITE

Author of 'The Secret River,' 'On the Night Express,' 'Blackmail', etc.


Published in the South Coast Times and Wollongong Argus (NSW) in serial
form commencing Friday 31 January, 1936 (this text). Also published in
The Age (Melbourne, Vic.) commencing 17 December, 1934.




CHAPTER I.

John Garnstone, generally known as Professor Garnstone, sat at a table
in his more or less armoured quarters contemplating an array of gold
and silver treasures that might have formed what was once known as a
king's ransom. Gold plate, silver plate worth ten times its weight in
the more precious metal, gems of price, each of them with a history,
such a collection as no museum or collection in Europe could boast.

For Garnstone was by far the most noted judge of such things in his
generation. He bought and sold and valued as he had done for the last
40 years; he had been the welcome guest of princes and magnates, for
his judgment was unerring and his word was undisputed in the sale rooms
of London and Paris. His own collection was rumoured to be unequalled,
and his present wealth was estimated at a million.

An old man, this John Garnstone. Tall and thin and spare with a fine
head crowned with a mass of silver hair, an imposing old man, rather
hard of feature and reserved in manner as if he were the recipient of
secrets--as doubtless he was. A man apparently without friends, outside
his business, unless one counted his secretary, Vera Zaroff and Captain
Ronald Brentford, late of the Indian Army, and now a professional
hunter of rare flora on behalf of his employer. For, outside his
business, Garnstone had one mastering passion--the propagation and
cross fertilization of flowers. He was prepared to go to any length
to obtain the rare. His one great ambition was to give the world a
blue daffodil. It was Brentford's main business to discover this or
something like a bulb from which the perfect flower might be bred.

From somewhere in the Caucasus slopes leading up from the Black Sea,
Brentford had discovered a pale simulacrum of the flower, and this
bulb had formed the basis of Garnstone's excursions into Mendelism.
At the moment he seemed to be on the verge of success. In his roof
conservatory was a solitary bulb in a pot already showing leaf, and
when this bloomed, Garnstone was convinced that he would have reached
his desideratum at last. Three weeks more, and then----

It was in a strange quarter of Town in which Garnstone had, so to
speak, pitched his camp. He had purchased a more or less derelict block
of offices which had long been in Chancery, and on the top storey he
had dug himself in. In the basement lived the caretaker with the ground
floor let as a warehouse, above that a whole floor was vacant and over
that a suite of rooms, where Garnstone lived and had his being. For
the most part he used a sort of office-library with a bedroom leading
out of it. There was a large dining-room, and on the far side of that
the bedroom occupied by Vera Zaroff, the lady secretary. As for meals,
they were all taken out--even breakfast--and whatever house work was
required was part of the duties of one, Isaac Gunter, the bachelor
caretaker, who lived in the basement.

Garnstone was taking no risks so far as burglars were concerned. It
was common knowledge that besides his own many priceless treasures he
frequently held in temporary possession historic valuables on behalf of
royal and other clients. The very latest thing in the way of safes was
not entirely satisfactory, so that Garnstone had caused a door of steel
and reinforced concrete to be built into the entrance to the upper
floor, the master-key of which he alone held.

Above this city fortress was the flat lead-covered roof given over
almost entirely to the great conservatory where the flowers flourished
despite London fog and mist since the roof caught all the sunshine and
looked over the river without much intervening obstruction.

The sun was shining into the flat that early autumn morning as
Garnstone sat at his big desk going over his treasures. He placed them
presently on a large Queen Anne salver, and locked them securely away.
He touched a bell on his desk.

Into the room came Vera Zaroff, a slim creature moving with the easy
grace of a deer. Young and beautiful, her dark loveliness was enhanced
by the fact that her hair, which grew naturally, was white as frosted
silver. And so it had been since her 15th year, when she lost both her
parents abroad.

This last member of an aristocratic family had reached London almost
penniless, and there had found Garnstone, whom she had known as a child
since he once visited her ancestral home with a view to arranging and
valuing the immense family treasures. All these had afterwards been
lost during the misfortunes that had broken her father's heart.

Despite his reserve and natural coldness, Garnstone had a warm
corner in his heart for Vera. Moreover she had proved her worth as a
secretary. Now she was more or less in his confidence, and more like a
daughter than a paid servant.

"Good morning," she said in her perfect English. "I did not hear you
come in last night, and began to fear----"

"I was detained by the Duke of Middlesex," Garnstone explained. "Also I
heard a rumour that Brentford had returned from Brazil. Has he written
by any chance?"

A warm wave of colour stained Vera's cheek.

"There is nothing in this morning's correspondence," Vera said, "but
then he never writes when he is on his way home. It will be very nice
to see him again."

Calmly as she spoke Vera could not keep out of her voice a little
thrill which was not lost on her employer. He smiled like some
benevolent old aristocrat though who he was and whence he came none
could as much as guess.

As Vera stooped to hide a certain confusion, her eye fell on some
glittering object on the floor. She bent to pick it up, and a cry of
admiration broke from her lips at the sight of the little gold box in
her hand.

A snuff-box evidently made in some remote period, on the lid of it a
miniature exquisitely painted of some Court beauty, the face surrounded
with brilliants. The background was red and black enamel, with a
monogram inserted in rubies.

"What a lovely thing," Vera cried. "And what a lovely face! Strange,
yet oddly familiar. If----"

An instant later the box was snatched from her hand with a force
which was almost painful. Vera started back at the changed expression
on Garnstone's face. The bland benevolence was no longer there, the
mouth was drawn in a hard line of cunning and rage--such an expression
as Vera had never seen before. It was only for an instant, but the
impression on Vera's mind was clear and vivid.

"A sacred memory," Garnstone murmured with a return of his normal
manner. "Most careless of me. It must have fallen from the table when
I was examining some objects of art just now. I will return it to the
safe."

For a moment the incident passed. But Vera was to recall it in dramatic
circumstances before long.

Then there were letters to be written to clients all over the world,
catalogues to mark until the hour for tea arrived. This appeared
through the medium of Gunter, the caretaker, a man who might have been
earlier in his career either a prize-fighter or a burglar of the Bill
Sikes school. The front door of the fortress was unlocked to admit him,
and on his heels came a youngish-looking man at the sight of whom Vera
flushed and her hands trembled ever so slightly.

"Ronald," she whispered, but the new-comer caught the word and the
tender light behind his smile was more eloquent than any word would
have been.

"Vera, I kiss your hand," Ronald Brentford cried. "So good to be back
home once more. I trust I see you well, sir. And the Blue Daffodil? Has
that burgeoned yet?"

"I hope that you are back in time to see its birth, my young friend,"
Garnstone smiled. "There is a bursting bulb in the conservatory--but I
must not anticipate. Sit down and relate your adventures over a cup of
tea."

"I am afraid there is little to tell," Ronald said. "It seems to me
that the Brazilian forests are played out so far as new flora is
concerned. That is unless you are prepared to fit out a full-dress
expedition to explore lands where no single hunter dare venture alone.
At my hotel I have a few new orchids of no striking beauty and little
use. I worked my way back through Asia Minor and once more visited the
slopes of the Caucasus hoping to find some further development of the
Blue Daffodil without effect."

"Were you near Batoum?" Vera asked. "You remember that we had a summer
palace there in the old days; at least Mr. Garnstone does. A lovely
place on the Black Sea."

"Of course I remember it well, Vera," Garnstone said, with a wave of
his hand. "Some of my happiest days were spent there with your father
and mother."

"I saw it," Brentford explained. "My passport allowed me to go
anywhere. The Zaroff Palace is now a sort of residential barracks for
the ironstone workers, and the once fine park is a crater from which
the ironstone is raised. I seem to remember that the Caucasian Blue
Daffodil formed part of your coat of arms, Vera."

"Well, I should hardly call it a blue flower," Vera said with a smile.
"Rather a dirty mauve. And not much of a bloom either. Isn't it rather
strange that you should have found the basic flower of Mr. Garnstone's
ambition near my home?"

"Not at all," Garnstone interrupted. "Don't forget that I was on terms
of intimate friendship with your family, Vera. It was the discovery
of one of those mauve flowers close to your summer palace that first
inspired me with the desire to perfect the Blue Daffodil. Cause and
effect, my dear."

"Then within a month or so?" Ronald suggested.

"Somewhere about that, my boy. Meanwhile I have plenty of other work
for you to do. A few days' holiday, and then----"

"Doesn't Vera deserve one, too?" Brentford asked. "That is unless you
have other views for her. I rather hoped I was to have the honour of
taking her out to dine to-night."

"Why not?" Garnstone smiled. "I propose to dine here and do a little
work, afterwards. Vera can have the key. I know I can trust it in her
hands."

"I should love it," Vera murmured.




CHAPTER II.

Here was a great concession, and the lovers knew it. There were two
keys to the fortress, one of which was a master, the other for the
use of Vera when Garnstone was away, and she had need to leave the
premises. And the way in which the keys were worked in the front door
lock was known only to Garnstone and his trusted secretary. A certain
gadget had to be manipulated first, and this, working automatically,
was so ingeniously hidden that nobody who managed to steal the key
could possibly find it or indeed be aware that it existed. Thieves
had attempted to enter the old millionaire's stronghold, but with no
success. In front of the building was a powerful standard lamp which
was always turned on at night from inside Garnstone's library. Of this
the police were aware and would act promptly in case the light failed.
There was a side window to the building, but this led to a blind
alley, also the side of the building lacked anything in the shape of
water pipes, while such windows as had been there at one time were now
bricked up so that the side of the house presented an entirely flat
surface to any enterprising burglar who had an ambition to enter the
fortress.

It was just after seven o'clock when Vera left the flat, carefully
closing the door behind her. She heard the great steel bolts click into
their places, and then adjusted the ingenious gadget on the outside.
This could be manipulated from the inside by a master key in case of
emergency. And in case Garnstone wanted to go out, he would inform
Gunter of the fact by house telephone and take that bodyguard with him
which was a rigid rule where night excursions were concerned. That was
if Garnstone was carrying valuables on his person.

Vera walked along in the direction of the Premium Hotel, where Ronald
was to meet her, feeling that she had not a care in the world. She was
happy and comfortable in her work; she was in the enjoyment of more
money than she could spend seeing that she had no friends of either sex
and therefore had no occasion to fritter her salary away on pleasures.

All the same there were times when she longed for some change from the
monotony of the fortress. She knew that she would be well provided for
when Garnstone was no more, as did Ronny Brentford himself. That Ronnie
had fallen in love with her was a wonderful and delightful thing, but
then Ronnie was so often on his travels, and Garnstone was not supposed
to know that the young people had come to an understanding.

But had they really come to an understanding? Vera asked herself as she
walked along. There was nothing on her left hand to prove the fact, but
perhaps after to-night.

There was a delicate flush on her face and a sparkle in her eyes as she
entered the lounge where Ronnie Brentford was eagerly awaiting her. And
when she bared her head showing the mass of silver hair in striking
contrast to her dark colouring, many admiring glances were turned in
her direction. Not that she noticed these in the dazzle of lights, the
flowers on the shaded tables and the life and movement about her.

But she did not fail to see the proud gleam in Ronnie's eyes as he
escorted her to a table reserved in one corner of the room. There they
took their seats, and now Vera had an opportunity to study the gay
scene about her. As she did so all the colour drained from her cheeks,
and for a moment it seemed to Brentford that she was on the point of
fainting.

"What is the matter, darling?" he whispered.

It was the first time that term of endearment had passed his lips,
and Vera thrilled to it. All the same, she indicated a dark, rather
distinguished man with a black moustache and short beard, who was
sitting at a nearby table in company with a pretty girl in red.

"That man there," Vera whispered. "Paul Manstar. At one time my
father's secretary. He has changed little, but I recognise him. I was
but a child at the time, but I shall never forget him."

"But he can't hurt you," Ronnie pointed out.

"I know, I know," Vera murmured. "But the sight of him brings it all
back. The man who owed us everything. And the man who stole thousands
of pounds worth of treasures."

"I'll make it my business to learn something about him," Ronnie
declared grimly, "but probably you will never see him again, darling."

Brentford's voice trailed off on the last endearing word, and once more
Vera thrilled to it. She shook off her terror, and smiled into her
companion's eyes. In a few moments the man with the black beard was
forgotten.

"I shall have to stay in London and look after you I can see," Ronnie
said. "You live too much alone with that old man. The mere fact that he
is going to leave you a lot of money some day is not everything. And
'some day' may be a long way off, sweetheart. Vera, can't you imagine
why I asked you to come here with me to-night?"

"To--give me pleasure," Vera murmured.

"And both of us happiness, I hope," Ronnie said. "Vera, you must know
that I love you. I have done so since the very first day we met. I am
not so poor that we shall have to wait. I don't want you to desert the
old man who has been so good to both of us, but the time must come
when--but perhaps I am taking too much for granted. Still, if you think
you can possibly care for me one of these days . . ."

Her dark eyes met his grey ones.

"I could ask no greater happiness," she said steadily. "What more could
any girl wish for than a good man's love? Let me make a confession,
my Ronnie. When you asked me to dine with you to-night I prayed for
something like this. From the first it has always been you, Ronnie. Oh,
it is lovely to feel that I am no longer in the world with nobody to
confide in or seek out if I needed a haven of rest. Ronnie, you have
lifted the one great shadow from my heart."

She paused, conscious that other eyes were watching her, and laughed
with the sheer joy of life. What did it matter what they ate or drank?
What did anything matter just then?

"Let's make the best of the shining hour," Ronnie cried gaily. "When we
have finished here we will go on to some show and perhaps a dance. You
have your pass-key so that it does not matter what time you get home. I
shall see you as far as the fortress door anyway."

And Vera was content to leave it at that. But it was only when dinner
was over and she and her lover were in a taxi on the way to the
Coliseum that Vera experienced the full measure of her happiness.
With Ronnie's arms about her and his lips on hers she drank the full
contentment of life.

"We will keep our secret to ourselves darling," Ronald said as they sat
in the darkness of the taxi. "Take this ring that I brought with me in
case my love was returned, and wear it about your neck for the present.
We don't want to upset the old man before it is necessary. Hold it to
the light. Then tell me if my taste meets with your approval."

"Won't you put it on?" Vera asked.

"Of course," Ronald cried. "How stupid of me."

He slipped the diamond and platinum circle about the slender finger
where it fitted to perfection.

"How lovely, and yet how simple," Vera murmured in a rapture of
delight. "I should like to wear it always; I should like to flash it
in the face of the world and say it was given me by the best man I
know--the man I am going to marry. But perhaps you are right. Still Mr.
Garnstone may choose to retire one of these days and then----"

"Never!" Ronald cried emphatically. "The fascination of his job will
never grow less. The handling of historic gems and plate forms part of
his life."

"Shared by the Blue Daffodil," Vera laughed. "Don't forget that,
Ronnie."

"Which flower he thinks he has found," Brentford pointed out. "With
that ambition satisfied, he will be all the more keen on his life's
work. Moreover, he may not be quite as rich as we think he is. He
spends recklessly doing research work for other people, and merely
takes his trade commission. Also he is fond of money. He pays neither
of us too much, and Gunter, who has been with him all these years,
never sees more than his few shillings a week. Nor dare he ask for a
few shillings in advance."

It was with a sigh that at length the lovers parted at the entrance of
the old building, and Brentford lingered on the pavement until he heard
the clicking in the bolts of the steel door, so that he knew Vera to be
safe inside.

Meanwhile Vera had closed the door behind her and satisfied herself
that all was well. Doubtless Garnstone had long since retired, so that
to all practical purposes Vera had the flat to herself. She would not
seek her bedroom yet for sleep was far away. She would go into the
library and read for a time.

Five minutes later a cry rang out a cry so loud that it might have been
heard in the street. It reached the ears of Gunter in his bedroom, and
brought him to his feet. Scrambling into his clothes he raced up the
stairs. Then the cry again---one word:

"Murder."




CHAPTER III.

Gunter pounded on the steel door with horny fists.

"For God's sake open the door, miss!" he cried. "It's Gunter. Can't you
recognise my voice?"

To everybody outside the fortress, save Garnstone and Ronnie Brentford,
Vera was known as Miss Goff. So pure was her English that such a
deception was easy.

Again Gunter smote on the metal. Presently he could hear a movement
inside, then a rattle of a key. A moment later the door swung back, and
Gunter entered, whereupon the door was closed and locked once more.

Vera stood there, her face drained of colour, her limbs shaking
like some slender reed swaying in the wind. She was holding on to
consciousness by sheer strength of will.

"What's happened miss?" Gunter asked hoarsely.

Vera pointed in the direction of the library. So far she had not been
able to speak. All the same, she followed Gunter who advanced without
sign of fear. Inside the big room the lights were blazing brilliantly,
showing up every corner. On the Persian rug in front of an Empire table
used as a desk Garnstone lay as if asleep.

But it was the sleep of death. His face was turned upwards showing a
white expanse of shirt over which lay a patch of blood. A dark stain
smeared the rug under him, Gunter bent down and examined the still form.

"Dead," he whispered. "And what's more--murdered. If he killed himself
where is the knife? I don't see no signs of a weapon nowhere. Nor----"

The caretaker glanced about him. First, at the great safe in one
corner of the room where once there had been a lift shaft. No sign of
tampering there. A tug at the handle proved that the safe was still
locked, the window facing the road and the other on the right looking
into the alley-way were also latched. Then how had the murderer managed
to find his way into the flat? Certainly nobody admitted by Garnstone
himself since the steel door, once closed from either side, could not
be opened again without knowledge of its workings. If the culprit had
been admitted by Garnstone during Vera's absence, and killed, then the
murderer would be hoist with his own petard, for he could never have
got free of the flat again.

"I--I found him there like that when I came in just now," Vera
whispered. "It was just after half-past twelve by the clock over the
fireplace when I opened the steel door. I came in here for a book as I
did not feel sleepy. It was a most dreadful shock, Gunter. What shall
we do?"

"The police," Gunter suggested. "And a doctor, though he won't be much
use. I'll go----"

"No, no," Vera cried. "Not yet. I am afraid of being left here alone.
Suppose the murderer is still hiding on the premises. He must be. How
could he get away without knowing the secrets of the door? He could
never have got out again. Help me to find him, Gunter.

"If he's here, miss, I'll find him," Gunter cried. "You just stay here
whilst I have a hunt round."

But there was no sign of the miscreant anywhere. Even the trap leading
to the leads above where the conservatory had its place was locked and
bolted from the inside so that any person trying to enter by means of
the roof would be equally at fault.

"Nothing living anywhere, miss," Gunter declared.

"More than strange," Vera said. "But Gunter--are you sure that Mr.
Garnstone did not leave the flat some time whilst I was away? I mean,
did he go out at all?"

"Not to my knowledge, miss," Gunter declared. "Couldn't have done
without my seeing him as I was in my room from the minute you left this
evening until I went to bed, and that was after the turn of midnight."

"Then why is he in dress clothes?" Vera asked. "When I left he was in a
morning suit."

Gunter scratched his head in a puzzled sort of way. At the same time he
started and his eyelids drooped, a fact that was not altogether lost
on Vera. But then Gunter was as powerless to enter the flat as any
stranger.

With an effort Vera pulled herself together.

"We are wasting precious time now," she said. "Go and telephone to the
police, and look up the nearest doctor. I am not afraid to wait her
alone any longer."

It was a trying ordeal all the same being alone with the dead man so
that Vera was thankful when there came a tap on the door, and a voice
asking for admission.

"The police," the voice said. "Chief Inspector Medway. Will you kindly
admit me, Miss Goff."

Vera hastened to comply. Left there alone a little while longer and
she would have collapsed altogether. To her came a man in the middle
thirties, dressed in a well-cut grey suit and carrying a velour hat in
his hand. If not a gentleman, then a very good imitation of one both in
manner and speech. Vera heaved a little sigh of relief. This man would
understand.

"So sorry to trouble you like this, Miss Goff," he said with sympathy
in his tone. "Directly I heard who it was who had been a victim, I
decided to come myself. I happened to be detained late at the Yard,
and so--but let us not waste time, which is so precious in a case like
this. Please be seated, and tell me all you know."

Under this soothing treatment, Vera soon regained her usual clarity
of mind. Medway listened patiently until at length he began to ask
questions.

"How long have you been here?" he began. "I mean in your present
occupation?"

"Just over two years," Vera explained. "But I am not an Englishwoman,
Inspector Medway."

"Indeed, madam, you surprise me. But please proceed--and omit nothing.
You have no idea what trivial details lead sometimes to great results."

Vera took the inspector at his word. She spoke of days when she lived
abroad, and how she had come to England to an old friend of the
family--John Garnstone. How she had become in law an English citizen
and gradually become necessary to Garnstone, and, in a way, gained his
confidence.

"All most interesting," Medway said. "I can quite understand why your
employer came to dig himself in here. No doubt many attempts have been
made to rob him--this time, I should say, unsuccessfully. However, we
shall see. You might open the door again, for, if I mistake not, the
doctor is coming up the stairs."

Into the flat came a little lame man with a quick bustling manner, who
proclaimed himself to be Dr. Paul Little, of Sefton Square, saying
that he had been called by telephone in connexion with something
that savored of murder. In a few words, Medway made him wise to the
situation.

"And now that you are here, Doctor, we can't do better than view the
body. Indeed, I ought to have done that at first. Miss Goff will remain
where she is."

Vera asked for nothing better. She knew that the inspector was saving
her as much as possible whilst they pursued their grim task. As to
that, Dr. Little, after one glance at the body, proclaimed it to be
that of a dead man.

"Murdered beyond the shadow of a doubt," he declared without the
slightest hesitation. "Stabbed through the heart by a dagger thrust
with such force that the point of it penetrated the skin under the
shoulder blade. I expect to find that prick when the clothes are
removed."

"No suspicion of suicide?" Medway suggested.

"Absolutely out of the question," Little declared. "No man could have
driven a knife into his own breast with the force which was behind that
blow."

There was little more that the man of science could say or do.

"About how long dead?" Medway asked.

"Not much more than an hour," was the reply; "roughly round about
midnight. Rigor mortis has not yet set in. Was there nobody on the
premises at the time?"

"That I have to ascertain," Medway said drily. The doctor was
unwittingly trespassing on his preserves. "There is a mystery here that
will take some solving."

Presently there came men with cameras, and others with some sort of
powder for the taking of fingerprints. Their operations took a long
time, and when these minions of the law had departed, Medway asked to
see Vera again.

"I have been looking round," he told her. "So far as we can tell
at present, we have only discovered the finger-prints of two
people--those, probably of Mr. Garnstone and your own. But the motive
for the crime puzzles me. Nothing seems to be missing, and the safe is
securely locked. I have never seen a safe like this one before. Nobody
could lock it or unlock it without knowledge of the secret process
behind it. Are you one in that secret?"

Vera shook her head emphatically.

"There are some things that Mr. Garnstone never spoke about, and the
safe was one of them. He had it specially made by a noted firm in
Oxford Street--Landcraft and Co. They may help."

Medway made a careful note of the address.

"There is very little that escapes you Miss Goff," Medway smiled. "I
can't even find a maker's name on the safe. Not that I expect to find
a clue there. What is baffling me is the way in which the murderer
managed to get in and out of the flat so easily. That door, for
instance. He could neither have opened it nor shut it. The same with
the safe. The trap leading to the leads is intact, and the windows
latched. Moreover, the strong electric light outside the building is
still burning. There is the side window, of course, which looks down
into the alley-way, but that is a good 30 feet from the ground. I have
examined the outside ledge with a strong glass, but the grime there has
not been disturbed in the slightest. For the moment I am absolutely
baffled. No way in or no way out, and no motive--so far as I can see.
Perhaps when we come to see the safe opened we shall find something."

That, however was going to be a matter of some time. For Messrs
Landcraft declared that the formula had been destroyed after delivery
of the safe and their work finished. Their expert might be able to
reconstruct his invention though that might be a matter of months.
Garnstone had asked for something that could not be duplicated, and got
it. Hence the destruction of the formula.

A baffled inspector of police turned sadly away.




CHAPTER IV.

Medway sat in the office of Deputy Commissioner Sir Giles Fairchild,
discussing the strange case of John Garnstone.

"A big man in his way, Medway," Sir Giles said, "I might almost say an
international character. For the present I am leaving the case entirely
in your hands. So far there seems nothing to report. Now as to----"

Sir Giles broke off as a constable entered.

"Gentleman to see you, sir," he said. "Says it is very important. The
Garnstone case, I think, sir."

"Indeed, Brooks. Then send him in at once."

There entered a tall dark man with clipped moustache and beard, a glass
in his left eye. He bowed with the easy grace of a man accustomed to
society.

"Sir Giles Fairchild, I think," he said, unerringly, picking out the
superior man. "My name is Tanberg--Efan Tanberg. A Rumanian to be
precise. Educated in this country, and of what you call independent
means. Also a dealer in art treasures in an amateur way. Purely for
a pastime, you understand. I had some dealings with the late John
Garnstone."

Sir Giles showed signs of interest. Medway said nothing. "If you can
tell us anything----"

"That is for you to judge, sir. I only heard about the case yesterday,
as I have been out of Town. The papers say that the unfortunate man was
not outside his flat on the night of his murder. If you are of the same
opinion, then all I can say is that you are mistaken. On that tragic
evening Mr. Garnstone met me by appointment in the lounge of the Regal
Palace at nine o'clock on a small matter of business. He arrived in a
small two-seater car which he said was his own, and was with me there
until after the clock struck ten. The head waiter will confirm this as
he knew Mr. Garnstone by sight."

"Interesting, decidedly interesting," Sir Giles murmured, with a glance
at Medway, who nodded. "Have you any idea of the direction in which Mr.
Garnstone went when he left you?"

"Ah, that I cannot say," the Rumanian replied. "But he said something
about an appointment somewhere in the Minories with a Jew dealer who
had picked up something out of the common. That was the last I saw of
him."

"Very strange," Sir Giles murmured. "The caretaker under Mr.
Garnstone's flat declares that he never left the place all the evening.
Do you know the flat, sir?"

"No I don't," Tanberg replied. "Secluded, and fortified like a castle,
I am told by dealers who have been there. But what I say is true, and
others can confirm it. But that is not what I came here to speak about,
singular as the whole thing is. In point of fact I want to get hold
of something which belongs to me, and which I passed over for valuing
purposes to Garnstone on night of his death. A gold and enamel cup set
with gems and almost priceless. It is probably in his safe."

"Oh, you know he has a safe," Medway challenged.

"Why-er-yes," Tanberg stammered. "At least I presume so. A man like
that handling precious articles almost every day is pretty sure to have
one. Besides, didn't the papers say that the safe was intact? Not even
open."

As a matter of fact the papers had said nothing of the kind for the
simple reason that the information had been kept back from them, and
only routine details had been furnished to the army of reporters
seeking news.

"Probably they did," Medway agreed with some show of confusion, though
he felt none. In his mind here was a man worth keeping an eye on.
"Sorry I asked that question sir."

The Rumanian ignored him entirely.

"I suppose I can have my cup," he said to Sir Giles. "I shall be
prepared to prove my claim, of course. Possibly the article is
somewhere about the flat."

"In that case," Medway suggested, "why not come and see for yourself."

"My chief inspector here will give you every facility," Sir Giles said,
smiling genially. "Any time you----"

"As a matter of fact I am just going that way, and you might like to
accompany me," Medway interrupted.

There was nothing the stranger would like better. It was not for him to
see the significant glance that passed between the two officers as he
moved towards the door. It was pretty plain that here was a man to be
watched. Not necessarily a criminal, but one who could tell things if
necessary. Before the two reached the flat Medway had elicited the name
of the place and street where Tanberg was living without the latter
giving, as he thought, anything away.

Before they arrived at their destination, Brentford had come to the
flat. Owing to one cause and another he had not seen Vera since the
murder so that he was all the more anxious to meet her again. The
inquest on Garnstone would be held on the morrow when both he and Vera
would have to give evidence. In the meantime the body had been removed
to a mortuary, and the flat was open to those who had business there.

One of these early days the safe would be dismantled and opened,
but not yet. Meanwhile there was much to be done in the way of
correspondence, and some attempt made to clear up the murdered man's
affairs. There were no books since they were deposited in the safe
every night, and handed out each morning when the day's business began.
So that Vera was free to come and go as she liked, only nothing would
ever persuade her to sleep in that building again.

Brentford found her pouring over a mass of correspondence in the small
room used as an office. She rose quickly as he came towards her, and
the next moment lay sobbing in his arms. For a few moments he made no
effort to restrain her tears.

"You poor darling," he whispered presently, "what a cruel ordeal
for you. And what a mystery! I should have said that no criminal
could manage to gain entrance here. The police are just as puzzled
as ourselves. Medway, who has the case in hand, came to see me this
morning. I think he wanted to make sure of your movements on the night
of the crime. Some person is suspected but I don't know whom. What's
this I hear about the safe? Can't the key be found?"

"Not up to now," Vera explained. "All the poor man's key's were on a
ring in his trousers pocket, but not one of them was anything like the
key he treasured, and never left out of his possession. And yet I know
he always kept it on that ring. It is as if he anticipated trouble."

"Looks very like it," Ronnie murmured. "It is more than possible that
the police will have us under observation. Who are these men coming up
the stairs?"

A moment later Medway and his companion came into the room. Medway
advanced towards Vera.

"Come to trouble you again, Miss Goff," he smiled. "I have a gentleman
here who knows something of Mr. Garnstone's later movements. This is
Mr. Tanberg, Miss Goff. I may explain, sir, that Miss Goff is, or
rather was, Mr. Garnstone's private secretary. She may be able to help
you."

Vera looked the stranger steadily in the face. There was no sign of any
kind from which she could draw a deduction. And, on his part he was
evidently meeting the beautiful and fascinating woman for the first
time. She could see admiration and something more in those dark eyes of
his then he glanced away from her as if conscious that he was showing
his feelings too much and spoke to her quite normally.

"I am very sorry to trouble you," he said. "But you see, I happened to
meet Mr. Garnstone on the night of his death."

"Really?" Vera exclaimed. "But we have every reason to believe that he
never left the flat. I went out myself somewhere about seven o'clock to
dine with my friend Mr. Brentford here, and I returned somewhere around
half-past twelve. The caretaker Gunter, who lives in the basement,
is prepared to swear that, up to twelve o'clock, at any rate, Mr.
Garnstone was in the flat."

"Nevertheless, he was in my company from nine till ten," the stranger
said. "But we need not go into that--it is all part of the puzzle the
police have to solve. What I came here to identify, if I can find it,
is a gold cup that I gave Mr. Garnstone on the night of his death for
the--er--purpose of valuation. If you have seen anything of it----"

Vera declared that nothing of any value outside the furniture of the
flat had been discovered. Many things might, or might not, be in the
safe but so far, there had been no effort made to open it.

"Oh, well, I suppose I must be satisfied for the present," Tanberg
said. "No doubt it is inside the safe. I came along on the off chance
of finding my cup, but I was not particularly sanguine. Please pardon
my obtrusion."

With that, the stranger made Vera a graceful bow and left the flat, in
company with Medway. The latter was not prepared to lose sight of his
companion for the moment. And directly the door closed behind them Vera
turned to her friend.

"I can't understand it," she said, showing every sign of agitation.
"Mr. Garnstone away from the flat when we know he did not move all that
evening. Gunter could not possibly be mistaken. But that is not the
worst. I hope I didn't show any alarm when the stranger came in."

"Why should you?" Brentford asked.

"I had every reason," Vera murmured. "Have you forgotten already the
man I pointed out to you in the restaurant? The man who came here just
now called himself Tanberg, but he was Paul Manstar, the scoundrel who
robbed and ruined us."




CHAPTER V.

"I hope that Tanberg did not recognise you," Ronnie said.

"I am quite sure he did not," Vera replied. "I gave him every chance. I
forced myself to look deliberately into his bold eyes, and could read
no recognition there. Ronnie, he must never know who I am--never."

"No need for that," Brentford agreed. "You have always been 'Miss Goff'
ever since you came here, and now that poor Garnstone is dead, the
secret is ours--and Medway's, of course. He wants all the help we can
give him. But, for the moment at any rate, we will keep this business
of Manstar alias Tanberg to ourselves. Because, you see, Vera, I am
going to take a hand in this game and never rest until the murderer has
been brought to justice. I mistrust this Manstar fellow who, I think,
may be of use to us. Now, why did he want to see over the flat?"

"For some sinister purpose I am sure," Vera cried. "I believe that the
story of the gold cup was untrue. I don't believe that there is any
gold cup. Remember how cooly he behaved when no such cup was found. He
wasn't even annoyed over it. There is something evil here, and we have
got to get to the bottom of it, Ronnie."

And there for the moment they left it. Nothing further could be done
until the safe was opened. Meanwhile Vera, who had taken rooms close
by, came in to the flat every day to deal with letters and other matter
that poured in from all parts of Europe. Whenever it was necessary she
could reach Brentford by telephone and in addition they were together
most evenings.

A day or two passed before Brentford could make a personal contact with
Medway, and, when he did, it was only to find that the inspector was as
much in the dark as ever.

"The most baffling case I ever handled," he admitted quite freely. "Not
a thread to hang on to. I am still as convinced as ever that Garnstone
was taken by surprise that night by some scoundrel who managed to find
a way into the flat. Given that, I am at the end of my resources."

"I don't think so," Ronald said, smiling. "Now I am interested in that
Rumanian gentleman who visited the flat in search of a gold cup--or so
he says. I'm not suggesting that he murdered the poor old gentleman,
but I do suggest that he could tell us quite a lot if he were so
disposed. I don't know whether you are keeping an eye on him or, if you
know----"

"Were he lives," Medway interrupted. "Yes, I found that much out from
the man himself. He was kind enough to ask me to dine with him one
night which I may or may not do. But one of my men has been told off
to keep an eye on him and make a note of his movements and the sort of
company he keeps. One never knows what is going to turn up."

"Any luck so far?" Brentford asked.

"Well, no, but I have not been altogether idle. I have seen Mr.
Garnstone's lawyers, for instance. I rather wanted to have a look at
the old man's will. They hadn't got it--nothing but draft instructions
made some time ago. Mr. Garnstone took the original away with him a
month ago; probably it is in the safe. Then I went to Mr. Garnstone's
bankers, and there I did make something of a discovery."

"I am all attention," Brentford murmured.

"Very well. On the morning of the crime, Mr. Garnstone came into the
bank and drew out a thousand pounds in Bank of England notes--mostly
fivers. Of these I have the numbers. Sooner or later the present holder
will cash one or more of these and then we shall learn something. As
far as I remember, no money was found on the body save a few treasury
notes. I particularly want to know where that big money went."

"Very interesting," Brentford commented. "The missing clue may be
behind the bank paper. But what about Tanberg and his statement to the
effect that he and Garnstone met in the lounge of the Regal Palace on
the night of the murder? Gunter swore his master never left the flat
that night--at least not much before midnight, by which time he was
dead."

"That part I am on my way to investigate at this very moment, and if
you like you can come along."

Brentford wanted nothing better. Ere long the two were in close
conversation with the head waiter at the Regal Palace.

"Oh, yes, sir," he said in answer to Medway's question. "I knew Mr.
Garnstone very well. He frequently dined here. Was he here on the night
of his murder? No doubt whatever about it. He spoke to me when he came
in and when shortly before 10 o'clock he went off in his little two
seater car. Two or three of our waiters will tell you the same thing."

Medway professed himself satisfied on the point after he had questioned
others of the staff.

"Very strange," he whispered to Brentford. "Gunter must have been
entirely mistaken or was not telling the truth for some reason or
another. Now for the hall porter."

But that individual was as firm in his statement as the rest of the
staff. He distinctly remembered Mr. Garnstone leaving the lounge with
a gentleman whom he knew by the name of Tanberg. A foreigner, he was,
and a regular customer of late. The two stood on the pavement chatting
before Mr. Garnstone climbed into his two seater, saying something
about a man he was to visit who lived somewhere down east--Whitechapel
Road, the hall porter thought. Not that he was listening.

"Did Mr. Tanberg go with him?" Medway asked.

"No sir," the porter replied. "He came back into the lounge, and there
he stayed till about eleven o'clock after which he left on foot, the
night being fine."

"Strange, very strange," Medway ruminated as they turned their backs on
the hotel. "Gunter tells me that Mr. Garnstone had no car. Did you know
of one?"

"Most certainly not," Brentford, declared emphatically. "He professed a
real hatred of cars. And as to driving one----"

"Well, there you are, anyway," Medway said. "We have a number of
reliable witnesses who have nothing, to gain by paltering with the
truth who knew that Garnstone not only owned a car but actually drove
it. Through London streets, too. Now, what do you think of that, my
friend?"

"I wonder if the hall porter knew the number of the car?"

"Now that is a real brain wave!" Medway cried. "Though I ought to have
thought of it myself. Just a moment."

Medway retraced his footsteps only to return a few moments later with a
half-amused look on his face.

"Got it," he said. "And yet not got it. The man is certain that the
number is ZX 1001."

"What do you mean, not got it?"

"Simply this--there is no such number, couldn't be. Now I wonder what
that old chap was up to. Keeping a secret car in some equally secret
garage whilst vowing that the sight of a car was anathema to him. It
would seem that the great man was leading a double life. What I am
asking myself at moment is whether there is a secret passage from
the flat to the street. It must either be that or Gunter is in the
conspiracy and is the finest liar I ever met. Yet I have a feeling that
Gunter quite believes in what he says."

"What is the next move now?" Brentford asked.

"Why to trace that car. I shall have to send out a general call. That
is a description, to the street patrols, of the car, its make, colour
and so on. It's any odds I shall pick up something in the next 24
hours."

Medway was not very far off in his prophesy, for late the following
afternoon a constable presented himself at the Yard with a request to
see Inspector Medway. Presently the two were sitting in Medway's office.

"About that motor car, sir," the man began. "I was on duty a few nights
ago and----"

"Stop a moment," Medway interrupted. "Which night? And what fixes it on
your memory?"

"It was the night of the flat murder sir."

"Good man," Medway murmured. "Go on."

"Well sir, I went on night duty at the usual hour. Down Whitechapel
Road way, that is. At about 10.20 I saw a small car coming east. In it
was a single person. The car tallied in every way with that described
in the general call."

"Stop there for a bit," Medway interpolated. "Did you take any
particular notice of the driver?"

"No sir; I can't say I did."

"But you might recognise him if you saw him again?"

"I think I should, sir, especially in the face of what happened
afterwards. You see sir----"

Once more Medway held up his hand for silence. From a bundle of
cuttings on his desk he produced a photograph evidently taken from some
picture paper.

"Now try and describe the car driver," he commanded.

"Very tall and thin, sir. White hair and the features of an aristocrat.
Commanding-looking gentleman. Might have been a general or a statesman."

Medway passed the cutting over to his visitor.

"Something like that, for instance?" he asked.

"Why sir, it is the very gentleman. Of course I don't know his name,
only the number of the car."

Medway smiled, for he had carefully removed the letterpress from the
cutting. Time enough for that later on. "And the number of the car is
ZX1001 eh? Yes, I can see it is without asking. But that is not what
jogged your memory. Something out of the common happened."

"Not so much, after all, sir. Just another car coming in the opposite
direction, and a skid which forced the two seater on to the pavement.
Front wheel buckled and so on. The old gentleman got out undamaged, and
declined to make any charge against the other driver. Quite polite he
was, about it. So he hopped into a taxi, saying that he would send for
his car almost at once, as he knew of a garage not far off."

"So that you did not see him again?"

"No sir, I didn't. Just as I came that way again there was a mechanic
and his mate tinkering with the car and fixing a new wheel. They had
just about finished when I turned up, and off they went before I could
ask a question."

"Um," Medway muttered thoughtfully. "I presume that you might be able
to recognise those mechanics again?"

"I don't think so," the officer replied, with a shake of his head.
"They were very dirty and black as sweeps, besides being in dungarees.
Anything else, sir?"

Medway shook his head in turn, and for a long time after the officer
had gone sat there plunged in deep thought.

"I wonder," he said, earnestly to himself. "I wonder."




CHAPTER VI.

Lord Glenday was naturally indignant as millionaires are apt to be when
things go wrong or they suffer some loss which is no fault of their
own. And such a misfortune had overtaken Alan, first Baron Glenday,
when expert thieves broke into his fine place in Sussex, and helped
themselves to most of his artistic treasures. The mere fact that
they were insured up to their full value did little to restore his
lordship's equanimity.

"Over a month ago, and not one single practical move on the part of
the police," he told Sir Giles Fairchild in the latter's sanctum in
Scotland Yard. "I gave your people a full list and description and you
have not even advertised them. A premium on dishonest pawnbrokers, I
call it."

"We have our reasons," Sir Giles replied. "And we are not entirely
without a clue to act upon. For the present we prefer to leave the
public in ignorance of what is missing. We have reason to think
that one of the treasures is in certain hands. That we can get, but
if we do, the rest will never be heard of again. Please yourself,
Glenday--get the one article back and lose the rest, or leave us a
little more time, and in all probability recover everything."

Scotland Yard commissioners are not to be bluffed, and his lordship
wisely recognised the fact. He made a dignified exit as Medway entered
the room.

"Worrying you again, sir?" Medway asked.

"Something like that," Sir Giles agreed. "But he has set me thinking.
I have here a list of Glenday's missing art treasures. Amongst them is
a gold and enamel cup set in brilliants and monogrammed. It has just
occurred to me that there is a hunt being made for another gold cup
which the man you were telling me about claimed."

"Oh, yes," Medway cried. "The man called Tanberg, who says that a
similar article was left in the possession of Mr. Garnstone prior to
his murder. You think it might be the same? Very odd that you should
have mentioned it sir."

"What! Do you think so, too?"

"Well, I won't go as far as that, sir. But one never knows when some
important clue may turn up. So I put one of my best men to shadow Mr.
Tanberg. The fellow seems to know all sorts and conditions of people.
Dines in Mayfair and is a guest at some of the very best houses. But
knows some very shady characters as well. The refugee type amongst
others. Doesn't appear to have a banking account, but pays everybody.
Lives in a fine service flat and has plenty of money to spend. But who
he is, and where he really comes from, nobody knows."

"Worth watching, you think?"

"I certainly do, sir. It looks to me as if he has the cheek to claim
property belonging to other people. Meaning that he seeks to prove the
ownership of some precious article which he knows was in Garnstone's
possession at the time of his death. And yet when he heard that
Garnstone was no more he was as cool as ice about it. A bit queer,
that, seeing that he was in the company of Garnstone within two hours
of his death."

"And you dare not cross-examine him," Sir Giles said chaffingly. "But
what about Garnstone, and that secret visit to some place in the
East End, and the car which you were told he hated. Any car, that
is. Don't you think it possible that Garnstone was up to some shady
business connected with his legitimate business? A man in his position
would make an ideal 'fence'. Known and trusted by everybody from
crowned heads downwards, handling gems of price as if they were so
many pebbles. And I have heard it said that he was a veritable miser,
grudging the spending of every penny. Outside his lady secretary, and
that traveller of his he cared for nothing. At any rate such is the
result of my fishing inquiries."

"There may be something in what you say, sir. At any rate, I won't rule
it out as a possible solution. If Garnstone was a fence, then he was a
precious grasping one. One can imagine him incurring the bitter enmity
of some deluded burglar who came to him hoping for hundreds and getting
tens. There are half a dozen burglars in London who would murder a man
for less than that. The Lefton gang, for instance."

"I have not put them out of the picture," Sir Giles said, with a grim
smile. "Now another question. Have you heard anything respecting the
garage to which Garnstone's car was taken on the night of the accident?"

"Not a word, sir. Curious thing, isn't it. Every known garage within
a mile of the spot where the smash happened has been visited without
result. And nobody has come forward to inquire as to the ownership of
the car."

"Um. Looks to me like a hidden garage somewhere. A place where the car
was kept by persons in Garnstone's pay. Criminals he had a hold on.
You don't suppose that Captain Brentford or the secretary are in the
secret?"

"Not for a moment sir. If you had seen the lady on the night of murder,
as I did, then you would have ruled her out without the slightest
hesitation. The captain the same. Anyhow, we have plenty to go on
with as it is. I am going to find that garage if it takes me a month.
Somehow I think the end of the long thread is somewhere there."

"Well, good hunting," Sir Giles said as he rose. "If you fail, then we
shall own defeat."

"We are not going to be defeated, sir," Medway said through closed
teeth. "I haven't finished with that car business. It is just possible
that the two-seater has already been changed out of recognition, but
what about the maker's name on the engine? I might find this though it
is like looking for a ruby dropped on the Pebble Ridge. Garnstone must
have bought it sometime, somewhere. Perhaps I can find some trace of a
receipt amongst that mass of papers in his big desk. I will see if the
beautiful secretary can help me."

Medway gave orders for a more extensive search with special attention
to the movements of the Lefton gang, whose activities always interested
him. Within 24 hours came a report from White chapel way that the elder
Lefton had been seen the night before leaving his house in a car that
almost distinctly tallied with the missing two-seater.

"Only the number is different, sir," said the constable, who came in
with the information. "Another officer and myself followed in another
car, but lost our man at Ealing. I feel pretty sure that we were on the
track of the right car."

"Well, it can't be helped," Medway said, philosophically. "But now that
you know, keep a close eye on Lefton's place. I had better detail a
couple of men to keep watch."

It was all very baffling and disappointing. Directly anything like
a thread appeared above ground it vanished like a mole in a meadow.
Nor was there anything to throw light on the mysterious car amongst
Garnstone's papers. Moreover, Vera was inclined to resent Medway's
veiled hints as to certain activities of the dead man. So far as she
was concerned, he had been more like a father to her than anything else.

"But wasn't he very mean?" Medway asked.

"As far as money was concerned--yes," Vera conceded. "But we all have
our little weaknesses. Mr. Garnstone hoped to retire before long and
devote himself to floriculture, which was a passion with him. It is a
most expensive hobby, so that he wanted a large fortune to maintain his
hot-houses. That was why he was so close about money."

"But why did he profess to hate motors, when he had one himself, and
knew how to drive it, even in London traffic?"

Vera shook her head hopelessly.

"Ah, that is beyond me altogether," she said. "Until you and the
others were so definite I should have been certain there was a mistake
somewhere. Again, why did Mr. Garnstone assure me that he was not going
out that night when all along he was going to keep an appointment with
that awful man?"

"Meaning Tanberg," Medway suggested. "But why do you speak of him in
such terms?"

Vera pulled herself up quickly. She had not intended to say quite so
much--at least not at present.

"We have met before," she said. "Our meeting has nothing to do with the
present case, and I wish to forget the matter. Please do not further
question me."

More mystery, thought Medway to himself, as he left the flat, little
knowing that Vera had a mystery--and a distressing one at that, to
worry her. And it would until Ronnie came along to take her out to
tea as promised. She was waiting for him now, having cleared up the
correspondence for the day.

Brentford arrived presently, having put aside all painful thoughts, as
he always did when giving Vera pleasure. But he was struck immediately
by the strained look on that lovely face, and the drawn lines about the
scarlet mouth.

"Why, what is the matter, darling?" he asked. "You look as if you had
seen a ghost."

"Ronnie, the most dreadful thing has happened. I only found it out half
an hour ago. On the roof looking to the conservatory. Nobody has been
up there but me since the crime. I can't think how I came to miss it.
But, Ronnie, the Blue Daffodil has vanished--pot and all. How on earth
was it stolen?--and why?"




CHAPTER VII.

What an amazing business it was from whatever point of view one
regarded it. All sorts of strange things happening without one of
them pointing towards a definite conclusion. And now here was another
startling development that threw no light whatever on the tragedy of
Garnstone's death.

"Are you quite sure?" Ronnie asked. "I mean are you sure the bulb was
there in its pot on the night that our poor friend was murdered?"

"Absolutely certain," Vera replied. "Not long before I joined you at
the Premium I was in the conservatory. I went up there on the roof to
make sure that the heating apparatus was working properly. As you know,
the conservatory is connected with the central heating of the flat, so
that no special furnace is required. I looked at the bulb to see what
progress it was making, as I generally do. I know it was there when I
left the flat, but how and when it vanished I cannot say. Since the
murder I have not given the Blue Daffodil a thought. There were so many
other things to think of. Do you think Mr. Garnstone took it with him
when he went out that night to keep his appointment with the man man
who calls himself Tanberg."

"I should say that it is exceedingly unlikely," Ronnie said. "I can't
see him carting that pot half over London. Nor can I believe that the
so-called Tanberg was the least interested in a new daffodil or any
other flower for that matter. Nor can I see the murderer risking his
neck for a bulb in a pot, even if he knew the value of it."

"Is it very valuable, do you think Ronnie?"

"Probably. Worth a thousand pounds perhaps. An entirely new flower
might fetch that sum. But think of the danger to the thief. So far as
he knows to the contrary, a score of people might be in the secret.
Therefore, any attempt to commercialise it would be simply asking for
trouble."

"And yet for some reason or other the bulb was stolen, and stolen on
the night of the murder. Nobody could possibly have been in the flat
since without using my key, and that has never left my possession for a
moment."

"Don't be too sure of that, Vera," Brentford said. "The man who
murdered our friend contrived to obtain entrance and exit. Since the
tragedy nobody has slept in the flat, which is deserted directly you
leave in the afternoon taking care to close the steel door behind you.
But there must be some way in and out or Mr. Garnstone would be alive
at this moment. It would be safe for the miscreant to come here again
any night."

Vera gave it up in despair. There was sound logic behind what Brentford
was saying. She shuddered to think of that foul monster being in a
position to visit the flat at any time he liked after nightfall.
Perhaps even in daylight . . .

"What shall we do about it, darling?" she asked forlornly.

"Very little for the moment," Brentford said. "I must see Medway about
this; he may be able to suggest something."

The inspector almost laughed as he heard the story that Brentford had
to tell. Not that he was in the least amused.

"I am so hopelessly fogged," he confessed candidly. "The further we
go the deeper we seem to be in the labyrinth. What are we to make of
a criminal who does not stop at murder, but has a love of flowers?
Now how the deuce did he glean his intimate knowledge of Garnstone's
hobbies and household generally? And again--what was behind those car
expeditions in a shady part of London? In a car which obviously he had
hidden in some garage the whereabouts of which we can't trace."

"Yes, I know all about that," Brentford said impatiently. "But here is
a new bright light altogether. What do you think about it? Can we make
a move in that direction?"

"Possibly," Medway said. "We are bound to suppose that the criminal
knew the value of what he stole. How he got to know that value does
not for the moment matter. But one thing we can be sure of--he is no
horticulturist. His brand of rascality has no use for Love amongst
the Roses. By this time he has probably disposed of the bulb to some
enthusiastic amateur for a good round sum. Probably the flower had
developed into bloom first. Showing colour, wasn't it?"

"So I have been informed," Brentford said.

"So much the better," Medway cried. "So much the easier then. This is
where Broadcasting House comes in."

"What has broadcasting House to do with it?"

"S.O.S." Medway grinned. "A police message. Something like this. 'The
police are anxious to trace the whereabouts of a blue daffodil in
a small pot which was removed from a house in London, and believed
subsequently sold. Will the purchaser please communicate with New
Scotland Yard, telephone number, Whitehall 1212.' or something to that
effect. Walk with me as far as Portland Place and we will put the
matter through."

It was getting late on the same evening when Medway got what he
believed to be the first real clue to the mystery of Garnstone's death.
It was just a tiny thread, but at least something to go on. A sergeant
attached to the City force came into his office having a report to make.

"It is about that two-seater, sir," he began. "We had a bit of luck
just after dark. I was watching a house down Whitechapel way in
connexion with another matter when who should come out, but the elder
Lefton. He gave a sort of whistle when a little two-seater rolled up.
Just the very spit of the car for which the general call went out.
Into that my gentleman stepped and drove off, leaving the man who
brought the car behind him. I had a police car handy so I followed.
Not half a mile away Lefton stopped before a respectable-looking house
in a back street. An empty house as far as I could judge. But a house
with folding doors. Out my man got, and taking a key from his pocket,
unlocked the doors, me hiding in an area opposite. Directly my man saw
an empty street he drove the car through the double doors and closed
them behind him. Directly he came out again I got busy. You know, sir."

"Meaning a little gentle burglary, eh?"

"That's it, sir. Well, as I expected, the house was empty. But the
whole of the ground floor has been knocked into one and fitted out with
a regular garage equipage. Three cars there, two of them flyers and a
two-seater. Half a dozen number-plates under the seat amongst other
things. But I managed to get the engine number and maker all right, and
then I thought it wise to come away. Particulars in my note-book, sir."

"Quite a neat piece of work, Huxtable," Medway said as he jotted down
the figures and the name he needed. "No suspicion aroused and nobody
any the wiser. Now we can get on."

But, all the same the 'getting on' was not so easy as it might have
been. It took Medway three whole days before he could trace the
manufacturers of the little car and then a series of telephone calls
ranging over three counties. Then, finally to an agent who had bought
the car second-hand, eventually selling it to a visitor who had paid
for it by cheque. Fortunately, the dealer possessed a good memory for
names, the more so as he was in a small way of business. Yes, he was
quite sure the name was Garnstone. Moreover Vera remembered that about
the time of the purchase her employer was in Norwich where the deal
took place.

So Garnstone was in some underhand way connected with one of the most
dangerous gangs of thieves in London. Yet what could be the link
between a man with an international reputation and such people as the
Lefton contingent? But that such a link existed Medway was now certain.
Could it be possible that Mr. Garnstone, in his hunt for treasures, had
dealings with those whose business was to steal them?

And where did that man Tanberg come in? That he was in some way
connected with the tragedy Medway felt certain. Tanberg was being
carefully shadowed, and if the man was in any way in touch with the
Lefton gang, then Medway would in time know.

So it happened two days later that Medway found himself in a
disreputable public house in Limehouse, disguised as a dock labourer.
This as the result of a report from one of his confidential agents. And
once there, he had not very long to wait. First came the elder Lefton
with the air of a man who is in perfectly congenial surroundings. He
sat down calling for a double rum, and sprawled there evidently waiting
for someone.

Then the man Tanberg came in. He wore a check cap pulled down over his
ears and a dingy suit of rusty brown. Round his head was a bandage as
if he had met with some accident, but this was evidently part of his
disguise. For the best part of an hour the pair talked in whispers,
with drinks in between. Most of these Tanberg paid for, changing a five
pound note for the purpose. It was some time after they had gone before
Medway loafed up to the bar. He pulled a number of dingy Treasury notes
and some silver from his pocket.

"Say, mister," he began. "I got to send a month's cash to the misses
in Liverpool. I got some small notes and a lot of silver, but I can't
put that in an envelope. Can you happen to oblige with a fiver for this
lot?"

"Happen I can," the landlord said. "I just changed a fiver fer the gent
what's gone out."

The transaction completed, Medway made the best of his way back
to headquarters. He had established the truth of his information,
the business of the banknote being a pure shot in the dark. But he
whistled long and low when he came to compare the number to those in
the sequence that Garnstone had drawn from his bank on the day of the
murder.

"A real bit of luck," he murmured. "Actually one of the missing notes
out of Garnstone's thousand pounds. One never knows until one tries.
Our friend is short of legitimate cash or he is getting careless. Well,
I can afford to wait now though I could pull Tanberg in on a fair
charge. Every move he makes now will be recorded. Quite a natty little
disguise of his, and good enough if I hadn't been actually expecting
him."

Medway was all the more satisfied because he felt that once one of
those notes was cashed others would follow. Probably the owners, or
present owners rather, were not aware that the police knew of the bank
transaction. If they had thought that the notes would have been sold on
the Continent at about a third of their face value. A side in the game
that was not likely to appeal to a crook of Tanberg's calibre.

Medway was still turning this over in his mind when an officer came in
evidently acting under instructions.

"There is a gentleman here, sir, who wants to see somebody in
authority. Deputy-Commissioner thinks he would be likely to interest
you. The flat murder business, sir."

"Send him in," Medway directed.

There entered a little old man with a fussy air and a certain absence
of mind about him.

"Dear me!" he said. "So this is Scotland Yard. I called to see somebody
interested in the Blue Daffodil. As a matter of fact, the thing is in
my possession."




CHAPTER VIII.

The little old man gazed about him under penthouse brows like some
rather intelligent parrot. It was difficult to decide whether or not
he was impressed by his surroundings. For there was nothing here to
speak of the majesty of the law or strike terror into the breast of the
malefactor.

"So this really is Scotland Yard?" he muttered. "Very foolish of me to
come here--no business of mine."

Evidently an eccentric, Medway thought. But with nothing of the
criminal type about him.

"Excuse me, sir!----" Medway said. "But didn't you come here on some
errand? The Blue Daffodil, you know."

"God bless my soul!" the little man said. "So I did--so I did!
Something I heard when turning on my wireless a night or two ago for
the second new bulletin. Police anxious to trace the whereabouts of
a blue daffodil--an impossible flower I should have said. A dream,
sir!--a dream! But such a flower does exist, and is at present in my
hot-house."

"I am exceedingly glad to hear it," Medway said. "You are, I presume,
interested in flowers?"

"Interested, sir!--interested! I live for them. Any horticulturist
worthy of the name knows Septimus Deacon--meaning myself. I am a man
of independent means and live at Buxted, in Sussex. Lived there all my
life. Propagating new flowers. But nothing so novel as a blue daffodil.
A lovely blue with an orange centre. You must come and see it."

"I most certainly will," Medway responded heartily. "Any time
convenient to you. But do I understand that the bulb in question is one
of your own producing?"

"Indeed not," the little man sighed. "As a matter of fact I bought it.
Lots of people come to me with floral novelties, or what they deem to
be novelties, because my name is so widely known. It was a travelling
hawker of carnation roots who brought the bulb to me. Only a week or so
ago. He seemed to know its value for he asked a big price."

"Which price you paid. How much was that?"

"Fifty pounds. I ought, perhaps to have made some inquiries first, but
I was too anxious to get the flower."

"You would recognise that hawker again?"

"Really, I am not so sure about that," the little man confessed. "In
the first place my sight is none too good. Also it was rather a dull
day."

"But what type of man? One sees all sorts and conditions of men reduced
to hawking. The seller might have been a gentleman down on his luck."

"Oh, he wasn't that," Mr. Deacon replied. "No mistaking a gentleman,
even in rags. More of the superior labouring class. He had a beard, I
noticed, streaked with grey. Probably about fifty years of age. But I
think I should recognise his voice. He sort of whistled through his
teeth."

Many more questions did Medway ask, but all to no practical effect. Of
course the man was a sham hawker and his basket of carnation roots a
mere blind.

"Well, thank you very much," Medway said at length. "Our talk may
produce good results. It is our business to trace the seller, and you
are to say nothing of this interview until we have finished our case."

Once having got rid of his visitor, Medway lost no time in reporting
the interview to Sir Giles Fairchild.

"Not much light on the subject," Sir Giles said. "But every little clue
points in the same direction. It is pretty obvious that our flower
seller can throw a deal of light on the big tragedy--if we can only get
hold of him."

"That might not be so very difficult, sir," Medway said. "But I expect
that the man never called on anybody but Mr. Deacon. That gentleman
was deliberately picked out as the one widely known floriculturist who
would be the most likely to purchase the bulb. There is a gang here
working together, and one of the lot was desperately hard up for money.
Hence the stealing of the bulb in circumstances concerning which we
still remain in abysmal ignorance. All the same, we are getting on."

So for the moment, the hunt was transferred to the district round and
about Buxted. But the pair of sleuths detailed for the purpose had
nothing definite to report after three days of intensive investigation.
Medway listened to what the leader of his human bloodhounds had to say.

"A blind alley sir," he declared. "At no single house within a mile
of Buxted did any hawker offer plant for sale. But that you probably
expected to hear, sir."

"I should have been very surprised otherwise," Medway said with a
patient smile. "Anything else, Proctor?"

"Just one other little thing, sir," Proctor said. "In a dry ditch half
a mile from Mr. Deacon's house we came on a basket containing a few
carnation roots faded and withered.

"Ah, thrown away directly the big deal was completed. But one thing I
fail to understand. So good a judge as Mr. Deacon would have smelt a
rat directly he saw those carnation roots."

"In the ordinary way, yes, sir. But each root was carefully wrapped and
labelled though probably they were no more than common pinks. That is
an old dodge with some flower hawkers who travel the country, and no
purchaser can tell until months later when blooming time comes. That's
why I brought two or three of those labels with me."

"Good work," Medway said approvingly. "Let us see if these labels lead
us anywhere."

The officer produced the labels from his pocket book. They were printed
on some sort of stout parchment paper, and various names of well-known
carnations prominently displayed. Each of the slips bore the initials
"A.B."

"Evidently turned out by some firm who do a lot of printing for the
flower trade. Now who the deuce is, or are 'A.B.'? Let us see if I can
find them in the London Directory."

Surely enough, after a long and patient search, the name came to light
in the Directory. Abel Barnes and Co., printers to the flower trade
with offices in Henrietta Street, Covent Garden. Medway smiled his
satisfaction.

"Better pop round and make inquiries," he directed briskly. "Take the
people there to a certain extent into your confidence. That ought to
buck them up."

In the course of an hour Proctor was back again with some exceedingly
interesting information. The labels on the carnations were their
manufacture right enough, and they remembered selling a score or so
of them to a customer within the past week or more. Man with a beard,
shabbily dressed, and evidently belonging to the working class.
Certainly the assistant who sold the tickets would know him again.

"Well, that is something gained," Medway cried. "See if he can give you
any further information."

Medway was not destined to be alone for long since his man had hardly
departed before Mr. Deacon was announced. The little man was in his
usual state of fussy excitement with a suggestion that he had something
important to say.

"I had to come up to Town on business to-day, and thought I might look
you up. An idea struck me yesterday. You did not exactly tell me that
the Blue Daffodil had been stolen, though your manner inferred it."

"You might have made a worse guess," Medway said.

"I knew it," the little man cried, "I knew it! Now there is only one
flower expert in England who could have raised a blue daffodil, and he
is, or was, my old friend John Garnstone. The poor fellow who was so
mysteriously murdered."

"Oh, an old friend of yours, was he? Strange that this fact should not
have leaked out during our interview. You see I have that case in hand,
and very intricate it is. I dare say, now we have gone so far, that the
Blue Daffodil is mixed up in the tragedy though I can't see exactly
how."

"Then the Blue Daffodil belonged to poor Garnstone. I might have
guessed as much. Somebody stole it."

"Precisely. There is no doubt about that. And the thief sold it to you,
Mr. Deacon. If we could lay him by the heels we should be a long way to
solving that murder."

The little man danced about excitedly.

"You don't say so," he cried. "What a pity it is that my sight is so
bad. Then I might have recognised him."

"You are familiar with Mr. Garnstone's flat, I suppose?"

"No, strange to say, I have never been inside it. I was going to call
but never did. I should very much like to have a look at that wonderful
conservatory."

"Then come along with me now," Medway suggested. "You may see something
there of interest to both of us."

The little man asked for nothing better. A taxi conveyed Medway and his
companion as far as the flat, and in it Deacon waited until Medway made
sure Vera was there.

"Mr. Garnstone's lady secretary is in charge for the present so I won't
drag you up the stairs until I make sure that she is on the premises.
Just a moment."

But Vera was not there. Down the stairs Medway shouted to Gunter, who
replied that Miss Goff was gone for the day.

"The man, the voice," Deacon whispered as Medway rejoined him. "The
creature you were speaking to. The voice with the whistle in it. As
sure as you are alive that was the very man who sold me the Blue
Daffodil."




CHAPTER IX.

Medway grasped Deacon by the hand almost savagely.

"You are absolutely sure of that?" he demanded. "You are ready to swear
to that voice?"

"My dear sir, my very dear sir, why this emotion?" the little man said.
"Are you blind to the fact that when Dame Nature deprives us of one
sense, she strengthens another. With my eyes failing, I became concious
that my hearing was growing more acute. I tell you that is the man."

"Would you like speech with him?" Medway asked. "I may tell you that
the man is clean shaven."

"But there are such things as false beards, Mr. Policeman. But I can
see that you are not entirely satisfied. I will stay here hidden in the
cab whilst you lure the fellow to the door-step and get him to speak."

Which Medway proceeded to do. A minute had hardly passed before he
noticed a sort of whistle between the teeth when Gunter answered his
questions. Undoubtedly the little man was right.

"Are you satisfied now?" he asked.

"Perfectly," Medway admitted. "But you see I had to make perfectly
certain before I took definite action. You have done the State some
service, sir, and I am infinitely obliged. For the moment I shall not
trouble you further. In the meantime please retain the Blue Daffodil
and take care of it."

The little man went his way presently, and Medway returned to
headquarters in thoughtful mood. There was no doubt in his mind that
Gunter had stolen the Blue Daffodil, and sold it to Deacon for a
substantial sum. The theft had been deliberately planned, and the
potential purchaser chosen in advance. Gunter was assured of his market
before the theft was committed. He had only to disguise himself, and
the thing was done.

Again Gunter was the only person besides Brentford and the lady
secretary who could possibly get into and out of the flat. And Gunter
only at such times as some labour was called for. That angle of the
crime pointed only to Gunter. Moreover, it was absurd to suppose that
the actual criminal entered the flat for the sole purpose of stealing
the flower. And even if he had, surely he would not have left the
disposal of it to Gunter. It was a case of the game not being worth the
candle.

No, Gunter was the culprit, working on his own at a moment when he
was at his wit's end to obtain 50 for one purpose or another. Had
Garnstone lived the theft would most assuredly have been detected, and
the thief recognised at once. Then what was the desperate need to run
such a risk.

Gunter was no murderer, of that Medway felt assured. But he might know
something about the crime. And in some way the Blue Daffodil might have
been mixed up in it. Therefore Medway resolved on a bold course. If it
failed he would be none the worse off, and if it succeeded then . . .
Thus it came about that next morning Gunter found himself being
escorted to Scotland Yard. Not in custody or anything like that, but in
company with a friendly policeman who had been sent by Inspector Medway
with a view to asking Gunter a few questions relating to the recent
crime. For Medway was shrewd enough to know that the atmosphere of the
Yard would not be without an impression on the victim. Moreover, Gunter
had something worrying at his conscious already.

Medway was genial and smiling as he motioned his victim to a chair, and
passed over to him a box of cigarettes, and invited him to smoke.

"I won't keep you long," he said. "Just a few questions, Gunter. First
of all, how long were you in Mr. Garnstone's employ? When did you first
go to the flat?"

Gunter pondered over the question for a moment.

"I can't speak exactly, sir," he said. "But somewhere round about three
years."

"And what were you doing before?"

"Out of work, sir. General laborer. Docks and so on."

"Um, yes. Bit of a pugilist, too, eh?"

"I could box a bit," Gunter grinned. "Mr. Garnstone, he found that out
afore he engaged me. A rare hand at finding things out, he were. After
a bit he used to take me about with him on his travels as a sort of
bodyguard. Many a time when he had valuables on him have I slept on a
rug inside his bedroom door. Not as nobody ever troubled us."

"Then you made yourself generally useful about the flat. Washing down
and cleaning, bed-making and the like. You had no key to the flat or
means of entrance at odd times."

"Never, sir," said Gunter with an earnestness that carried conviction
with it. "I couldn't have got into the flat until Mr. Garnstone gave me
a call on the house telephone after he were about in the morning. Miss
Goff, she had a key some time after she come, but I never seen it."

"And you were never alone in the flat?"

"Never once, sir, on my solemn oath."

"Do any work inside the conservatory?" Medway asked as if quite
casually. "Cleaning up and all that."

"Now and again, sir. Perhaps once a week."

"Then of course you know all about those wonderful flowers. The Blue
Daffodil, for instance."

For the first time Gunter betrayed signs of uneasiness. A little bead
of sweat trickled down his nose.

"I did hear something about that," Gunter said, and the whistle between
his teeth grew more pronounced. "But I dunno anything about flowers
sir."

Medway's manner suddenly changed. His face grew hard, his lips set in a
rigid line as his finger pointed at Gunter.

"Then why did you steal the Blue Daffodil?" he shouted.

Gunter almost collapsed in his chair. A feeble denial came from his
lips, but no conviction showed now.

"It's no use, Gunter," Medway went on. "For some reason or other you
stole that bulb and sold it. I am not accusing you of a hand in Mr.
Garnstone's murder, but I know that in some way there is a connexion
between that and the missing flower. Now if you like to speak you
may--I am putting no pressure on you one way or another. But I can keep
you here in custody and charge you with stealing a piece of property."

"I never did," Gunter said sullenly.

"No? Then let me ask you a question. Did you ever hear the name of Mr.
Septimus Deacon, of Buxted, a great authority on flowers? You needn't
answer unless you like."

Lower and lower Gunter wilted in his chair whilst he shook his head as
if in pain. Not yet was he entirely beaten.

"And another question," Medway went on mercilessly. "Did you ever
meet a man in the neighbourhood of Buxted, a man with a beard who was
peddling carnation roots?"

Gunter fairly gasped. His tongue lolled out of the corner of his mouth
his lips were dry and parched.

"A beard may be an effective disguise," Medway proceeded as if speaking
to himself. "But to disguise the human voice is harder. Your voice
Gunter, is a peculiar one since you whistle through that missing front
tooth as you speak. You have been identified as the seller of the
Blue Daffodil through that little defect. Sooner or later you will
be confronted with Mr. Deacon. You will be in the dock and he in the
witness box. Later on, a detective officer will have something to say
about your past. And that won't help you, Gunter."

All this was part truth and part bluff, but it lost nothing in its
effect on the man writhing in his chair.

"What I should like to know," Medway resumed, "is why you took such a
desperate risk when you stole that flower? You were bound to be found
out in a few hours if your master had lived, and nobody knows that
better than yourself. You need not tell me unless you like, but I am
curious to know the desperate need you had for 50. If I knew that,
things might be made easier for you. I say might, Gunter."

A deep sigh shook Gunter's giant frame.

"You got me, sir," he said hoarsely, "got me on a bit of toast. I did
steal that there flower what I heard master say was worth its weight
in gold, and damn the consequences. More'n once I heard about that
blinking flower and how a Mr. Deacon would give his head to possess
it. It wasn't hard to find out where he lived, and as to the rest you
are quite correct sir. But there is one thing that nobody knows, and
that's as my master was one of the meanest screws on earth. If I'd been
sentenced to death and five bob would have saved me, he wouldn't have
forked out."

"But wouldn't he have prosecuted you?"

"No, fear! He'd got a stranglehold on me, and I had him by the short
hairs. I was being blackmailed, sir. I daren't come to you gentlemen
here because of the past, which I hoped was buried--and it worn't by a
long chalk. But prosecuted! You makes me laugh. Because I'll tell you
something. You know a lot about that Lefton gang? Well the boss was at
the head of it. Been so for years."

It was with the greatest difficulty that Medway prevented himself from
leaping from his chair.

"We know a whole lot about them," he said, speaking as calmly as he
could. "Before long----"

He checked himself purposely, hoping to hear more. It came without any
encouragement from him.

"I hope so, sir," Gunter said, piously. "But if what I got to tell you
comes out. I'm as good as dead."

"I don't think so," Medway smiled. "We can go through the farce of
prosecuting you for the theft of the flower without saying anything
about the past, and giving the magistrate a tip to bind you over. Then
no rascal who is bleeding you will think that you have given anything
away."

"Sounds good to me," Gunter grinned. "Do you happen to know as the
boss were out of the flat on the night of the murder? I see him go out
though I never let on at that there short first inquest hearing what
was adjourned. I was afraid to tell about that journey the boss took
because he was up to one of his little games along with the Leftons."

"What particular games?"

"Lor, lumme, I don't know sir. And old Lefton, he ain't going to tell.
But one thing I did find out. My old boss is the biggest 'fence' in
London."

"You are able to prove that?" Medway asked.

"Prove it! Course I can when the time comes. And I can tell you all
about that little brown car as you don't know of."

"There you are mistaken," Medway said. He wanted no half confidences
now that matters had gone so far. "You mean the two-seater in the
secret garage with the double doors. The one that was damaged on the
night of the murder. Go on!"




CHAPTER X.

Gunter gazed open-mouthed at Medway. What manner of man was this who
seemed to know everything without being told? No use trying to disguise
the truth from him.

"Lor', love-a-duck!" he muttered. "What's the use of telling yer a
story when you have heard it afore? Maybe you know where the little
two-seater is hidden."

"Oh yes," Medway said quite casually. "I can put my hand on it at any
moment. Who does it belong to--I mean who has owned it since it came
from Norwich."

"Well, if that don't beat the band!" Gunter cried. "And them Leftons
walking about like ignorant kids as don't know a danger signal when
they see one."

"Never mind that, Gunter. A ghastly murder has been committed in
most mysterious circumstances which have utterly baffled us. I don't
mind telling you so much because the police are not what is called
infallible. I want to get my hands on some likely clue to that murder,
and if you can help, so much the better for you. I still have a feeling
that the Blue Daffodil had something to do with it, although a mere
plain theft seems to clear up that point. You stole it because you were
desperately pushed for money to buy a little peace from a blackmailer.
Do you suppose that you have heard the last of him?"

"He swore on his oath, sir----"

"Um. Do you think that the oath of a blackmailer is worth a brass
farthing? Better tell me all about it, Gunter. If you can help me, then
I will stretch a point and help you."

"Even if it is a case of forgery, sir?"

"Yes, even then. You have done something wrong, Gunter, and this fellow
can give you away. You had better make a clean breast of it, and even
if I can't help you, I will respect your confidence. Now then--out with
it."

Gunter hesitated for a moment before he spoke.

"Well, it's like this, sir," he said. "For years I was on my uppers.
Desperate like. Sleeping on the Embankment and all that. Then I come
in touch with an old lag who put me on to a foreign bloke--one of the
swell brigade. Regular toff, he were, but rotten all through. Forging
Bank of England notes, and passing 'em off on the continent. Me, I
was just a bloke out er work, a carpenter by trade, see? My game was
to carry the stuff about in my bag of tools, the foreign bloke taking
no risk of being arrested with the snide stuff on him. One night in
Hamburg I got pinched--drunk, I was, and when they come to search my
bag, what ho! There was only three of us in the little station house,
so I made a fight for it. Being a bit of a bruiser, it wasn't long
before I was legging it down the street to a place where I knew I could
hide until the chase got tired, and a week later I was back in England.
But not afore my finger-prints was took in the station-house.

"After a long time I met Mr. Garnstone, and entered his service. Sort
of body-guard, you know. It was only by accident as I learnt about his
double life. No business of mine I thinks, so long as my quarters was
snug and the pay regular. And then about six months ago, I banged into
my old toff in Regent street--looking as if he hadn't had a square
meal in weeks. Clothes in rags almost. He asked me for a fiver, and I
refused. Then he began to threaten. He would put the German police on
to me, and those fingerprints would do the rest. There was no charge
against him, he had never been seen in company. So, you see, sir, he
was all right, and I had to pay. I'd saved a bit when with my late
boss, and he had every penny of that. When I told him so, he laughed,
and said as how the boss had thousands, at the same time hinting at Mr.
Garnstone's double life.

"By this time the foreign bloke was turned out swell as he was when I
first knew him, mostly due to the money he got from me. Then you could
have struck me all of a heap when one day he called as bold as brass
asking to see the boss. So I gives his name to the old gentleman on the
house telephone, and I am told to show him up, which I did."

"One moment," Medway interrupted. "What was the name of this man who
was fleecing you?"

"Two names, he had, sir. When I first knew him it was Manstar, but now
he calls hisself Tanberg."

No sign came from Medway, though this piece of priceless information
caused a fine inward glow of satisfaction.

"Do you know his present address?" he asked.

Gunter was posted so far, and gave the number of the street in which
Tanberg--to use his present name--resided. It was not for Medway to say
that he had this particular already.

"I think I can put a spoke in his wheel," he said. "The next time he
asks for money tell him to go to the devil. Call his bluff. He dare
not give you away. Now tell me all you now about the Garnstone-Lefton
connexion."

"I'll do my best, sir. I know a lot about them Leftons. Never been in
gaol either father or son, yet, though the police know their little
game. Sort of go between when a big burglary has been pulled off.
Within a few hours the stuff passes to the Leftons, who used to call
up my old boss from some call office, using some few code words for
the purpose. Sometimes the old man worked alone if the Leftons were
suspicious that the police were on the watch. Then when the code came
on the telephone the old man set out by bus for the Commercial Road,
and took out his two-seater. Sometimes the car was garaged off the
Commercial Road, sometimes close to the flat. In the latter case he
took the car out openly, and worked the oracle on his own. He would
drive to some chosen spot down East and meet his man who had to give a
certain password. Then the messenger was blindfolded and taken to some
house, which I know nothing of, and there the stuff was handed over
to Mr. Garnstone for cash. Mind you, this game always began in a back
street, where it was very dark, and the old man wore a sort of mask
before he responded to the signal."

"How did you know that?" Medway asked.

"Because I followed the boss once on my motor cycle, and saw most of
the game. I told a lie when I said he never left the flat on the night
of his death."

"I was pretty sure of that," Medway said. "Go on."

"He did go out that night about nine o'clock on one of his little games
for he crept downstairs as if wishing to get out without being seen. He
had a little despatch-case in his hand, and his head was muffled up. On
the door-step he dropped the case and swore at hisself for doing so. I
think----"

"Just a moment," Medway interrupted. "Was the case you speak of light
or heavy."

"Very light, sir, but heavy enough when he came back an hour or two
later," Gunter chuckled. "That's why I was certain that he had been up
to one of his little games. And that's about all I can tell you, sir."

And quite enough, too, Medway thought when once more he was alone with
his own thoughts. Remarkable that a man like Garnstone, standing so
high as he did, should stoop so low as to become a common trafficker in
stolen goods. His mere social status should have come between him and
such criminality.

And yet the opportunities were unique. Who would suspect a man handling
half the art treasures in Europe of such a trade? And what had become
of most of the 1,000 that Garnstone had drawn from his bank on the
morning of his murder. Certainly the man who now called himself Tanberg
had had one of the notes and probably more than one. Therefore it
was fair to presume that Garnstone and Tanberg were engaged in some
sinister deal in which the alleged gold cup played some part.

That was if there was such a thing as a gold cup. As likely, perhaps,
that Tanberg should have some overpowering reason to see the inside of
Garnstone's safe directly he heard that the old man had met with his
death. Or was the gold cup a mere excuse for the visit to the flat to
remove some evidence the murderer had left behind him, Tanberg being
himself the criminal.

Certainly, suspicions pointed that way. But, then, how on earth did
Tanberg get into the flat after the old man's return? According to
Gunter's recent evidence--evidence which Medway had no reason to
doubt--Garnstone had returned alone. He had fastened the steel door
behind him, a precaution he was never known to forget, and Vera had
found it fast when she returned from her evening out. It was possible
that the safe held a clue to the mystery though no search had been made
there. To break into such a complicated piece of engineering would be
a matter of days though it was possible that the key to the letter
combinations might be found after a further search. Strange that this
should be missing unless the murderer had taken it away so as to gain
time. Surely if same was in Tanberg's possession he would have made an
excuse to find it or how otherwise could he establish the whereabouts
of the gold cup.

"We must have that safe opened," Medway told the deputy commissioner
bluntly. "They say that it means taking half the side of the house down
or something like that, but it must be done. We are wasting precious
time, and giving the criminal too great a chance of covering his
tracks. Will you give me the necessary instructions, sir?"

Sir Giles scribbled a few words on a sheet of paper, and handed it to
his subordinate. Almost before Medway reached his room the telephone
bell rang. He took up the receiver.

"Yes, Medway speaking," he said. "Who is it?"

"Miss Goff," a voice replied. "We have found the letter key to the
safe, Inspector. Perhaps you would like to come round here and see it
opened."

"I'll be round in ten minutes," Medway said crisply.




CHAPTER XI.

But it was considerably more than ten minutes before Medway reached the
flat. He had first of all to listen to a telephone call that caused him
to smile cheerfully to himself.

"All right, Huxtable," he said at length. "I will be down there about
ten o'clock this evening. Get another man or two. Yes, I think we had
better be inside the building--we might pick up something by a little
eavesdropping. Then we can make a raid as if we were outside all the
time. You do the arrest business as they reach the street, and then we
will come on the scene as if by accident. So long."

The line went dead, and Medway took his way in the direction of the
flat using a taxi for the purpose. He dismissed his driver some hundred
yards from the flat, reaching it on foot. But he did not at once
proceed to mount the stairs.

First of all he wanted a few words with Gunter, so he crept down
into the basement and called the caretaker by name. At once Gunter
appeared.

"Now look here, my man," Medway said. "There is nothing against you
remember, and there won't be so long as you play the game by me. So far
you have."

"Course I have," Gunter growled. "I ain't looking for no trouble with
that there murder still unsolved. Already, I've told you a lot as I
didn't need to."

"True enough," Medway agreed. "Now cast your mind back to the night
of the crime. You told me that Mr. Garnstone went out carrying a
dispatch-case which seemed to be empty."

"Empty it was, sir. Give you my word."

"Very well. When Mr. Garnstone came back in his car which he had picked
up somewhere----"

Gunter made a noise that was intended for laughter.

"Love-a-duck," he said. "When he was on those games do you suppose
the boss came back with a torchlight procession and a brass band! Not
he. He just left the car a few hundred yards away, where somebody was
waiting to take it back home again, and sneaked into the house on his
toes."

"Um. As he did that night, I presume."

"That there presuming of yourn is correct, sir. 'Cause I see him come
back. Just as I was thinking about bed."

Medway asked no further questions. A certain suspicion in his mind was
confirmed. Then he proceeded upstairs to the flat where he knew that
Vera and Brentford were awaiting him.

"I am so glad you have come," Vera said. "We didn't think it wise to
open the safe before your arrival."

"Quite right," Medway agreed. "Never interfere when the police have
taken a hand."

He turned away to examine the safe that stood in one corner of the
room--a most formidable affair that revolved almost at a touch. There
was not a single inch of it where a burglar's tool could get a grip.
Medway had seen many safes, but not one more impregnable than this. It
was the very latest that the brain of an engineer could devise.

"How on earth do you open it?" he asked.

"It is a double letter combination," Vera replied. "Two words in
parallel. I am the only person in the world to whom the secret was
confided. And only then because Mr. Garnstone trusted me in case he
might want something out of the safe, I could send it to him."

"Where did you stumble across the combination," Medway asked. "Had you
forgotten it?"

"I am afraid that I haven't made myself quite plain," Vera replied.
"There are no less than eight combinations, and the lock can be set
to any of them. It was only one of these combinations the late Mr.
Garnstone confided to me, and the safe was set to that when Mr.
Garnstone was on his travels. I very much doubt that my figures, or
letters, rather, will open the safe now. Probably the code word has
been changed since I held the secret. But as you were informed over the
telephone, the whole combination has been found. I have been searching
for it high and low. It was tucked in the back of a picture frame. But
let us----"

Medway held up a protesting hand.

"Not yet," he said. "I have my very good reasons for not opening the
safe to-day--to-morrow things may be very different. I am pretty sure
they will be. When the safe is opened I want two people to be present,
and I want them to feel sure nobody has forestalled them. At the
same time I must ask you to hand over to me the paper on which those
combinations are recorded. I will produce it at the right moment."

Vera glanced at Brentford who nodded approval. Then she took from her
handbag a strip of parchment on which a number of words were written in
parallel columns.

"There is nothing more to be said, then," she sighed.

"Not in that direction," Medway said. "But in another direction I have
something to reveal. Miss Goff did it ever occur to you that your
employer was a clever criminal."

Vera was profoundly shocked and showed it.

"The mere suggestion is offensive," she declared. "Why, Mr. Garnstone
was an intimate friend of my family. Many times he was trusted with
valuables beyond price. And consider his international reputation."

"Nevertheless, what I say is true," Medway went on. "It was his
wonderful record that gave him the opportunity he wanted. He had very
little money to start with, and though his commission meant a lot,
his passion for flowers ran him into thousands a year. I am sure Mr.
Brentford will bear me out in that."

"Thousands, of course," Brentford agreed. "But----"

"There are no 'buts'," Medway interrupted. "I know that Garnstone was
the master 'fence' in Europe, though this knowledge has only come
my way quite recently. Perhaps you, Miss Goff, are ignorant of the
fact that Mr. Garnstone possessed a two-seater motor car and drove it
expertly."

Vera regarded the speaker with helpless amazement.

"Quite true," Medway said. "And what is more, that car was used by
the owner on the night of his death--in fact he was out of the flat
until very late. Now this I know because the car has been identified
as the property of Mr. Garnstone, and the purchase of the same traced
to him. In the face of what I have just told you, it will not be
difficult for you to see why I don't want that safe opened at the
moment. I have every reason to believe that it contains a lot of stolen
property--stuff which is not easily disposed of, and therefore has to
be placed in cold storage, so to speak, until the time is ripe for
sending it across the water. I only ask you to be patient for a day or
so. But make it your business to be here some time to-morrow afternoon,
when you will see startling developments."

Medway went off presently leaving Vera and her lover to ponder over his
disclosures. He himself had plenty of work to occupy his energies for
the rest of the day, and nine o'clock in the evening found him not far
off the secret garage where the little two-seater was in hiding.

He was not wearing his uniform, nor was the man who accompanied him
at a respectful distance, as if there had been no sort of connexion
between the two. When the back street was clear, Medway crossed the
road and tapped in a peculiar way on the door of the garage with the
double entrance.

It was opened almost immediately an inch or two by someone inside, and
closed once more as soon as Medway and his companion were safely inside.

"Good work, Huxtables," Medway whispered. "I presume that those rascals
will be along soon."

"Bound to be," Huxtable said. "There's a job on down Epping way which I
got on to, so that the working party of the gang are likely to run into
trouble presently. Lefton and his son are going down to bring the swag
away, and that's why they will be here presently for the two-seater.
There's a nice dark corner there where we can hide till the moment
comes to help in the little game which they are playing."

An hour passed in the pitchy darkness of the garage before the door
was softly opened and two men entered. As they closed the door one of
them switched on the lights, disclosing the Semitic features of the
two men, one old and gizzled, with a pair of foxy eyes full of cunning
and greed. The second man was a younger replica and if possible, more
vulpine and predatory. Father Lefton held out a grimy claw.

"Got the spondulicks, Ben?" he asked eagerly.

"Aye, I got the stuff old 'un," the dutiful son grunted in response.
"But not until I threatened to chuck the job. Tried to come the posh
swell over me, he did. But I soon showed him I wasn't taking any. I
told him plain that those boys of ours was working on a cash basis, and
that the stuff would have to be handed to them the very minute they
turned over the goods to us. And then he parted but not before."

"How much, Benny dear, how much?" the old man asked.

"Two hundred quid, same as you told me to ask. But I had to take it in
Bank of England notes."

"That don't matter," the elder Lefton shuckled. "We can give him away
if things go wrong with those notes. How do we know how he got them?"

"All the same, we can give a pretty good guess," the younger man said
in a hoarse whisper. "But it's no business of ours."

"That's right, Benny. Hand the stuff over."

Grudgingly Ben Lefton took from his breast pocket a packet of what the
watchers saw were palpably Bank of England notes. With a grin the old
man transferred them to his own pocket.

"Good boy, Benny," he said. "Now you run out the little car and we will
be moving."

With that the car was moved in the direction of the door and thence
into the street, but not before Ben Lefton had glanced outside to make
sure the coast was clear.

Then things began to happen. Out of nowhere two plain clothes
constables appeared accompanied by an officer in uniform, and then,
from behind, came Medway and his man.

"What's all this about?" Medway demanded.

The men standing round saluted. The Leftons stood there in the grasp of
two stalwart policemen.

"Breaking into a garage and stealing a car, sir," one of the officers
explained. "These men are Lefton, father and son. Chaps we have had our
eye on for a long time. Caught in the very act, sir. Opened the door
with a skeleton key and took out the car that's standing there. Bring
'em along lads, to the station. Like to come along, sir?"

"Very much," Medway said drily. "I may have a word to say about this
business. Lead the way, Sergeant."




CHAPTER XII.

Once in the station house Medway lost no time in getting busy. From the
uneasy glances in his direction it was plain that he was no stranger to
the prisoners. That they would be detained for the night was certain
whilst the question of bail when they came before the magistrate on the
morrow was very much in the balance. It was that packet of banknotes in
his pocket that so sorely troubled Levi Lefton.

"You know me, don't you?" Medway asked.

"By sight, sir, only by sight," Levi said. "Never had the pleasure of
your company before, sir."

He might have added that he knew most of the lights of Scotland Yard by
sight.

"Now listen," Medway went on "You can answer certain questions or you
can keep your mouth shut. I only want what you care to volunteer. For
instance how do you account for the 200 in Bank of England notes which
you have in your pocket at the present moment."

Levi's jaw dropped until it seemed to disappear into his beard that
quivered like a leaf in the wind.

"I never got no notes from anybody. A poor man----"

"Search him," Medway commanded tersely.

The notes duly appeared, and were laid on the table. Medway ruffled
them over casually, idly noting the serial numbers. But there was in
his eye the gleam of the hunter when he sights his quarry. He picked up
the notes, and placed them in his wallet.

"I will be responsible for these for the moment," he said casually.
"Detain these two and oppose bail when they come before the magistrates
in the morning. I may have a much more serious charge to make later on.
Make them comfortable for the night. Perhaps there will be others to
keep them company."

"But it is monstrous," Levi screamed. "You take my own money from me,
and charge me with stealing my own car."

"Oh, is that so?" Medway asked. "I was under the impression that the
car belonged to one John Garnstone, who was murdered some time ago. But
as to that it will be a matter for a police court. And you won't need
that money to-night because your friends out Epping way will not have
earned it. By this time their efforts have been checkmated. In other
words, they are in custody. Perhaps, on the whole, Levi, you had better
say nothing. It doesn't matter either way."

Levi fairly wept in his beard, half stunned as he was by the knowledge
the police seemed to have gathered concerning his efforts and movements
during the last few hours. He was still bemoaning his fate as Medway,
who was more than satisfied with the events of the evening, left the
station.

Not that he had finished yet by any means. First of all, back to
the Yard again where he took out the bank notes and examined them
thoroughly. There were five 10 notes, and 30 of the denomination of
5, more than one was stained a rusty red in patches.

But the important point was that they tallied with those which
Garnstone had drawn from his bank on the morning of his murder. Nor was
Medway in the least surprised to discover this. It helped to confirm a
theory, but that theory was in the early stages of speculation yet.

Late as it was, Medway had still to make two calls; the first took him
in a taxi as far as Park Street where he stopped at one of the fine
houses there, and asked for Lord Glenday.

"I am afraid I am a bit late," he told the footman who flung open the
door, "but if you will tell his lordship that Chief Inspector Medway is
here, probably he will forgive me for troubling him at such an hour."

"His lordship is here, sir, and alone, her ladyship being at the
opera," the man volunteered. "If you will come in, sir, I will mention
your presence to his lordship."

"The great City magnate was only too ready to see his visitor,
especially if it had anything to do with the recent burglary.

"Sit down and have a whisky and soda with me," he said quite genially.
"I presume you have something interesting to say with regard to my lost
property."

"I hope so," Medway replied, "but that depends to a certain extent on
yourself. But I am rather sanguine that I can show you some of it. You
will recall of course, the murder of Mr. John Garnstone a little time
ago."

"Most amazing affair," Lord Glenday cried, "just shows you that nobody
is safe whatever precautions one takes. I knew the man well--had
business with him. Several pieces in my collection were bought through
him. Man who went everywhere and was the friend of princes."

This was just the opening that Medway wanted, and he lost no time in
grasping it.

"Well, my lord," he said, "it is just possible that some of your stuff
had drifted back to Mr. Garnstone's hands again. If so, it might be in
his safe which we have only managed to find the key of recently. If you
can make it convenient to call at deceased's flat sometime to-morrow
afternoon--say three o'clock when the safe is formally opened it might
be to your advantage. I have the key so that nothing can be done until
I am there to see."

"Count me in," the great man said. "Nothing shall stand in the way.
Three o'clock. All right, my friend."

Medway stopped just long enough to take a whisky and soda before
departing on his final errand that night. But it was a much longer job
than the first, it being long after the midnight hour before Medway ran
the man Tanberg to earth in his luxurious flat. The Rumanian eyed him
with open suspicion, and his hand moved mechanically towards a drawer
at the table before which he was sitting. If Medway had come with a
warrant for the other's arrest the visit would have ended in tragedy,
and the policeman made a mental note accordingly.

"I wanted to see you concerning that gold cup of yours, the one you
handed to Mr. Garnstone an hour or so before he died, and which you
thought must be in his safe."

"Very little doubt about that," Tanberg replied. "I handed it to him in
the lounge of the Regal Palace on the night in question when he told me
he was on his way home."

"Does that mean you sold it to him?" Medway asked.

"Well, more or less. We had a bit of an argument about the price so
we left it for further discussion. As Mr. Garnstone was a man to be
trusted, I let him have the cup which he took saying he was going
straight home. As you know, only one person saw him alive afterwards."

"Rather lucky for you that no money passed," Medway smiled in his most
pleasant manner; "though, come to think of it, he might have given you
a cheque."

"I tell you no money passed," Tanberg snarled.

Medway duly apologised. But one thing he had discovered--so far the
Leftons had made no attempt to get in touch with Tanberg over the
matter of the sheaf of banknotes. Probably they never would since the
gang engaged on the abortive robbery was in gaol by this time so that
it might be inferred that they had been paid in advance for a raid that
had never come off.

The Leftons would be charged with breaking and entering and the
stealing of a car so that the money found on Levi could be legitimately
claimed by some trusted relative, seeing that no charge could arise out
of the possession of so much paper money. Moreover, they might bring
suborned witnesses to prove that the Leftons had permission to use that
car and make free of the garage. All this flashed through Medway's mind.

"Well, it's like this," he went on. "We are opening Mr. Garnstone's
safe to-morrow at three o'clock, and I want you to be there to identify
your property if it is inside."

"Right you are," Tanberg cried. "Count me in."

It was Tanberg who was the last to arrive at the appointed time next
day. He appeared to be somewhat taken aback when he caught sight of
Lord Glenday as Medway did not fail to note. Then he proceeded to open
the safe and look inside.

There was only one article there--a magnificent gold cup richly
decorated and with a monogram in brilliants. Tanberg advanced with a
smile on his face.

"My Cup," he cried. "I could swear to it anywhere."

"Then there must be a pair of them," Glenday said in cold tones.
"Before I handle that cup let me tell everybody here that I bought it
from a dealer in Amsterdam a year ago. When I purchase a treasure like
that I invariably have my private mark stamped on it. Mr. Medway, if
you will look at the foot of the cup inside you will see my initials
under a Maltese cross together with the date of purchase. If I am
wrong, then I have no business here and will take my leave."

"The cup is mine," Tanberg shouted.

"But Lord Glenday is perfectly correct," Medway pointed out, "for here
are the marks he indicated. In the face of that what more is there to
be said?"

"Nevertheless I still claim my property," Tanberg growled.

"In which case the police will retain it," Medway said with a finality
that spoke of authority. "There may be some litigation over this
treasure."

All this time Vera had been looking on in fascinated astonishment. She
sidled up to Ronald and whispered in his ear.

"Darling, they are both wrong," she said breathlessly. "The cup is
mine. I recognised it instantly. It is part of the treasure stolen
from our summer palace near Batoum. That monogram was that of my
ancesstress, Olga Zaroff, who lived 150 years ago. What shall we do
about it?"

"Nothing for the present," Ronald whispered.




CHAPTER XIII.

Medway did not fail to note the difference between the two men before
him in their reactions to the matter of the gold cup. The millionaire
icily cold and sure of his ground, Tanberg in a suppressed fury at the
dramatic turn of events. Despite the man's undoubted good looks and
social gloss, despite his perfectly cut morning suit, he was a sorry
figure by the side of Lord Glenday. Try as he would to carry it out
with a swagger, the brooding suspicion darkened his eyes as if he were
some wild animal suspecting a trap.

"As you like," he said thickly. "It is all the same to me. There is
some infernal trickery here, and I warn you, Lord Glenday, I shall not
take it lying down."

The great man shrugged his shoulders.

"As you will, sir," he said. "Meanwhile matters must be left in the
hands of the police. And, with that, let me wish you all a very good
afternoon."

With a bow for Vera, Glenday stalked out, followed a moment later by
the discomfited Tanberg.

Brentford turned to Vera.

"You had better tell Mr. Medway everything," he suggested.

Thereupon Vera told her tale.

"That cup is really mine," she said. "I have not had it in my hands
since it was taken from the safe, but I can tell you every detail of
it."

"Better make sure before we go any further," Medway suggested. "Take
the cup in your hand, Miss Goff."

"It is hardly necessary," Vera declared as she turned the treasure over
in her hand. "Yes, this is mine. Note those flowers in enamel round
the rim. Those represent the daffodils that used to grow in Southern
Russia. They are interwoven into our coat of arms, but why I don't
know. It is almost a compliment to call them blue, as they are a sort
of pale mauve. Mr. Brentford can tell you all about that."

"I can," Ronald interposed. "I brought some of the bulbs home for Mr.
Garnstone, and from them he evolved the real Blue Daffodil of which you
know."

"Oh, yes, I know all about that," Medway smiled. "It seems to me that
the Blue Daffodil is going to play a star part in the tragedy we have
to solve. And that man Tanberg could tell us a whole lot if he could be
induced to speak."

"You think he was involved in the murder?" Ronnie asked.

"Well, I won't go as far as that. But of one thing there can't be a
shadow of doubt. After that cup was stolen from Lord Glenday it passed
into the hands of Tanberg, though innocently or not it is impossible to
say. All the same, there is something wrong about that chap."

"Wrong!" Vera cried. "He is a villain of the worst possible type. He
owed everything to my father, who raised him from the gutter."

"What a good thing he does not recognise you," Medway said. "That would
have spoilt everything."

"I feel quite easy on that score," Vera said. "There has been no
recognition."

"But where does all this lead," Brentford asked.

"I wish I could tell you," Medway lamented. "But one thing is very
certain. Tanberg knew that the gold cup was in Mr. Garnstone's
possession at the time he was murdered. My theory is that the cup was
handed over to Garnstone not before but after the money changed hands.
Then Tanberg had an idea. He'd got the money, and thought it wouldn't
be a bad idea to get the cup again. Hence his appearance at Scotland
Yard. Then Tanberg came here to bluff it out, being certain that the
cup was in the safe. And he might have got away with it if the safe
could have been opened there and then. When I talked the matter over
with him he seemed to put all his cards on the table, but there must
have been an ace or two up his sleeve. However, one fact I can prove
beyond a doubt. Tanberg did not tell me himself, but I have actually
in my possession 200 in notes, which passed from Tanberg to a shady
confederate. Mr. Garnstone drew them with others from the bank on the
morning of his death."

"Can't you arrest him on that?" Ronnie asked.

"I could, of course, but I don't want to. The fellow's audacity is so
colossal that sooner or later he will make some slip, and then my turn
will come. There are men of his type so clever that they regard the
rest of the world as fools, and I am sure that Tanberg thinks he is
fooling me."

Medway went away presently with a view to learning something of his
prisoners down East. He wanted to interview the elder Lefton in the
dread surroundings of the prison cell. But that was not to be, for the
simple reason that the Leftons had been before the bench that morning,
and released on bail which was immediately forthcoming, so that the
wily pair of Jews were free to do as they liked for the next seven days.

Medway fairly boiled over when he heard of this. Now the Leftons would
lose no time in getting in touch with Tanberg, if they had not already
done so. In which case some cunning tale would be hatched to account
for the possession of the bank notes.

There was only one thing for it--both the Leftons and Tanberg must be
carefully watched. It might even be possible to get on to their meeting
place and hear something of their conversation. Meanwhile something had
to be done.

"Put me on to 0072 City," he said. "See if Lord Glenday is still in his
office. If so, I want a word with him."

It being barely four o'clock, Lord Glenday was still in his office and
alone for a few moments.

"What I want to know," Medway said, "is the name of the man or firm
from whom you purchased the gold cup."

"Oh then you are sure that it is mine?"

"By purchase--yes. I am quite satisfied as to that."

"Well, I bought it in Amsterdam. Hold on a moment, and I will refer
to my private diary, where I have a number of addresses where I have
made purchases . . . Here you are. Paul Nester, 105 Pester Avenue,
Amsterdam. I paid 1,000 for the cup, which is worth ten times that
amount. One of the very best bargains I ever made. Anything more?"

There being nothing further to be said, Medway rang off. A few moments
later he was on to the police headquarters at Amsterdam. Did the
authorities there know anything concerning an art dealer one Paul
Nester, who carried on business at 105 Pester Avenue, in that city?
Amsterdam did not, but would make inquiries and let Mr. Medway know.

At the end of an hour the reply came. Paul Nester was no longer in
business, his shop had changed hands, the present owner knowing nothing
of his predecessor. Nester had vanished owing much money, and had never
been seen since. There was no criminal charge against him, so that the
police had not been called upon to interfere. It was not very helpful.

All the same it was very much as Medway had expected. He had meanwhile
given instructions to have both the Leftons and Tanberg carefully
watched, and shortly after seven o'clock the first report came in.

"Speaking from a call office, sir," a voice said. "Mr. Tanberg has just
left his flat. Johnson is following him. He is shabbily dressed, and
wearing a beard and glasses. But I spotted him from his walk. Sort of
swagger, get-out-of-my-way. You will hear from Johnson presently."

But the clock was striking 10 o'clock before the voice of Johnson
drifted in over the telephone.

"That you sir?" the voice said. "Johnson speaking. I have been relieved
by Makins. At present Tanberg is inside a pub at Wapping. Shady sort of
place off Nightingale Lane. Been raided twice, and the landlord warned.
Went inside, I did, and ordered a drink. Tanberg in the bar evidently
waiting for somebody. Anything more I can do, sir?"

"Yes," Medway said, "describe the pub? Any place where one could hide?
What is the pub called?"

The shady house of call was the Two Cows situated next to a yard where
some sort of carpentry went on. There were two or three sheds there in
which to lie "perdu" if necessary. The landlord's name was Geary; he
was under suspicion of being concerned in a job lately brought off in
Kent.

Medway rapidly made up his mind. He would pay a visit to this
public-house and spy out the land for himself. Moreover he would go
with a warrant in his pocket for the arrest of the man Geary on a
charge of burglary. Some sort of disguise would be needed, and this
Medway proceeded to don. When he had done he presented a presentment
of a drunken loafer out of work. A police car carried him as far as
Nightingale Lane, where he alighted and went the rest of the way on
foot.

His luck was evidently in, for the first person he recognised there was
Tanberg and all the easier because of his disguise. The Rumanian sat
by himself, seeming to have little use for the rest of the company. He
scowled from time to time as he glanced at the clock over the bar and
the flash of anger grew in his eyes as the elder Lefton crept into the
room.

"Been long enough about it," he growled. "I have been here for ages.
Why didn't you come before?"

"My dear, it wasn't safe," Lefton said ingratiatingly. "It wasn't quite
safe. I had the feeling that I was being followed. So I come the long
way round."

"Well, let's get on with it. I can't stay here all night."

Lefton made a sign to the landlord who left the bar and opened a door
leading into another room. He had hardly ushered Tanberg and Lefton
into this private apartment when Medway called him aside with an air of
command.

"Look here, Geary," he said. "I am a police officer, and I hold a
warrant for your arrest. It is up to you to say whether I execute it or
not. Give me the chance of overhearing what those two men are talking
about, and I can make things easy for you. Otherwise I search the
premises."

The landlord hesitated not at all. These men were nothing to him, they
did not belong to his gang.

"All right, sir," he said humbly. "Follow me and I will show you where
you can hear everything."




CHAPTER XIV.

Presently Medway found himself outside the house and on a patch of
ground overlooking the carpenter's premises on the left; thence down
a sort of alley-way that ended in a door which the guide opened into
something like darkness.

"Here you are, sir," he whispered. "A dozen steps or so, and you come
to a door leading directly into the room where them two fellows are.
You can't mistake it."

"All right," Medway replied. "I won't trouble you any further. No steps
to stumble over, eh?"

The man called Geary gave the desired assurance, and with a wave of
a hand was dismissed. Very shortly Medway crept along the cavernous
passage until his groping hands touched a door, and immediately the
sound of voices could be heard. Moreover, the door was an old one
with many cracks in it so that Medway could see what was taking place
inside. The figures of the two men were quite plain to him.

They were seated in front of a table on which stood a bottle and two
glasses together with a syphon of soda water. They were talking in
the most casual way about racing, and for a quarter of an hour Medway
listened to trivialities which seemed likely to continue for some time.

Then, as a sudden thought occurred to him, Medway cursed softly to
himself. Those men knew perfectly well that he was listening, and
had known it all along. Geary had nipped back and warned them of the
danger. They were playing with him and laughing in their sleeves.

For the moment checkmate was complete. But Medway was too old a hand at
the game to accept defeat. He crept away as gently as he had come, and
faded into the darkness of the night. Before he slept, however, he had
reported his failure to Sir Giles Fairchild, suggesting other methods
on the morrow.

"Yes, I think you are right," came the voice over the telephone. "Get
what you want early in the morning, and I will sign it directly I reach
the office."

With a certain document in his pocket, Medway was about to leave the
Yard next morning soon after 10 o'clock when he saw Ronald Brentford
awaiting him on the doorstep.

"Rather early to see you here," Medway said. "Anything happened? You
look rather put put."

"Not that exactly," Ronald said. "But something is in the wind all the
time. Gunter was on the 'phone to me just now and swears that somebody
tried to enter the flat last night. I thought that you would like to
know."

"And you thought right, Mr. Brentford. I am in no hurry for the moment,
so I will come along with you and see Gunter."

Gunter had quite a lot to say. He had been out quite late the previous
evening, in fact had not got back till after midnight. He had left the
flat in darkness and in darkness it was when he returned. He made no
move to switch on a light until he reached his quarters in the basement
knowing the way blindfold. Then he heard a noise overhead. As far as he
could make out the noise came from the top flat and inside the steel
door.

"Very strange, I think, seeing that the steel door was firmly shut
when Miss Goff left at five o'clock, me going up when she was gone to
make certain the flat was safe. So in my stockings I creeps up in the
darkness, and sure enough I heard somebody inside. I couldn't get at
him, you see, because I could no more open the door than either of you
two gents. So I bangs on the door crying out to know who was there to
which there worn't no reply. Then I heard a sort of scratching and
rattling and after that nothing. But I'll take my oath as there was
some cove in Mr. Garnstone's sitting-room last night."

"More mystery," Ronald sighed. "Anyway we may find something up there
when Miss Goff comes along with the key of the flat as usual."

There was not long to wait, for Vera appeared presently with her key
after which a search was made of the flat without finding that anything
had been disturbed. There was nothing save an impression of a heavy
heel mark on the thick Persian rug in front of the desk where Mr.
Garnstone was in the habit of writing his letters. As to the rest the
flat was exactly as Medway had seen it on his last visit there. But
most assuredly that heavy heel mark was something really new.

He made a rapid calculation in his mind. It had not been much after ten
the previous night when he abandoned his fruitless vigil in the Wapping
public house so that Tanberg and Lefton would be free to leave later,
and one, or both of them could reach the neighborhood long before 11
o'clock. For, despite the absence of any actual fact to go upon he was
certain in his mind that Tanberg was behind the whole business. And
this latest audacity absolutely staggered him.

"Strange, very strange," he muttered. "All the same I am trying a
little experiment that may tend to shed some light on the mystery."

"Anything we may not know?" Brentford asked.

"Oh, no. Only it makes me look like a fool. Still the man who never
makes mistakes never makes anything. I lost the last trick, which makes
me all the more keen to win next one. But I will tell you what happened
last night."

Very simply Medway told his story. Then he took from his pocket a sheet
of paper, and showed it to his listeners.

"Now, that," he explained, "is a search warrant. Yesterday I had a
warrant for the arrest of the man Geary which I used to force him to
do my bidding. And this he did to a certain extent, the scoundrel. No
doubt he is now chuckling over the way in which he fooled the police.
In less than an hour's time a most unpleasant surprise awaits him."

"I should like to see his face when you show him that piece of paper,"
Brentford chuckled. "I wonder if there is any objection to my coming
along."

"Well, it's rather unusual," Medway replied. "But you can if you like.
But I warn you there is a chance of a rough house--especially if there
is anything to conceal. I shall probably ask you to play sentry guard
outside a back door, in fact the door that played its part last night.
That is by the side of a master carpenter's shop and yard."

"Count me in," Ronald said with relish. "I love a scrap. Most old
rugger men do."

Yes, that was all very well Medway thought, when the rules of the game
were observed, but not where knuckle-dusters and sandbags come in.
Anyway, if Brentford chose to take the risk it was nobody's business
but his own.

About an hour later Medway, accompanied by two men in plain clothes
walked into the Two Cows, where the landlord was lounging behind the
bar. It being close time for drinks, the place was empty. Geary glanced
half defiantly at his visitors, though there was a gleam of fear in his
shifty eyes when Medway made himself known.

"Do any good last night?" he asked.

"That remains to be seen," Medway replied. "No, I don't want you,
Geary, at least this time. What I promised yesterday I hold to. But I
am not my own master, as you probably know. All the same, my errand is
no pleasant one. I have here what is called a search warrant."

"Mean to say, search my premises? Not likely."

"Now, no nonsense," Medway said sharply. "I have two good men here and
others outside--especially one guarding the door you introduced me to
last night. So you just sit there quietly whilst my little lot goes
over the house. No, don't you touch that bell under the counter or I
shall have to handcuff you. I know you have queer customers sleeping on
the premises, and I don't want a rough house if I can help it. Now, you
chaps!"

Geary subsided muttering to himself. Medway sat opposite him whilst
his men vanished on their search. It was a long time before one of the
searchers returned carrying a big suit case that seemed to be heavy.

"Got quite a lot of stuff here, sir," he reported. "It looks like the
Caversham plate. Found it in the cistern. Jones is bringing a lot more."

"Good," Medway said. "Anybody sleeping upstairs?"

"One or two of the regulars, sir. Mostly old lags. But they lay down
quiet when told that none of them was wanted."

"All right. Better take Geary and hand him over to Andrews outside. I
suppose that there is a woman somewhere on the premises. Get her to
come and look after things whilst you two continue the search. I'll get
back to headquarters now as I have something pressing on hand."

Meanwhile out there facing the carpenter's yard, Ronald was awaiting
events. But the best part of an hour passed and he was getting
bored and half inclined to sleep. It was only the activities in the
carpenter's open shop that kept him from utter boredom.

Then suddenly he was acutely alive. The sight of a light ladder propped
up against a wall started a train of thought that caused him to tingle
from head to foot. He came forward eagerly as Medway appeared on the
scene.

"Medway," he said, in hoarse tones "I believe I have solved the problem
of illicit entry into Garnstone's flat."

"You don't say? An idea or a plain fact?"

"Well, an idea, or the germ of one," Brentford replied. "But I am not
going to enlarge upon it as yet."




CHAPTER XV.

Ronald Brentford did not seem willing to explain any further. The glow
of inspiration had fled almost before he had spoken of it to Medway.
There would be plenty of time to take the detective into his confidence
when he had a little more practical detail to go on.

"If you don't mind," he said, "I had rather hold back until I am a
little more sure of my ground. I am only a novice at this sort of game,
and I might lure you off your own track at a time when you begin to see
daylight. Another day or two . . . By the way, did you have any luck
just now?"

Without going any further along the lines of Ronald's vague suggestion,
Medway briefly told him what had happened during the raid on the Two
Cows. On the whole he was satisfied with his morning's work, and said
so.

"Though it was pretty dull for you," he concluded. "All the same, you
have learnt what patience we detectives have to exercise in the pursuit
of our duties. I am prepared to wager a small sum that you noticed
nothing likely to be of the slightest use to me."

Ronald smiled, and shook his head.

"I am not going to argue that point with you," he said. "All the
same it did occur to me that this carpenter's yard would make a fine
bolt-hole in case the public house was raided at some unexpected
moment--I mean, by way of the door I am still guarding. Lots of little
hiding places there provided that the knight of the shaving plane was
party to the contract. It is not very far from the yard to the river,
and a handy boat there would do the rest. Who is this carpenter?"

"Quite a respectable man so far as my information goes," Medway smiled.
"You don't suppose that we work hap-hazard. There is nothing against
Ling Choo."

"A Chinaman!" Brentford cried. "I know something about the gentle
Mogul. A good enough chap if you play the game with him, but if
you don't then look to yourself. I would to have speech with this
carpenter."

"What do you know of the wily Celestial," Medway asked.

"Quite a whole lot, my boy. You seem to forget that I have travelled
all over the globe hunting rare flowers for the late Mr. Garnstone.
No foreign devil has penetrated farther into Central China than yours
truly. What about it?"

Willing to indulge a man in the career of his humour, Medway crossed
the yard and demanded to see Ling Choo, who came without delay, almond
eyes blinking behind horn-rimmed glasses and ingratiating in manner.

"What can I do for the honorable gentleman?" he asked.

Ronald uttered a few queer-sounding words under his breath and Ling
Choo responded with an illuminating smile. For a few minutes Medway had
perforce to listen to a tongue that he did not in the least understand.

"This man is all right," Brentford said at length, speaking in French.
"He says he has been here for years making furniture of a certain kind.
Light stuff for week-end cottages and small houses. Mostly of hollow
woods of various kinds. I should say decidedly honest and all that."

"I'd like to look over the workshops," Ronald went on, now addressing
Ling Choo in English. "I'm looking for something in your line."

"It will be ploud to me," Ling Choo replied. "My poor house is yours,
and all that is in it."

Brentford apparently wanted to see everything. There was an uneasy
restlessness in his manner that was not lost on Medway. The best part
of an hour had elapsed before Brentford appeared to be satisfied. Even
then he did not turn to go.

"You have lots of chance customers?" he asked Ling Choo.

"Not so many outside the tlade," the Chinaman replied. "I make for the
tlade. Then sometimes a gentlemon comes along and wants something to
his own fancy. Such as a deck-chair to use on board ship. I had one a
little time ago."

"That's odd," Brentford responded. "A friend of mine not long ago told
me he had had a deck-chair specially made for him by a clever workman
in cane and hollow wood. I wonder if it was the same man."

"It is possible," Ling Choo murmured. "The honorable gentleman who was
my patron was called Tanberg."

Medway could hardly repress a start. But Brentford smiled with the
air of a man who has made a discovery. Certainly it was strange how
Tanberg's name came cropping up in all sorts of places. And what in
the name of fate did he want a special kind of deck-chair for? It
almost looked as if the man were contemplating flight. If he did, then
something had happened to shake his audacity to such an extent that he
had abandoned any idea of recovering possession of the gold cup.

"Now what does it all mean?" he asked Brentford once they were on their
way westward. "You have got me completely fogged. If you have made any
discovery----"

"I haven't," Brentford smiled. "Up to the present I have merely an
idea, and what I heard just now justifies me in taking a certain line.
But until I have a real clue in my hands I prefer to act the part of
the Sphinx."

And with that Medway was fain to be contented. The two parted
presently, Medway for the Yard and Brentford towards the flat where he
hoped to find Vera.

But there was something to do before the hour when it was usual to take
Vera out to tea, and that something lay quite close to the vicinity of
the flat.

Ronnie strolled along casually until he came close to the block of
three buildings, the third of which contained the flat. The first
building was, of course, no more, since it had been burnt down not long
ago, and apparently was likely to remain for some time, little better
than a blackened ruin.

In front of it was the usual hoarding plastered with the inevitable
posters, and a sort of broken down door for the admission of such
casual labour as was necessary from time to time. As soon as the street
was clear Ronnie darted for the door, and once inside, contemplated the
ruins with something more than a casual eye.

Part of the roof was still standing and leaning against its next
door neighbour. The rest of the building had collapsed, leaving the
grates and fire-places more or less intact. The fire had done its work
effectively, for the ground was one mass of ashes with here and there
fragments of unburnt woodwork.

All these things Brentford studied carefully. He was where he could not
be overlooked or attract the attention of the curious passer-by. Then
he began poking about in the black mass on the floor with his walking
stick.

Presently something came to light--Something that glistened in the
sunshine as if it had been polished, taking the form of a stout bamboo
stake some nine feet long. It was almost clean and untouched by the
fire. Strange that it should be so when it was light and dry and the
first lick of flame must have set it alight. Yet here it was in the
midst of what must have been a blazing inferno.

Brentford examined it carefully, the bamboo pole was notched at
intervals of about a foot each all down its length, and the sight of
this brought a grim smile to his lips. Luck was with him as he peered
cautiously into the street where no pedestrian was passing. He lifted
the pole which was little more than a featherweight, and hastened with
it until he came to the flat buildings. There he handed his prize to
Gunter who regarded both man and article with great surprise.

"Why, what the devil, sir----" he began.

"Never mind about that, Gunter," Brentford commanded. "You take that
and ask no questions. Put it away carefully, and don't speak of it to a
soul. Miss Vera about?"

Gunter said that the lady in question was in the flat, and that he was
acting as her bodyguard as usual. As he was telling this Vera herself
appeared.

"Finished for the day?" Ronnie asked.

Vera smilingly assented. She was at the disposal of her lover for as
long as he pleased. So that a few minutes later they were seated in a
cosy tea-room where they had a table out of earshot of other customers.

Very soon the conversation veered round to the one topic that so
closely appealed to them both.

"Do you know darling, that I have practically cleared up everything I
can as regards Mr. Garnstone's business matters? I can do no more at
the flat; indeed, it has been a dreadful ordeal working there at all. I
had a letter this morning from our dead friend's solicitors saying that
they have no funds with which to pay me any more salary. It means that
I am dismissed, and have to look elsewhere for a living."

"Bad as all that?" Ronnie smiled. "In that case the sooner we are
married the better."

"Oh, but Ronnie darling, I couldn't. I mean until this dreadful mystery
is cleared up. Besides, I have saved some money--more than 200. So
you see, I shall have something to go on with until you and Mr. Medway
solve the problem of the poor old man's death."

"To say nothing of what he has left you, darling."

"But how do you know that he has left me anything--or you either, for
the matter of that? He certainly left a will, but that seems to have
vanished--at any rate, it was not in the safe, nor is it amongst the
private papers. The lawyers say it is possible that the court will
act on the draft will in their possession, but not until they have
advertised for months for next-of-kin."

"But the old man told me he had no relations."

"Nonsense, dearest boy. Everybody has relations--without knowing it
sometimes. There will be scores of these when once the advertisements
begin to appear. If they don't, it may be years before the court gives
judgment in our favour. But I hate to talk like this, Ronnie."

"Of course, you do, darling," Ronnie agreed. "But that will business is
all part of the mystery we have to solve. And when we have found out
who it was who managed to get into the flat and out again, we shall be
in sight of the murderers."

Vera's eyes lighted up swiftly.

"Ronnie, you have discovered something," she cried. "I can judge by the
sound of your voice. What is it?"

"Only a little light at present," Ronnie said. "Don't ask yet or you
may be disappointed. But something has happened to-day that gives me a
whole lot to think about. A day or two, and I hope all the cards will
be on the table."




CHAPTER XVI.

Sir Giles Fairchild was expressing himself pretty freely with regard to
the flat murder. Time was getting on and nothing seemed to be done with
a view to solving the mystery. Had Medway anything to report.

"Well, no, sir," Medway admitted. "Everything seems to have gone wrong
with my arrangements. It was a fatal mistake to allow the Leftons out
on bail. So long as they were safe under lock and key I could move in a
certain direction, but with those two at large my hands are tied."

"Then you think they are connected with the crime?"

"Indirectly at any rate," Medway said. "But not as the actual
murderers. That showed courage and daring, and those Jews are not built
that way. But they know who the criminal is, and that is why I have
them under close observation."

"All the same they will never speak so long as their necks are not
in danger. We know that they were in close connexion with Garnstone
with regard to his criminal activities, and that they acted as his
go-between when certain loot had to change hands. Witness the business
of the secret garage of which the Lefton's had the run. We also know
that Garnstone drew 1,000 from the bank on the morning of his death,
and that a large part of it found its way into the hands of the man who
calls himself Tanberg. By the way have you traced him?"

"As to his record, sir, you mean? I am making inquiries in several
directions, and a certain amount of information has come to hand. The
man is no Rumanian, but a renegade Russian. His real name is Manstar,
not that it matters very much either way."

"Oh, but it does," Sir Giles said. "I also have been making inquiries
through diplomatic channels. That man, I found, was once a trusted
servant of the great Zaroff family and managed their estate on the
Black Sea. After feathering his own nest for years, he robbed them of
the Zaroff jewels, and plate--worth an immense sum I believe. I shall
be vastly mistaken if that gold cup wasn't part of the plunder. Hence
some of his recent activities."

Medway listened to all this with the deepest interest. His chief was
confirming all that Vera had told him some time before.

"All most valuable, sir," he cried. "The gold cup found its way to
Amsterdam where a sort of bogus business was opened in the name of
Paul Nester with a view to a sale of the cup to Lord Glenday. You will
remember that this Paul Nester could not be found--even if he ever
existed, but he was in business long enough to lure Lord Glenday over
there, and sell him the cup. That is how I see it, sir."

"Reasoning quite sound," Sir Giles smiled. "Then later on the cup
was stolen, and once more fell into Tanberg's hands--via the Leftons
probably. I mean they were the receivers acting under Garnstone. But
somehow or other Tanberg managed to snaffle the cup and sold it to
Garnstone an hour or two before the latter was killed. And Garnstone
paid for the cup in banknotes, a portion of which was passed over to
the elder Lefton and subsequently confiscated by you."

"That seems all plain sailing, sir," Medway grinned, "but only to a
certain point. We can pin the handling of those notes on to Tanberg,
though he stoutly denies that Garnstone paid for the cup at the moment
he received it. You see Tanberg doesn't know what we know, but Levi
Lefton must have an inkling. So far, at any rate, Lefton hasn't told
Tanberg that the notes were not paid away as payment for the attempted
burglary at Epping, or if he has, it will be to swear that the arrested
men were paid in advance. Lefton would probably cling to the hope that
sooner or later he will recover that money from the police."

"I am inclined to agree with you," Sir Giles said. "But why not play
off one party against the other?"

"Meaning, sir?"

"Well, isn't it perfectly plain? Here you have the Leftons on bail, and
trembling in their shoes lest Tanberg should find out their duplicity,
and those abortive burglars who so signally failed at Epping, in
custody. Suppose we manage to arrange bail for those burglar bunglers,
and leave them to face the Leftons? As they were not paid in advance
they are pretty sure to demand money under threats, which money will be
refused. Then you get in touch with the two sides, and it is long odds
that you learn something."

So when the Epping burglars came up for the first hearing bail was
forthcoming, which meant that they were free for the next fortnight.
And as Medway expected, they were not long in seeking out the Leftons.
Medway knew this in consequence of the close shadowing of the now free
men.

There emerged presently into the Whitechapel Road a couple of angry and
disgruntled men. So angry that when Medway came up and spoke to them
and offered refreshment of a liquid nature they rose to it with one
accord, though their experience told them that they were in contact
with a police officer.

"Leftons let you down, eh?" Medway asked when the glasses had been
replenished for the second time. "Always stipulate for cash when
dealing with that tribe."

"Lefton swore he hadn't got a bob until the posh came along, which was
to be when we'd done the trick," growled Spink, who appeared to be the
leader of the two. "And when we asked for a few quids to carry on with
just now Levi Lefton laughed. Said we'd ditched the whole business and
didn't deserve nothing. But me and Bill Marcus here will get even yet."

Medway lingered a little longer. In a way he had made friends with
these men even to the disclosing of his name, and for the moment, had
learnt all he wanted. So now, being sure of his facts, he went off
presently in search of Levi Lefton.

The wily old rascal received his visitor with a grin. He had a pretty
intimate knowledge of the law, and so far as he could see, the case
against him was a thin one.

"Anything I can do to help you, my dear?" he said. "A pleasure to help
the police."

"Very properly expressed," Medway replied. "Then perhaps you will tell
me where you got those banknotes we found on your person when you were
arrested."

"Betting," Lefton responded promptly. "Lingfield Park that very same
afternoon."

Medway thought a moment before he replied. Checking his memory, he
realised that Lingfield Park races did take place on the date indicated.

"And the name of the bookie?" he demanded.

Lefton threw up his hands in despair.

"I was afraid you were going to ask me that question," he moaned. "The
man wath a stranger to me. In the silver ring we was. I backed three
winners and a double, and all come off. But I should know that man
again."

"No doubt," Medway said drily. "But never mind about him for the
moment. Because he doesn't exist. Now let me tell you something, Levi.
Those notes we took from you were drawn by Mr. Garnstone from his bank
on the morning of his murder. I have the numbers to prove it. Later on
they were in your possession, and if you don't want to hang for murder,
you had better tell me the truth. You needn't incriminate yourself, and
if you refuse to answer then I have no more to say."

Lefton crumpled up in his chair. It was as if Medway had struck him a
mortal blow. But there was not so much guilt in his eyes as fear. Frank
and deadly fear.

"I will tell the truth," he screamed. "I got those notes from Tanberg.
They were to be paid to those two chaps who were to blow that crib at
Epping. As they bungled it. I thought I might as well keep them, and
pretend to Tanberg that Spink and Marcus were paid in advance. And
that's the truth."

"I know it is," Medway said, "and a pretty ghastly truth, too. Do you
know that Tanberg was with Mr. Garnstone on the night that he was
killed?"

A feeble moan was Lefton's only response.

"Yes, I see you do," Medway went on. "Now listen to me. If you try to
help me I will do my best to help you. I want you to get Tanberg down
here in this house. You must arrange to have the place entirely to
yourself. Then you are to tell Tanberg the truth about the notes."

"If I do he will murder me," Lefton wept.

"Nonsense, man. If he shows violence I shall come out of my hiding
place and help you. I shall be in that cupboard listening to your
conversation. When the trap is ready, let me know."

Three days later there came a letter from Lefton to the effect that 10
o'clock that night would be the time. But it was nearly half an hour
later before Medway reached the house, which was all in darkness. He
knocked on the door three times without any reply, and then turned the
knob and entered. Still the same strange silence. Had Lefton gone back
on his word?

Medway struck a match and glanced about him. He could see no sign
of illumination anywhere. He struck another match, and this time
illumination came with a vengeance.

For Lefton was lying face upwards on the floor with a trickle of blood
oozing from his left breast--dead beyond recall.

The man had been murdered, and that within the last few minutes, for
the wound still flowed and the body was warm. Medway ran into the road
to summon assistance.




CHAPTER XVII.

Medway was back in the house again almost as soon as he left it. Was he
losing his head over this affair? Had the mere spectacle of a corpse
deprived him of his reasoning faculties? And what would they say at
Scotland Yard when they heard how he had behaved like a frightened
child.

Of course he ought not to have left the house, but waited in that
little, grimy front sitting-room until he could hail a passer-by by
tapping on the window.

He had found a body still quivering with a knife thrust through the
heart, a body barely dead, and had rushed into the street as a demented
woman might have done. That deadly glow had perhaps been struck whilst
he was knocking at the door.

Medway began his search. Not by means of the window in the front room
had the murderer vanished, for that was closed and latched. Nor by the
kitchen door which was bolted on the inside. The two bedrooms overhead
were empty, though over one of the beds was a trap door leading to the
roof. That also was secured by two bolts which were shot home. They
were well-oiled bolts sliding easily into the framework, and evidently
intended for use in case of a raid and an escape by means of the roof.
But there was not a sign to be seen of the criminal.

Then back to the sitting-room again as there came sound of measured
tread. A blue uniform topped with a helmet came striding past the
window. Medway drummed on the dusty panes.

The constable stopped. Then very slowly he entered the house and
confronted Medway with a suspicious eye.

"What all this about?" he demanded.

"That," Medway said tersely as he pointed to the body on the floor.
"That. And it's murder. Now don't begin to talk, my good fellow, but
lend a hand here. If you want to know, I am Inspector Medway of the
Yard, and I came here by appointment to meet the man who is lying
there. A minute or two earlier, and I might have caught the murderer
red-handed."

The man in blue saluted.

"Anything, I can do, sir," he said.

"Come on then. Lift the body carefully and turn it on the face. Hullo,
what's this?"

"This" was a tightly clenched right hand holding a long, thin shagreen
sheath which evidently belonged to a dagger or some lethal weapon. A
slender weapon no doubt, but one capable of inflicting a mortal wound.

This Medway took carefully from the clenched hand, using a silk
handkerchief for the purpose with a view to fingerprints, and laid it
on one side for the moment. There was something else tangled with the
twisted fingers in the shape of a small fragment of fine cloth with a
brown thread of silk running through it--a matter of less than a square
inch. This Medway deposited in his pocket book.

"I'll take this shagreen case with me to the Yard, and see if it
helps," he said. "Meanwhile you had better stay here until I can have
you relieved. If----"

Whatever Medway was going to say was interrupted by the sudden
appearance of the younger Lefton. He evidently expected to see Medway
there, but the presence of the policeman startled him. If things had
gone wrong . . .

"Yes, they evidently have," Medway said as if reading the thoughts of
Ben Lefton. "Your poor father----"

He got no further for the young man had caught sight of the body. A
quick cry broke from his lips as he scooped down and bent over the
corpse. Then he was himself again, save for a wild gleam in his dark
eyes.

"I was half afraid of something like this when my father sent me out of
the house this evening telling me not to come back for an hour or two.
Always the same, he was, never trusting to nobody. But I found out--I
always find out. He ought to have come to you, sir, but he thought it
too dangerous."

"Oh did he?" Medway asked. "Did he say so?"

"He never said nothing, swelp me. But he mutters to himself, see? A
habit of his when he is bothered. Doesn't know when he does it. So when
your name came out tea-time and I got my orders, I put things together.
And I was right."

No filial affection here, Medway thought; no feeling whatever for the
dead man. Probably a smug satisfaction seeing that Levi Lefton had been
reputed as a miser, and the owner of considerable property, both real
and personal.

"You thought that trouble was brewing?" Medway asked.

"I was absolutely sure of it," Ben Lefton declared.

"Then whom do you suspect?" Medway demanded. "Come, out with it. Who
killed, your father?"

For the first time the young man showed signs of emotion. He writhed
and twisted with both hands pressed to his abdomen as if suffering some
great pain there.

"I don't know," he groaned. "I don't know. It isn't any use guessing,
mister, because that might get me into trouble. I don't want a knife in
my back."

The man was shaking from head to foot with abject fear. Medway regarded
him with fine contempt.

"A pretty fine son you are," he said. "Thinking only of your own skin,
whilst your father lies dead at your feet. And all the police in London
behind you."

Young Lefton gave a ghastly grin.

"They were behind him too," he muttered. "But that didn't save his
life, mister. You find the murderer and put him safe under lock and
key, and then perhaps--perhaps, mind you--I got something to say. But
you'll never catch him--never."

It was useless to prolong the conversation as Medway saw to his
disgust. Under the old rules of police procedure he could have
subjected this youth to something like a mild form of the third degree,
but not now.

In quite a savage mood he made his way the next morning to Scotland
Yard. He wanted to talk this new development over with Sir Giles, but
the latter was not in his office, and would not return before afternoon.

There came to him presently the officer in charge of the finger-prints
department with no welcome news. He passed the Shagreen case over to
his superior.

"No good, sir," he said. "Plenty finger marks, but all so jumbled
up that we can make nothing of them. Impression of gloves, too.
Premeditated business, I should say."

"And you would be right. We have a most daring and clever scoundrel to
deal with here. Man who anticipates every move we make. I am absolutely
beaten."

It was the same tale Medway had to tell Sir Giles when came to talk the
matter over in the afternoon.

"I can see daylight nowhere, sir," Medway confessed as he sat in the
great man's sanctum. "I made an appointment to meet Levi Lefton in his
own house for 10 o'clock last night. A perfectly safe place to meet--or
so I thought. I never mentioned to a soul what I was doing. Yet this
fiend, who, I am sure, is the creature that killed Garnstone as well,
seemed to divine what was in the air, and beat me by a short head, so
to speak."

"Um!--were you on the spot to time?" Sir Giles asked.

"Well--no, I wasn't. As a matter of fact, I was nearly half an hour
late. Detained over that Hackney shooting affair by a witness whose
evidence wasn't worth twopence. Matter of the number of a motor car."

"Find that witness again, Medway?"

"Probably--if I wanted him, which I don't."

"Which is a pity, my friend. Because in all probability the man was
sent there on purpose to detain you."

"I never thought of that," Medway said miserably. "It is possible you
are right, sir. But what an infernally audacious thing to do--not to
say risky."

"Not so risky, after all," Sir Giles smiled. "Lots of men would play a
game like that for a fiver."

Medway pondered over this problem moodily. If he had been diddled
in this way within the four walls of Scotland Yard itself, then he
would never hear the last of it. He might even be asked to tender
his resignation. Sir Giles evidently guessed what was passing in his
subordinate's mind when he spoke again.

"I wouldn't let that worry you unduly," he said. "It was only an idea
that flashed across my brain. After all, that witness might have been
genuine. If that turns out to be the case, I am the fool, not you."

"Very good of you to put it that way, sir," Medway said gratefully.
"But there is no getting away from the fact the man who killed Levi
Lefton knew that I had arranged a meeting with him last night. Now how
on earth----"

"Levi Lefton must have told somebody," Sir Giles said. "He must. Where
was he last night?"

Medway couldn't say, but he would try to find out. It was at that
moment that he recollected what Ben Lefton had said as to his father's
habit of thinking aloud. At any rate some possible explanation might
come that way. He would send for Ben and interview him at the Yard.
Perhaps the awesome atmosphere of the place might have a Salutary
effect.

The morning papers had contained brief reports of the crime and the
evening publications had elicited further facts. Thus "The Planet."

MURDER IN WHITECHAPEL


"A well-known Whitechapel resident, Mr. Levi Lefton was found dead in
his house last night with every evidence that he was the victim of
murder. He was discovered with a wound that had penetrated the heart
producing instant death. Oddly enough deceased was discovered by a
prominent member of the C.I.D., who had an appointment with him. So far
no sort of clue has been discovered beyond the sheath of a knife on
which possibly finger-prints may be found."


Medway tossed the paper aside in disgust. It was pretty plain that Ben
Lefton had been talking not only to the policeman left in charge, but
to the Press fraternity who had scented the tragedy from afar off after
the manner of their kind.

The very last thing Medway wanted was for the detail of the knife
sheath to become public property. He sat down and wrote a command to
Ben Lefton to come and see him at half-past ten the following morning,
and this being done he put the matter out of his mind for the moment.
Perhaps Brentford might have some more to say regarding his brainwave.
But Ronnie was not available; having taken Vera out to dinner.




CHAPTER XVIII.

Where, Medway asked Brentford's landlord over the telephone was the
latter dining? The Regal Palace, was the answer. Captain Brentford
had made that plain in case anyone wanted to see him in the course of
the evening. It was a habit of that gentleman to do so. "And a very
good habit, too," Medway told himself. "A pity all men were not so
business-like."

There were two or three reasons why Medway wanted a few words with
Brentford. To begin with, had that astute young man gone any further
with his attempt to solve the problem as to how the murderer had made
his way into Garnstone's fortress? If that riddle could be solved then
the rest would be something like plain sailing. But that was not the
only thing.

There was the queer case or sheath in which was placed the weapon by
which Levi Lefton had been murdered. The blade of this was little more
than half-an-inch wide as the autopsy had proved and some nine inches
in length; moreover it had been driven home as the bloodstains on the
haft showed. Round the top of the sheath ran a gold band about as
broad as an ordinary match and on it a series of tiny tool chasings
with a series of three seed sapphires set in pyramid fashion. Ancient
workmanship beyond a shadow of a doubt with, at the point of the
sheath, a gold mounting with some strange lettering thereon.

It seemed to Medway that he had noticed something like this on the
gold cup, but on this point he was uncertain. Nor could he make any
comparison for the moment seeing that the gold cup was locked away in
the official safe. However, all in good time. Meanwhile no harm could
come from a visit to the Regal Palace.

In the interim, however, Brentford had been passing what he would
describe as a busy day. Most of this had been spent in probing around
the ruins of the fire which had happened so near to Garnstone's flat.
There was not much difficulty as to that because once inside the
hoarding with its flamboyant posters depicting the vagaries of film
stars, it was quite easy to avoid anything in the way of lookers-on.

It was by no means a pleasant job. However Brentford had come prepared
for it. In an old grey suit of very shabby plus fours and hobnailed
shoes, to say nothing of a cap of sorts, he dived in and out under
the friendly cover of the flaming posters, but so far all in vain.
There was some twenty yards either way of huddled desolation, piled up
rubbish, most of it reduced to cinders by the duplex action of fire and
water.

But Brentford knew only too well that the thing he was looking for was
here and he was going to find it if he had to turn over every inch
of the terrain. The missing part of the jig-saw puzzle must be there
otherwise why was part of it rescued more or less from the ruins?
Brentford could not visualise the owner of the second part so to speak,
leaving it behind and going away with the other piece. There would be
no sense in that at all. Unless, perhaps, he had been scared off at the
last moment which did not seem likely.

In his mind's eye, Brentford could visualise every action on the
criminal's part from the moment he had set out on his murderous
errand until the minute when he had made good his escape leaving,
as he thought, no kind of evidence behind him. Just the one act of
carelessness that the clever criminal almost inevitably commits,
believing himself perfectly beyond the law.

With a fork he had found amongst the ruins Brentford turned over the
debris until the sweat poured down his face. But no sign of what he
wanted showed itself. By the time he had made his final exit for the
day it was time to dress for dinner. However, with nothing else to do
and many days before him, he did not despair. If the needle was in the
rick of hay, then he was going to find it if it took him a month.

He picked up Vera outside her lodgings and a taxi took them speedily to
the Regal Palace. Already he had ordered a table there in a secluded
corner of the room where they could see without being seen by other
diners with whom the dining room was fairly full.

Vera's spirits rose as she looked about her. She loved the subdued
lights and the flowers on the tables, the exquisite dresses and the
murmur of conversation. It was such a lovely change after the drudgery
of the daily round. Yet she knew that this sort of thing could not
last. Ere long she would have to find something to do by way of earning
a living as would Ronnie also because his funds did not permit of the
marriage he was urging upon her.

"We must not come here again, Ronnie darling," she sighed. "I am
getting too fond of this sort of life. We should never be able to
afford it."

"Have you forgotten the old man's will, sweetheart?"

"My dear, we dare not count on it. Nor would you be happy on money
earned by the worst kind of dishonesty. You seem to have forgotten that
side of Mr. Garnstone's life."

"Upon my word, I had," Ronnie confessed. "Of course that makes all the
difference. Though he must have made a big fortune in his legitimate
business."

Dinner was almost over before Medway made his appearance. He came in
quietly and unrecognised as he made his way to the table where the
lovers were seated.

"So sorry to disturb you," he said. "But there is something I want to
show you."

"Pull up a chair," Brentford said. "Mean to say that you have made an
important discovery?"

"I wish I had," Medway sighed. "But Miss Goff may be able to help in a
way. I have here in my pocket a grim piece of evidence concerning the
death of that man, Levi Lefton. It is a horrible time to come barging
in like this, but my time is so occupied that really----"

"Oh please don't apologise," Vera said quietly, though a cloud seemed
to pass over her happiness. "If I can help you in any way, I will. But
what connexion can there be between our mystery and that case?"

"Because," Medway said, "unless I am altogether mistaken, both crimes
were committed by the same man. However, will you be so good as to look
at this."

With that he produced the shagreen case from his pocket, and handed it
over for Vera's inspection. There was a puzzled frown on her face as
she turned it over in her hands. Then suddenly her face cleared and her
eyes grew bright.

"Why of course," she said. "This once belonged to my family. It was
the centre of an arms trophy and stood against a wall in the lounge.
Those tiny designs are the stalks of flowers and the sapphires form the
bloom. The Blue Daffodil which is incorporated in the family arms."

"No getting away from the Blue Daffodil," Ronnie said. "It seems to
crop up everywhere. First the bulb belonging to the old gentleman which
was stolen by Gunter, then the gold cup purchased by Lord Glenday and
claimed by Tanberg, and now this sheath from which I presume came the
knife that killed Lefton."

"Perfectly correct," Medway agreed. "It was taken from Lefton's
fingers. As to the knife. I can say nothing. The murderer probably took
that with him. But----"

Medway paused suddenly with his eyes turned in the direction of the
door. There was Tanberg looking for a table and with him the same
pretty and alluring girl who had been his companion when, on a former
occasion, Brentford and Vera were in the same room. From where they
were seated the watchers could see without being seen, so that every
movement on the part of the newcomers was perfectly plain.

Tanberg found a table presently, and motioned his friend to a chair,
into which she sank gracefully and began to look about her. She wore no
jewels save a sort of sunburst of diamonds in the centre of her corsage.

Almost at the same moment another woman entered the dining room and
glanced about her. She was quite alone. A woman, tall and dark, with
flashing, fearless eyes that denoted a proud and independent spirit--in
fact, a woman quite capable of taking care of herself the world over.
Superbly handsome, though a little past her first youth.

Very slowly, like a yacht in full sail, she sauntered up the room until
she reached the table where Tanberg and the girl were seated. Then
without a word or change of expression, she bent down and literally
tore the flashing ornament from the girl's breast, and dropped it into
the bag she was carrying.

The girl fell back in her chair white to the lips, far too astonished
to utter a sound. With a murderous expression on his face, Tanberg
looked up at the handsome stranger.

"Pretty bold, aren't you?" he asked in a hoarse whisper that carried to
the ears of the listeners, though nobody else seemed to realise what
was going on. "Put that back unless you want me to hand you over to the
police."

"Police!" the woman sneered. "Audacious as you are, you dare not. Those
diamonds are as much mine as anybody's. Given and taken back as the
mood strikes you. How many women have you dazzled with them, I wonder?"

With that she turned on her heel and sailed out of the room, much as if
the place belonged to her. Before she had reached the entrance, Medway
was on his feet.

"I'll follow her," he said. "There is nobody else to do so. Keep your
eye on the other two, Brentford, and don't lose sight of them. Put Miss
Goff into a cab and let her go home. I must see what becomes of that
girl. We are on the verge of a great discovery unless I am entirely
mistaken."




CHAPTER XIX.

"Every time I see that man or even hear his name mentioned a cold chill
runs down my spine," said Vera with a shudder as she looked away from
Tanberg. "Whoever that pretty girl with him is, I am sorry for her."

And she was a pretty girl as Ronnie was more than prepared to admit.
Young and fair, with regular features lit up by a pair of dark blue
eyes. The mouth was a little petulant and weak suggesting lack of
character and resolution, in short the type of womanhood that would be
as wax in hands like those of a rascal such as Tanberg.

The two were talking earnestly together now, the girl with a face
alternately red and white with a suggestion of angry tears in her eyes.
It was quite evident that Tanberg was trying to soothe her wounded
vanity, for he was exerting all his powers of fascination to explain
away the strange events of the past few minutes. A few words reached
Brentford's ears.

"But why did you let her?" the girl said.

"My dearest child, what would you have me do?" Tanberg replied in his
most honied tones. "Make a scene here? The very last thing I want."

"But she said that the diamonds were hers."

"Well, in a manner of speaking, they were. There was a time when we
fancied that we were in love with each other, but that was before I
found her out. A selfish and grasping creature only out to get what she
could without giving anything in return. Playing one man off against
another. And I strongly objected to be that other. There was the most
unpleasant scene between us. She flung that diamond ornament at my feet
as if it had been glass. Do you blame me for picking it up?"

The girl shrugged her shoulders sulkily.

"Then why come and steal it back?" she asked.

"Why? Who can fathom the feminine breast? Jealously. One of your poets
has said that hell knows no fury like a woman scorned. She must have
seen us together, and hated you because she recognised a beauty beyond
her own. She must have seen you wearing my diamonds, and inspired by
wild passion, followed us here and behaved as she did to-night. But
what does it matter? I have other gems that shall be yours if you like."

The girl rose and resumed her wrap.

"I am going home," she said. "I couldn't stay here after this. Order me
a taxi."

She moved towards the door closely followed by Tanberg. Evidently he
was not going to lose sight of her whilst she was in her present mood.

Brentford turned to Vera. "Darling," he whispered hurriedly, "you will
have to make your way home alone. There is no help for it. I must help
Medway as far as possible."

Five minutes later a taxi driver with an unexpected ten shilling note
in his pocket was following another cab at a respectful distance. The
journey was a fairly long one, ending presently in one of the many
respectable streets between Barons Court and West Kensington stations.
Brentford could see the foremost cab stopped before one of the houses
there, and the girl alighting with Tanberg behind her.

"Pull up," Brentford directed. "Then back your car round the corner.
Wait for me there till I return when I may want you again. In any case
there is more where that note came from. Do you know the name of this
street?"

"Right your are, sir," the cabman grinned. "Been her afore, I have.
Name of the street is Glanby."

The pair in front still stood on the pavement. Evidently Tanberg was
trying to make the girl do something which did not fit in with her
present mood. Brentford crept cautiously along the deserted street,
taking advantage of the fact that the couple had their backs towards
him. Soon he was hidden in a doorway on the far side of the road from
whence he could both see and hear what was going on.

"Now, don't be silly, Doris," Tanberg was saying. "Why spoil the
evening for a bit of temper. It's quite early yet, so why not an hour
or so at some night club? We haven't had a dance for ages."

There was all this and much more before the girl began to weaken. At
last she smiled and laughed with a gesture of surrender. Tanberg pushed
home his advantage.

"All right," she said. "Just for an hour. But I must go into the house
and make a few changes. Another frock. I won't keep you five minutes."

She was as good as her word, for presently the two cabs were moving
westward. Arrived at a somewhat dubious club where both proprietor
and patron were inclined to take risks. Brentford found himself duly
enrolled as a member on putting a pound note on the desk of the
cashier. Now he was free of the club to do as he pleased and dance or
drink as the mood moved him. The place was crowded with all sorts and
conditions of people from wearers of the strawberry leaves down to
members of the swell mob. There was an utter lack of ceremony so that
the choosing of partners called for no introductions. No doubt there
was a thrill for her ladyship to find herself in the arms of a man
pointed out to her as a well-known swindler or burglar.

She and her gilded sisters had come there in search of new sensations,
leaving theatres and evening parties behind them with more than a
chance of taking part in a police raid and appearing at Bow Street in
the morning.

All of which Brentford took in with a cynical eye. Still, he was there
for one purpose only, and of that he was not likely to lose sight. He
sat down at a remote table with an expensive drink before him--some
vile brand of champagne which he had not the remotest intention of
drinking. From where he sat he could see everything that was going on.
He could see the pretty girl in the arms of Tanberg, and his gorge rose
at the sight.

Then something happened. A large woman, old enough to know better,
was revolving in the arms of a professional partner with, most
conspicuously displayed, a pearl necklace of price about her fat neck.
Tanberg, who was dancing with a visitor who obviously came from some
South American state, made a slight slip and came violently in contact
with the lady of the pearls. A strange lapse on the part of so perfect
a dancer.

This all took place in a flash, and only a split second later the
obese lady was on her feet helped by Tanberg, who was making the most
profuse apologies. But in that instant Ronnie discovered that the pearl
necklace was no longer round the neck of the owner.

Tanberg released his partner, and came back to the table where just now
he and the girl Doris were seated. The pretty girl welcomed Tanberg
with a smile when he came back to her, and in doing so knocked her
handbag on to the floor. As he stooped to replace it, Brentford noticed
that he hastily released the catch and placed something inside.

As if this had been a signal for trouble, a great cry arose that Lady
Longton had lost her famous pearl necklace. Instantly half the dancers
there were on their hands and looking for the missing treasures.
Above the din there rose the voice of a youngish-looking man making a
challenge.

"No occasion for all this bother," he said. "I know where the missing
necklace is to be found."

A tense silence followed. The speaker led the way to the table where
Tanberg and his companion were seated and pointed an accusing finger in
the direction of the girl.

"The necklace is in your bag," he said. "It was passed to you by
someone I could not see for the moment because of the many dancers on
the floor. But I am correct in what I say."

Tanberg jumped angrily from his chair.

"Monstrous!" he cried. "Infamous! I can vouch for this lady. She is
incapable of such a thing."

"Nevertheless I cannot withdraw what I have said," the accuser went on.
"I represent the police. Scotland Yard, to be exact. Search that bag,
Jones."

Out of nowhere two policemen appeared. True, they were in evening
dress, but the word policeman was written all over them. The pearl
necklace was quickly exposed to view, and placed in the pudgy hands of
the owner.

"Your's my lady?" she was asked.

"Mine undoubtedly," came the reply. "So very clever of you officer. But
I make no charge."

The Yard man suppressed a smile. He could quite understand why her
ladyship preferred to make no charge seeing that publicity of that kind
was the last thing she desired.

"I am afraid the matter is out of your hands, my lady," came the reply.
"As a matter of fact this young woman has been under my eye for some
time past. Jones, please."

Jones aforesaid laid a hand on the girl's arm.

"Better come along with me," he said. "You had better not interfere,
sir. Only make things more unpleasant."

This to Tanberg who was beginning to expostulate. He dropped back with
a vague threat of what might happen later. A few seconds later, and the
dance was in full swing.

Taking advantage of this, Brentford approached the man who appeared to
be in charge of the plain clothes men.

"A word with you," he said. "I came here to-night at the urgent request
of Chief Inspector Medway. There was no time to call in professional
assistance, hence my intrusion. My name is Ronald Brentford, at one
time of the Intelligence."

"So was I," the other man said. "Detective Inspector Evan Brookes.
There were numbers in those days."

"And mine was S.B. 106," Ronnie smiled.

"All right, sir," Brookes replied. "Say on."

"Well, I followed that girl here at the special request of Mr. Medway.
But more especially her companion. I have been watching them carefully
the last hour. I didn't actually see the man steal the necklace, but
I saw how cleverly he barged into Lady Longton and her partner, and I
actually saw the pearls hidden in the handbag by the fellow who calls
himself Tanberg. My belief is that the girl is innocent."

"Uh! What you say does make a difference. But the girl has drifted in
to queer company of late. When I said I had had my eye on her for some
time, I was exaggerating a little because I didn't want to lose my
case. I won't charge her yet, but wait until we can get hold of Medway.
All the same I shall have to detain the young woman for the present. If
we decide to release her Lady Longton won't weep."

Brentford decided to leave it at that for the moment, the more so as
nothing could be done until he had seen Medway again. But he felt that
his evening had by no means been wasted.




CHAPTER XX.

The task that Medway had set for himself was not nearly so difficult
as that assigned to Brentford nor did it entail so long a journey.
Moreover there was no call for pursuit in the ordinary sense of the
word seeing that the dark lady came and went on foot. A leisurely
stroll as far as Regent Street and a turn or two ended in a block of
modest flats on a two storey basis, and into one of these blocks the
woman entered. Medway was so close behind her that he could actually
see the number of the flat where his quarry entered. She closed the
door behind her, leaving Medway to study the neat brass plate with
which it was decorated.

From this Medway learnt that the occupant was one Madame Nordiva,
teacher of theatrical dancing. After a little hesitation he laid a
finger on the electric bell whereupon the dark lady came herself to
demand what her visitor wanted.

"Just a few words with you," he answered. "You see I am a police
officer, and therefore----"

Medway allowed his voice to trail off incoherently, hoping that the
announcement would have some effect. But the dark lady never turned a
hair. She merely regarded her caller with a cold contempt, waiting for
his further explanation.

"If I may be permitted to enter," Medway suggested.

"As you will," the woman said coldly. "I am quite alone here, and
unprotected. You may or may not be what you pretend, but I am not
afraid."

Medway could see as much for himself. This was not the type of woman to
be afraid of anything. She stood quietly aside so that he might pass
into a neat sitting room in which Madame Nordiva indicated a chair.
Then she took a seat apposite him and signed to him to explain.

"First I had better give you my card," Medway said as he took out his
case. "Just as well for you to know that you are not dealing with an
imposter."

"I can see that," Madame said. "I am rather a good judge of a man--I
have had much experience of your sex."

There was a concentrated bitterness in the last part of the remark that
was not lost to Medway.

"Though you never can tell," he said. "It is just as well to be on the
safe side, especially when you are unprotected and have on your person
a piece of jewellery worth anything up to 5,000."

For the first time the woman showed signs of interest. But of fear
there was no suggestion at all.

"How do you know that?" she asked.

"I could make a mystery of it if I liked," Medway said with a smile,
"but I won't. As a matter of fact I was in the Regal Palace dining-room
to-night when you came in. I saw everything that happened so far as you
were concerned which is why I took the liberty of following you here.
Now it struck me as a very strange thing that a man like Mr. Tanberg
should take such an action on your part lying down. He would have made
a fuss had he duly dared--perhaps given you in custody."

"Me!" the woman laughed. "He dared not."

"Yes, I gathered that much. But I am not sure he wouldn't have murdered
you had the interview taken place in some dark corner. That is how I
read his face."

"I have heard worse guesses," Madame Nordiva said in the coolest
possible tone. "As a matter of fact, those fine diamonds were given
to me years ago, and recovered by means of a trick. I merely took a
dramatic step to get my own back. I knew that Efan Tanberg dared not
interfere. But what is all this to you, Mr. Policeman? You are not here
to try and bounce me out of what is legally mine."

"Perfectly correct," Medway said. "It is Tanberg whom I am interested
in. If I were not sure that you can give me a whole lot of information
about him, I should not be here at this moment. Of course, I can't make
you speak . . ."

"Nobody could do that," the woman said grimly. "Tanberg is nothing to
me--absolutely nothing."

"Not now, perhaps, but what about the past?" Medway asked shrewdly. "I
gather from what you say that at some time in the past Tanberg gave you
those diamonds. He must have been very much in love to have done that."

Medway fired this shot blindly, but he could see plainly that it had
struck a mark. Just for a moment the woman's expression changed to one
of concentrated fury. A woman scorned, Medway decided, and a jealous
one to boot.

"Very well," Medway went on, "I presume that the fair girl of
restaurant has usurped your place."

"One of many," the woman breathed heavily.

"But the only one who wears your jewels, madame. Therefore, the
very latest of Tanberg's loves. I am not concerned with her for the
moment--she is in other hands. But as to Tanberg? You have no love for
him left."

"Love!" the woman cried. "Love! Don't make me laugh."

"Women are strange creatures," Medway went on. "Love turns to hate, and
as suddenly reverses. I have known a woman give a criminal away out of
revenge, and then weep bitterly because she has done so. Let me jog
your memory. How long is it since Tanberg was known as Paul Manstar?"

He had touched her at last; the arrow had gone home to the feather. He
saw the dark eyes dilate, and the widening of the nostrils. But not
with fear.

"I am not quite myself to-night," she said. "My nerve is not what it
used to be. Come and see me again. Any night after six o'clock will
find me here. Now please go."

It was shortly after nine the next morning that Brentford called Medway
up and told him of the previous night's adventure. Half an hour later
the two were in a police cell interviewing the girl known as Doris
Reeve. She smiled faintly and dried her tears as Medway described the
situation.

"You are free to go at any moment," Medway concluded. "There is going
to be no fuss and no prosecution. Tanberg played a cruel trick on you
to shield himself in case he was detected. If I were you, young lady, I
should give----"

"Never," the girl cried, "never again. What a fool I have been.
All this comes of trying to be independent. You see I have a small
income of my own and I wanted to become a great actress. So I came
to London into lodgings. Then I met Tanberg at a night club. He said
he had fallen in love with me at first sight, and, like an idiot I
believed him. You can guess how flattered I was. Then he gave me those
diamonds and took me to see his cottage in the country where he spends
week-ends. A lovely little place, 10 miles from Brighton."

"One moment," Medway interrupted. "What is the name of this cottage,
and where situated?"

"Mile End it is called. The village is Barcombe. Tanberg was not known
there by his usual name, but Alexis. It was a whim of his, he said. We
are going to honeymoon there."

Medway listened gravely. Here was a lovely innocent snatched from what
was certain to have become a career of crime by a set of circumstances
over which she had no control. On the contrary, she had come along with
some priceless information.

"I do hope I shall not have to give evidence," Doris said imploringly.
"It would be dreadful."

"Make your mind quite easy about that," Medway assured her once more.
"I will see to it that Tanberg does not molest you any further. If
he does let us know. But I don't imagine that you will ever see the
scoundrel again. But there is one thing I must ask you to do, Miss
Reeve."

"Oh anything. I am most grateful."

"Well, the best thing you can do is to go home and stay there. It is
bad for girls like you to be alone in the world."

"I am going to-day," Doris said firmly. "But what is it you want me to
do first?"

"Go back to your lodgings and stay there until six o'clock to-night.
Then I will fetch you. We shall only want you for about half an hour at
the most."

True to his word, Medway picked up Doris shortly before the time
appointed and conveyed her to the flat occupied by Madame Nordiva.
Doris started back and her cheeks flamed as she saw who it was
who confronted her. Medway--perfectly at his ease--made a smiling
introduction.

"You two have met before," he said. "Miss Reeve, the late possessor of
those diamonds, met Madame Nordiva, the lawful owner, at least so we
believe for the moment. Now Miss Reeve, how did those stones come to
belong to you?"

"They were given to me by Tanberg," Doris replied simply. "He told me
they were historic and had belonged to his family for generations."

"He made love to you?" Madame smiled hardly.

"He asked me to marry him. He told me that he was a rich man and head
of a great Rumanian family. He spoke of his lands and forests, and
showed me other jewels."

"Where was that?" Medway asked sharply.

"At the Country cottage I told you about. He has them there in a safe.
But I was not to speak of that until after we were married. Which will
never be now."

"And never could be," Madame laughed shrilly, "because he is married
already. Who is his wife? My dear innocent, that happy woman stands
before you. I am his wife. Something to be proud of, is it not?"




CHAPTER XXI.

The fair-haired girl gasped. Then the rich red poured into her cheeks
as she half collapsed in an agony of shame and confusion. In a dim kind
of way she was beginning to understand why Medway had brought her here.

"Oh, how dreadful!" she cried.

"For you or me?" Madame Nordiva asked with something like pity in her
sombre eyes. "I am sorry for you, my child, for you are little better.
Do you begin to realise what a narrow escape you have had? That man
would never have married you even if I did not stand in the way. I
suppose Mr. Policeman here brought you with a view to driving the
lesson home."

"Something rather like that," Medway admitted.

"Also in the hope that I might speak freely," Madame laughed harshly.
"Well, I am going to. God forbid that I should stand by and see an
innocent girl walk into the same trap that I did. That man would merely
have used you and your fresh loveliness as a bait for the robbing of
trusting fools. Oh, you need not protest. I was just as indignant years
ago when I was warned. At any rate the scoundrel did marry me."

The last remark struck home as the speaker intended that it should, and
once more Doris blushed vividly.

"I was not devoid of physical attraction then," the woman went on,
"and it seemed as if the world was at my feet. I was going to become
a famous tragic actress. Then I met Efan Tanberg, or, to give him his
proper name, Paul Manstar. Oh, yes, the rich Rumanian with his estates
and castles. So infatuated was I that I left the stage and married him.

"I was his complete slave. Ah, what do you cool English know about
passion? Even when I found him out for the adventurer he is, I loved
him. So long as I deluded myself that he was faithful to me, the rest
mattered nothing. And even when I knew that there was a great swindle
being launched, I was ready to play my part--and did. It was after one
of these successful raids that I came into possession of those diamonds
which you know of as my share of the plunder. Two years later when Paul
was tired of me, and when I had found him out where another woman was
concerned he managed to get the stones back by a trick and went away
leaving me penniless.

"Gradually I managed to establish something like a connexion in the art
dancing line. But always I vowed to get those stones back. Then one
night I saw you, my child, with Paul at some theatre show when you were
wearing my diamonds. I was desperate and ready for anything. Jealous,
too, if you like. I did not know where to turn for money. For one thing
my rent was overdue and the landlord threatening. So I decided on a
bold stroke, and, like most bold strokes, it was successful. But Mr.
Policeman here chanced to see the little drama, and followed me here. I
had to tell him the truth, and I am glad now that I did. Probably, my
child, you were followed at the same time."

"She was," Medway admitted. "The whole thing was too interesting for
me to drop. You see, in my line, it is unwise to overlook interesting
events like that in the Regal Palace. Nor has my time been wasted."

There was little more to be said or done for the moment except to see
Doris safe to her lodgings and explain her absence the previous night
after which Medway lost no time in getting in touch with Brentford who
hurried round to Scotland Yard after a few words on the telephone.

There he listened to what Medway had to say with regard to his recent
movements, and waited for the next move.

"What do you propose now?" he asked.

"Well, to tell you the truth," Medway said, "I was contemplating a
little trip into the country. Green fields and woods so restful to the
soul. Say down Sussex way."

"Tanberg's cottage for a dollar," Brentford cried.

"Guessed it the very first time," Medway replied. "I want to have a
peep inside the rural paradise where Tanberg hides as Alexis. It's long
odds that the plots are hatched there and the booty stowed away until a
convenient time for turning it into cash. However, we shall see."

"After dark, plus search warrant, eh?"

"Search warrant be blowed," Medway laughed. "Nothing of the sort. Broad
daylight, my friend. I have ascertained that our man left for Paris
this morning for a day or two, so he is out of the way. Also I am told
that unless Alexis is in residence the cottage is closed. When our man
is taking his ease he employs a deaf and dumb housekeeper who lives in
the village to look after him. Like to come along?"

Brentford wanted nothing better. So shortly after two of the clock
they set out for Barcombe on an errand that seemed likely to achieve
definite results. It was not difficult to locate Mile End cottage, for
it was marked on the ordinance map at the end of a lane that seemed to
lead nowhere. Nearby was a wood into which Medway drove the car.

"No sense in leaving that outside the cottage," he said. "Only attract
any curious passer-by."

The place looked innocent enough with its neat garden, and secluded
enough for the seeker after solitude. A lattice window yielded to
Medway's expert touch, and a moment later he and Brentford were inside
the building.

"Very neat," Medway commented. "Just the sort of place for a retired
bachelor. All in the best of taste, too. Old oak undoubtedly genuine.
This is the sitting-room. Overhead three bedrooms, and bath. And
there's the safe."

He pointed to one corner of the room where a solid-looking safe was
built into the wall. But a casual inspection of this brought about
disappointment.

"The confounded thing is open," Medway cried. "And as empty as Mother
Hubbard's cupboard. It looks to me as if we had run into the trail of
some successful plant. Most of the plunder on its way to Paris by this
time with Tanberg."

"A day after the fair," Brentford said. "Looks as if we shall have our
journey for our pains."

"Maybe," Medway agreed. "But I am not going to chuck it just yet. You
never known your luck."

At the back of the house Brentford sat and smoked half a dozen
cigarettes whilst Medway made a thorough search. Then a shout recalled
him to the sitting room, where Medway stood with eager light in his
eyes.

"Smoked out the fox?" Brentford asked.

"The next best thing to it. Look here."

Medway had removed a picture from the wall--a picture in a deep oak
frame so deep that it had attracted Medway's attention. The painting
was on a panel, the whole thing being so light that the woodwork could
not be solid. At the back were two tiny screws which Medway began to
manipulate with the point of his pocket knife. With a little coaxing
they came out leaving a square hollow some two inches deep exposed to
the view. And in this a flat parcel tied with string.

"Bank-notes, or call me a Dutchman," Medway cried. "A little store in
case of sheer necessity. It seems----"

He broke off suddenly, and pulled out his pocket book.

"By the Lord Harry, this seems something like a find," he almost
whispered. "If I am wrong, we are no worse off, but if I am right, then
things will move rapidly."

Spread out on a table now were bank notes of various denominations, all
of which Medway carefully compared with certain numbers jotted down in
his pocket book.

"I'm right," he said, "dead right. You remember the 1,000 in notes
drawn by Garnstone on the morning of his death."

"As if I were likely to forget! Did not you trace 200 in notes to Levi
Lefton who stuck to them pretending he had paid them over to the gang
who tried on the burglary Epping way."

"Go up top," Medway smiled. "Well, here are the rest of those notes.
What price that for a find?"

It was even as Medway said. Every note corresponded with the list in
his pocket book.

"I could arrest Tanberg on this," he said.

"Yes, and what would the charge be?"

Medway looked a little confused for the moment.

"I don't know much about the law," Brentford went on quietly. "But
it is for you to prove the prisoner guilty, not for him to prove his
innocence. Suppose Tanberg refuses to say how these notes came into his
possession. Suppose that he says they were handed to him in the way of
business. Snide business if you like. We are bound to admit that poor
old Garnstone was leading a double life, also that possibly he was in
league with Tanberg. How much further does that get you."

Medway was fain to admit the logic of the argument.

"What we have to do is to connect Tanberg in some way with the murder
of Garnstone. When Tanberg attempted by sheer bluff to get hold of
the gold cup, he told you that he had sold it the night before to
Garnstone, but that he had not been paid. I suggest that that was a
lie. He was paid in notes amounting to 1,000. We have traced those
notes to him, it is true, but that is not enough. If we could only
trace the way in which the murder was committed----"

"Which you promised to do," Medway pointed out.

"I did nothing of the sort," Brentford retorted. "I said I had an
inspiration and so I have. I am working on it day by day. You can help
if you like."

"Nothing I would like better!" Medway cried.

"Patience," Brentford smiled. "What I am working on is a jig-saw
puzzle. I have fitted one half the pieces together but the other half
eludes me. If I can find one missing element, then I can show you how
Garnstone was murdered. The whole thing is so easy that one simply
overlooks it. Have you read the mystery stories by Poe?"

"Not since I was a boy," Medway said.

"Well you will possibly remember the story of the purloined letter
which nobody could find because it was hidden in a place where
everybody could actually see it."

"Yes, I remember that," Medway admitted. "Also the mystery of Marie
Roget. Dashed fine yarns. You mean to say the problem of Garnstone's
death is looking us in the face?"

"Well, I won't go quite so far as that," Brentford said smilingly.
"But when the light came to me I wondered that I had not thought of it
before. Meanwhile what are you going to do with those notes? Take them
with you or leave them in their hiding place until the dramatic moment
arrives? I should put them back."

"Precisely what I am going to do," Medway said grimly. "The cheese is
toasted, so we'll leave it in the trap. Maybe we shall catch the mouse
that way."

"Call him a rat," Brentford said between his teeth.




CHAPTER XXII

"You have missed your vocation," Medway smiled. "You ought to be a
detective like me."

"Well, I was," Brentford replied. "Or something like it. Intelligence
at one time. But never mind that. As there is little to serve by
staying here hadn't we better get a move on?"

A few moments later and the car was on the way back to Town. Once well
under way, Brentford took up the tale.

"Now look here, Medway," he began. "I want you to put yourself in my
hands for an hour or two this afternoon. Can you meet me close by the
Garnstone premises about four o'clock."

"Of course," Medway agreed promptly. "I believe you are going to show
me something interesting."

They parted in due course, Medway making his way back to headquarters,
where work awaited him. But that work was destined to stand over for
the present as a constable in uniform came into Medway's office with
the information that Ben Lefton had been waiting in an outer office for
some time.

"Like a cat on hot bricks, he is sir," the policeman explained. "Can't
sit down. Asking for you every 10 seconds. Rigged-out up to the nines,
too."

"Bring him in," Medway directed. "And see that we are not disturbed."

Benjamin Lefton crept into the room like a whipped dog until the door
was closed behind him. Then he pulled himself together into something
like the semblance of a man. He was dressed in perfectly-upholstered
morning garb complete with white spats over patent leather shoes, and
carrying in his hand a top hat of the glossiest kind. Diamonds sparkled
on his stubby fingers, and in his Ascot tie. Overdressed, Medway
decided, though Lefton would have indignantly denied the suggestion.

But all this show of sartorial splendour did not disguise the mingled
fear and malice in the man's eyes. Something had greatly disturbed him
or he would never have thrust his head inside such a place as Scotland
Yard.

"Sit down," Medway commanded. "A cigarette?"

Lefton writhed about on his seat, although he gladly accepted the
proffered cigarette. He panted as if short of breath.

"Spill the beans, Benny," Medway said encouragingly. "I am all
attention. Something about your father, isn't it?"

Lefton showed the whites of his eyes. When he spoke all the gloss
had vanished, and the stark child of the Ghetto stood confessed.
The vernacular took the place of that neat English which Ben had so
carefully studied in his role of a man about town. The frequenter of
bars, the follower of race meetings and other pleasure grounds where
the genus thug is to be marked down for future plucking.

"Vun thing at a time, Mr. Medway," he gabbled. "In the first place,
Tanberg. He's bolted."

"I don't think so," Medway said. "Only a little trip to Paris. Back
again before the week is out."

Lefton's voice rose to a scream.

"Bolted, I tell you, bolted. And lot's more, he has taken most of the
Lord Glenday stuff with him."

Medway never batted an eyelid. His line was to assume that all this was
no news to him.

"Double-crossed you, in fact," Medway smiled. "But isn't it rather
dangerous for you to come and tell me this even if it is no news to me?
Your hands are not clean."

"Ain't they, mister? Vell, they are so far as Lord Glenday's posh is
concerned. My farder is dead now, and nobody can't touch him vich is vy
I am talking to you like this. I vasn't in the Glenday bithness ath I
can prove, being elsevere at the time."

"But your father was?"

"Am I denying it, mister? Vild hosses won't get me to say who did
the actual job, but it was put up between my farder and that damned
Tanberg. And now he's got clear with the lot."

"You can make your mind quite easy on that score," Medway said with
an assured air he was far from feeling. "I know exactly where to put
my hand on Tanberg when I want him. So this is where you get your own
back, eh?"

"He robbed my farder," Lefton cried indignantly. "There is honor
amongst thieves. Vy didn't he give my farder his share like an honest
man?"

Medway manfully suppressed a smile.

"You never know in this wicked world," he said. "But Tanberg is coming
back. Don't forget that business of the gold cup, Benny. Tanberg means
to have that if he has to bluff until he is black in the face. There
is no limit to the audacity of that man. You see, Benny, he does not
realise yet that he is under suspicion for the murder of your father."

Lefton jumped from his chair. It was impossible for him to turn pale,
but he changed to a dirty yellow instead.

"You know that, too?" he gasped.

"Better tell me the whole story so as to see if it fits in with my
information," Medway said. "Never mind about your silly little revenge
for the moment. Don't you know perfectly well that Tanberg murdered
your father? And don't you know why? He wanted to recover those
banknotes paid to Levi towards the cost of that abortive burglary down
Epping way."

"But farder hadn't got 'em," Lefton screamed. "You took the notes wen
ve vos at Garnstone's secret garage."

"Precisely, Benny. But Tanberg didn't know that. He was under the
impression that Levi had simply pocketed those notes, and pretended
that he had passed them on in the course of business. He wanted those
notes back badly--why, is my business. Tell me all you knew about the
murder, Benny."

"Vell, it was like this," Lefton muttered. "The old man never told me
everything. Said I was extravagant, and spent far too much money. But I
never got my proper share, though farder was vot you call a varn man.
I found out he had a secret appointment on morning of his death ven he
told me to clear out for the day. I didn't. I crept back into the house
by the back way and I listened. Mine farder and Tanberg in a proper
row. Just as I vos about to interfere came a knock at the front door,
and the row ceased. So, thinking there was no more use stopping there,
I come away to learn later of the murder. This is the truth vich I vill
svare in any court in the land."

"I believe you, Benny," Medway said, "all the more because I was the
man who knocked on the door, and found the body in the sitting-room. I
can't stay talking to you any longer now, as I have a call elsewhere,
but you can rest assured that Tanberg is not going to get away with it.
Being so loving a son, the fact will warm your kind heart, I'm sure."

It was shortly after four o'clock when Medway met Brentford outside the
burnt building and followed him inside wondering what all this mystery
was about. Once inside, and shielded from public view, Brentford began
to talk.

"I want you to help me to find something," he said. "I have one half of
it, but we simply must find the other. It is a stout bamboo pole about
nine feet in length. It is certainly here, but so far has eluded me.
Now come along."

Medway came along accordingly. He was not going to ask any questions
until he saw that Brentford was in a position to answer them. So for
an hour or more the search went on. Then it seemed to Medway that he
could see behind a heap of charred fragments something that looked like
a hook sticking upwards. This he endeavoured to raise, but in vain. It
took both of them all they knew before the whole of the hook came in
sight, when it was seen that a long bamboo pole was attached to the end
of it.

"Eureka," Brentford cried. "I knew the thing was here."

With his handkerchief he cleaned the whole length of the pole and
examined it carefully. Like the other pole in his possession it was
notched at regular intervals down the whole length. Brentford smiled in
triumph.

"Where are we now?" Medway asked.

"Practically through," Brentford replied. "But one thing at a time.
Look at this for a moment."

With the hooked pole in his hand Brentford went as far as the blackened
wall where he upraised the staff so as to hook the contrivance into the
fireplace on the first floor. With the aid thus afforded, he climbed up
until he reached the iron fireplace and sat there for a moment.

"By this hook and ladder gadget I could reach the roof," he said as he
came down. "But that is only what I might call one of the lights to the
acrostic. Now come with me, and I will show you something more."

They were down in Gunter's quarters a few minutes later when the
caretaker was dismissed on some concocted errand so that the two had
the room to themselves. From the area passage Brentford produced the
twin pole together with some short pieces of stout rope knotted at
either end.

"This is going to hang the murderer of poor old Garnstone at any rate,"
Brentford said. "But we can't do any more until Miss Goff comes along
with the key of the flat. She will be here any moment now, and then we
shall see what we shall see."




CHAPTER XXIII.

All the same Medway was still puzzled as his face showed, and Brentford
rather enjoyed his perplexity.

"Let us go a step further," he said. "Oblige me by placing those bamboo
poles on the floor about fifteen inches apart, keeping them quite
parallel. Very good. Turn them over so that the notched sires are
uppermost."

"And the next move, please," Medway asked.

From one corner of the room Brentford produced a handful of short
pieces of rope fifteen inches in length and tightly knotted at both
ends.

"Now then," he said. "Let us fit these short ropes into the slots on
either of the two poles."

This Brentford proceeded to do. Once the work was ended he turned to
Medway with a smile.

"What have we there?" he asked.

"Well, I suppose we might call it a sort of a ladder," Medway replied.
"But where does that get us?"

"Quite a long way as you will see later on. What do you think that
contraption weighs altogether."

Medway balanced the improvised ladder in his hand.

"Not more than six pounds," he declared.

"Very well, then; something quite easy to carry about and not likely
to attract much attention. A man might walk along the street carrying
one of these poles under his arm without being suspected of anything
sinister. If he carried the poles one at a time the most inquisitive
policeman would never dream that mischief was afoot. That is just what
our man did, knowing that in the ruins of the fire and behind the
hoarding he could hide his stock-in-trade with perfect safety. The
mistake he made was in leaving those useful implements more or less
hidden in the ruins of that building. You have told me more than once
that every criminal, however clever, always commits some act that leads
eventually to his conviction. And that is precisely what the man we are
after did."

"Quite logical," Medway murmured. "Go on."

"Cela! When our man had finished with his implement, he just took it to
pieces and thrust the poles into that mass of ruins never dreaming that
a mere amateur like me would have the right inspiration. The odds were
a million to one against it, but for once the odds came off. I venture
to prophesy----"

Brentford broke off as Gunter appeared with the information that Miss
Goff had arrived and was in the flat.

"Ah, now we can get on!" Brentford exclaimed.

Vera raised her eyebrows as the two men entered the flat.

"Why what on earth have you got there, Ronnie," she asked as she noted
the ladder. "Has anything happened?"

"A great deal, darling," Ronnie said gravely. "We are hot on the trail
of the criminal who murdered Mr. Garnstone. But let me make you wise as
to recent events."

Briefly Brentford told Vera exactly what he had just disclosed to
Medway. Then he took the bamboo ladder and propped it against the
sitting-room window that looked down to the dark way some 30 feet below.

"Now Medway," he directed, "open that window. Then lean out and attach
the hooks of the ladder on to the iron guttering that forms the rain
spouting. By the way, I had to buy the missing hook, though you can see
where the original one was screwed into the top of the first pole we
found. But that is a mere detail. Now, please."

Medway was only too eager to obey. The ladder was hooked to the
spouting where it held firmly.

"Give it a hearty pull," Brentford directed. "Then tell me if it will
support a man."

Medway was quite sure it would. Also he was quite sure now what
Brentford was driving at.

"Well, there you are," the latter said. "Now you know how the murderer
entered the flat. By means of the hooks on the ladder he contrived to
reach the roof on the ruin using those practically intact fire-places
as resting places. Then he climbed over the roof next door, and lowered
himself by means of that light ladder until he was exactly in front of
the side window. Nobody could possibly see him owing to the darkness
of the alley and the fact that he was perched 30 feet above ground. A
thin-bladed knife opened the window which was relatched later on by a
fine pliable wire worked round the catch?"

"And then what happened?" Vera asked.

"Who can tell exactly?" Brentford declared. "Goodness only knows what
the criminal came for, but I strongly suspect that the gold cup was the
lure. I am the more convinced of this because there was nothing else in
the safe when it came to be opened. Anyhow the murderer came and went
by the way of that ladder taking it with him and smothering the two
poles in masses of charred ruins. That was his great mistake."

"The inevitable mistake," Medway agreed. "Who would ever dream that an
outsider would solve the problem, which had so puzzled the brains of
Scotland Yard."

"But how did you arrive at such a conclusion, Ronnie?" Vera asked. "And
how clever of you!"

"Not very clever," Brentford said modestly. "It was a pure fluke. To
begin with I began to wonder if it were just possible for anyone to
reach the flat by means of the roof. So I decided to study my theory
from the potential field of action. By that I mean those ruins. I could
potter about there as much as I liked without interference or arousing
curiosity. The first thing to encourage me lay in those fire-places. I
could visualise a man of muscle using them to reach the roof next door
provided he had a sort of ladder with hooks at the upper end like those
used by the fire brigade. It would have to be a very light ladder so
that the criminal could play about with it, reach the top storey, and
thence on to our neighbour's roof. The rest, of course would be child's
play.

"My first bit of luck lay in the finding of the initial pole. Now what
was this doing in a mass of charred timbers where, had it been there
when the fire broke out, it would have been burnt like tinder amidst
the flames? But it wasn't. The pole was as fresh and glossy as if it
had just come from a carpenter's shop. When I saw those notches it
was patent to me that I had one side of the necessary ladder in my
possession. But, seek as I would, I could not find the counterpart. Our
friend Medway did that for me, after which the rest was easy."

"What is to happen now!" Vera asked. She turned to Medway as she spoke.

"We have a long way to go yet," he said. "We have a most clever
criminal to deal with, though, like most of his class, he is inclined
to be careless. When he left the flat in the same manner by which he
came, it seemed to him that he had nothing more to trouble about in
that direction. So he merely dismantled his ladder and shoved the poles
into the pile of ruins. Nobody would ever be likely to find them there,
and even if workmen did so afterwards, the poles would only be carted
away with other rubbish. But we know now exactly how the murderer
managed to enter the flat when nobody was there but the owner, and that
without disturbing Gunter down in the basement."

"Then there is very little gained," Vera sighed.

"Oh, I wouldn't go as far as that," Medway declared. "It is all to
the good that we know how the crime was committed. A few days and
perhaps . . ."

It was not until Medway and Brentford were away together that the
former began to speak more freely.

"I hope I didn't seem to belittle your work unduly," he said. "On the
contrary, you have done the state some service, and the state is not
likely to forget it. Sir Giles Fairchild will know how to appreciate
your work. But I didn't like to discuss the crime before that young
lady. As a matter of fact I have more than a suspicion."

"Strangely enough, so have I," Brentford said drily.

"So I more than suspected. But there is no occasion to mention names.
Best keep those to ourselves."

"Then you don't propose to take action yet?"

"Not for a day or two at any rate. But there is one thing I may
mention--relying on your discretion--and that is the strange similarity
between the way both Mr. Garnstone and Levi Lefton were done to
death. Stabbed in the same heart region with a blow struck upward by
a thin-bladed knife of the stiletto type. Just the sort of knife that
would fit into the sheath which is now in my possession."

"In other words, a double murder."

"Looks to me like it," Medway said. "But we shall know more about that
when those adjourned inquests are held. We are having these kept back
for a purpose. Now another phase on the cases. Isn't it strange how the
affair of the Blue Daffodil keeps cropping up all through the drama?
The gold cup Tanberg claims as his own, though Lord Glenday has proved
by his private mark that he bought the cup in Amsterdam. Then the cup
is stolen from his lordship's house in Park Street, and when Miss Goff
or Miss Zaroff sees it she says it was stolen from her parents. Then
again, we have the Blue Daffodil flower itself purloined by Gunter in
order to raise money for a person who is blackmailing him."

"A bewildering business altogether," Brentford agreed.

"Yes, and then there happens the murder of Levi Lefton to complicate
matters still further. He was killed almost in my sight by a man who
barely escaped detection, leaving behind him the sheath of a knife
which has a Blue Daffodil design on it--a sheath which also once
belonged to the Zaroffs."

"And here we come in direct contact with Tanberg who was once in the
Zaroff employ. Don't you think he could tell us a whole lot if he could
be induced to speak."

"I'm absolutely sure of it?" Medway declared. "We may find it possible
to make him speak."

"You don't think he has fled the country then?"

"I am absolutely sure he hasn't. Nor has he gone off with all the loot
stolen from Lord Glenday. At the present moment the man is closely
watched by the Paris police, and every move he makes will be reported
to me. Besides, he is not going to relinquish his claim on the gold cup
so easily. Give him all the rope he wants, I say. Now is there anything
more you want to know, or alternately can you give me another pointer?"

Brentford smiled as if something amused him.

"Just one little thing," he said. "I propose to take a taxi as far as
Wapping. Off Nightingale Lane, you know. The place where I kept watch.
Like to come along."

A sudden light flashed into Medway's eyes.

"Rather!" he cried. "I shall forget my own name next."




CHAPTER XXIV.

There was something else that Medway might have forgotten and Brentford
promptly reminded him of the fact.

"Exactly what I was going to suggest," Medway said. "Now that I am
awake, my faculties are functioning normally. By all means let us drop
in at Scotland Yard before proceeding further. Yes, I have got the
thing you want. Come along."

It was but a few moments that the two lingered at the Yard, and then
proceeded eastwards in a taxi. Presently they came to a turning off
Nightingale Lane, where was situated the shady public house called
the Two Cows where, a short time before, Medway made a raid whilst
Brentford kept guard on the back door that gave a view of Ling Choo's
premises next door.

Brentford indicated the public house.

"Anybody there likely to overlook us?" he asked.

"Not in the least," Medway explained. "For the moment that interesting
tenement is without a landlord. He'll almost certainly lose his license
over this business."

Almost as he spoke a police van turned the corner and pulled up at a
sign from Medway.

"Hang on," he said to the driver. "When you hear me whistle, bring the
stuff along."

With that, he and Brentford proceeded to make their way into the
Chinaman's yard where two or three hands were at work. Ling Choo
himself appeared with his usual smile, and an inquiry as to what he
could do for the honorable gentlemen.

"You had better explain," Medway suggested to Brentford.

"Well, it's like this, Ling Choo. I want a couple of bamboo poles about
nine feet long and three inches in diameter. Do you happen to have
anything of the sort on the premises?"

"Alle litee," the Chinaman declared. "Plenty lot of poles. I makee the
furniture. Many big shops in London come to me for my goods. If the
honorable gentlemen will come this way I will show them over my stock."

In a kind of warehouse were bamboo poles by the thousand. Some thick,
some thin, adaptable for all kinds of light furniture. Ling Choo
indicated the stock with a wave of the hand. Then Brentford picked out
two lengths of the bamboo which exactly corresponded with those he had
found in the ruins adjacent to Garnstone's flat. These were a little
longer perhaps, but in all other respects corresponding.

Brentford nodded significantly, and Medway whistled. In reply one of
the passengers in the police van came forward carrying the two poles he
had fetched from Gutter's basement as ordered during the recent call at
the Yard. To these Brentford called Ling Choo's attention.

"I want something exactly like that," he said. "You ought to be able to
match those two."

Ling Choo smiled in his blandest manner.

"Many times over," he said. "These comes from the same part of India
where I get all of mine. And they were mine not long back. That little
close cut is what you might call my tlade mark. I seem to lemember the
honorable gentleman who came here, and bought them. I look in my book
and see."

The Chinaman vanished for a few minutes ere he returned with the same
bland smile on his features.

"I thought I lemembered," he said. "A gentleman who came in his own
car, and took them away with him."

"Evidently a friend of ours," Medway put in casually. "Tall, dark man
somewhere about middle aged. Would you recognise him if you saw him
again, Ling Choo?"

"Never do I forget a face," Ling Choo boasted.

"Anything like this?" Medway asked. At the same time he took from his
pocket-book a photograph which he handed to the Chinaman. Ling Choo
hardly glanced at it before returning it with a smile of recognition.

"That is the same honorable gentleman," he declared firmly. "I
recognise him at once."

"Then you lose your bet," said Medway with a wink for Brentford alone.
"I knew you were mistaken."

"Looks like it," Brentford said casually. "Not my friend anyhow. Now,
Mr. Ling Choo, will you be good enough to send those poles to this
address, and I will pay for them. How much?"

Ling Choo named a price, and the transaction was complete. A little
later and Brentford and his companion were once more on their way
westward.

"That snapshot was most useful," Brentford said. "It clinches the whole
business. How on earth did you manage to get Tanberg before the camera."

"I didn't," Medway grinned, "I have had my eye on that elusive
gentleman from the first. So I had him dogged until, with a pinhole
camera my man got him. All the same I hardly expected that picture to
come in so dramatically useful. Mind you we have been amazingly lucky.
We know now how Mr. Garnstone's flat was entered and by whom. Ling
Choo's evidence will go far to hang the criminal, and a better witness
we could not find. But we have a long way to go yet."

"So I suppose," Brentford agreed, "but did you know that Tanberg had a
car of his own?"

"He hadn't. But he wasn't going to take any risks. There would be no
delivery of those poles to an address that could be traced. He probably
borrowed a car, by which I mean stole it. Easy enough to abandon it
later on. The fellow took no risks until he felt himself to be quite
safe which was the very point where he began to grow careless. I mean
when he abandoned those bamboo poles in the fire ruins. That was a
fatal mistake owing to that inspiration of yours. He had to convey
those two poles separately to the ruins under cover of the darkness.
That was fairly safe. But after entrance to the flat and the murder and
the escape by retracing his steps, it wasn't good enough to recover the
improvised ladder piece, and smuggle it into his flat. Who was likely
to find those poles, let alone discover the use to which they had been
put?"

"You don't think Tanberg has bolted?" Brentford asked.

"Not he. Not that type. Besides, he hasn't the least idea that he is
suspected. Again, he has more than an inkling as to where the bulk of
Lord Glenday's treasures are hidden, and he means to have his share of
the plunder. Directly he returns from Paris I am going to drop him a
friendly note asking him to come and see me at the Yard."

Medway refused to say more than that, and the two parted for the time
being. A day or two passed before Brentford heard from Medway that
Tanberg was back again, and proposed to avail himself of the invitation
to Scotland Yard.

So Tanberg turned up at the appointed time very spick and perfectly
self-possessed. He flung himself into a chair, and accepted the
cigarette offered to him.

"You wanted to see me," he drawled. "Anything my dear fellow that I can
do for you will be a pleasure."

"Very nice of you to say so," Medway smiled. "Now in the first place,
what about that gold cup? You claim it as your property. Can you prove
your title?"

"When the proper time comes," Tanberg smiled. "You are puzzled over the
Glenday claim?"

"Naturally. Lord Glenday is a man above suspicion. He is rich, and a
collector of note. He is prepared to swear that he purchased the cup in
Amsterdam from a dealer----"

"Who cannot be traced, remember."

"I am not so sure of that," Medway said thoughtfully. "We have means
here that outside people little dream of. The name of the Amsterdam
dealer is Paul Nester. Do you know it?"

For the first time Tanberg showed signs of uneasiness. He pretended to
search his memory.

"Paul Nester," he repeated. "Oh, yes. It comes back to me now. The very
man who sold that gold cup for me, and went off with the proceeds. If
you can trace him----"

"We have traced him," Medway said crisply.

Once more Tanberg showed signs of confusion.

"Where is he now?" he asked unsteadily.

"I rather fancy that he is in this room at the present moment," Medway
said softly. "I suggest that you are Paul Nester and that the man who
acted as your puppet posed as yourself. From behind the scenes you were
the seller of the cup which was stolen from Lord Glenday's house. You
can't have forgotten that Lord Glenday showed us his private mark on
the cup, which must have been a shock for you. Now, according to your
own statement, on the night when Mr. Garnstone was murdered, you were
with him up to about ten o'clock."

"Have I ever denied it?" Tanberg cried.

"Not that I am aware of. Also you say that you handed the cup for
valuation to Mr. Garnstone that evening. Moreover, you received no
money."

"Isn't this all ancient history?" Tanberg sneered.

"But history all the same," Medway said. "You can tell me as much or
as little as you like, because I ought to caution you before I go any
further. If Mr. Garnstone paid you no money that night how did you
manage to come into possession of the sum of 1,000 in notes which he
drew from the bank on the morning of his death?"

"You are trying to trap me," Tanberg said furiously.

"Oh, no," Medway said. "You are under arrest charged with the murders
of Mr. Garnstone and Levi Lefton. If you like to say any more you can.
But it may be used in evidence against you."




CHAPTER XXV.

Very little attention had been paid by the Press to the murder of
Levi Lefton, which was regarded as one of those sordid crimes that
are only too frequent in that part of London where the poorer classes
predominate. There was nothing in this Whitechapel crime to show that
it was in any way connected with the mystery surrounding the death of
Mr. Garnstone.

And the Press had had enough and to spare in connexion with that
sensational outrage. Every criminal "expert" in the Metropolis had
something to say in his newspaper anent the police and their methods.
Various clues were hinted but nothing came of these, and the case
looked like being relegated to the limbo of baffling mysteries when it
became known that the police had made an arrest, which fact brought
Pressmen hot-foot to Bow street when Tanberg made his first appearance
before the magistrate, concerned with the hearing.

This was merely a formal affair lasting but a few minutes, after which
proceedings were adjourned for a fortnight when Tanberg appeared again.

From the first he carried himself with the greatest coolness and poise.
Nor would he avail himself of legal aid. He wanted no solicitor or
lawyer to represent him, and his attitude he maintained from first to
last. He would defend himself when the proper time came to do so.

The proper time came when at length the prisoner stood in the dock
of the Central Criminal Court charged with the murder of Professor
Garnstone on a certain date. For the moment the charge concerning Levi
Lefton was not in the indictment. That would come later if the present
proceedings proved abortive.

Once the proceedings were opened sensation followed on sensation.
Counsel for the Crown did not seek to hide the fact that the murdered
man had lived a double life. It was alleged, and would be proved in due
course, that John Garnstone had taken advantage of his high standing
as a technical art expert to traffic with international thieves, and
was, in fact, the greatest receiver of stolen treasures in Europe. It
was true that with the exception of one historic piece of gold plate,
nothing had been discovered in the dead man's safe when it came to be
opened. But that piece of gold plate formed one of the clues which led
to Tanberg as the murderer. The prisoner had claimed that he had parted
with it an hour or two before John Garnstone died without at the same
time being paid for it.

Call Alfred Preece.

Alfred Preece deposed that he was chief cashier in the bank where the
dead man had an account. On the morning of the murder deceased had
called at the bank and drew 1,000 in notes of various denominations,
numbers of which witness put in. Having done this, Mr. Preece retired
after Tanberg had intimated that he had no questions to ask.

Call Inspector Medway.

Inspector Medway had a long story to tell. First of all how he traced a
portion of the fatal notes to Levi Lefton to whom they were paid by the
prisoner with a view to finding the cash needed for a certain burglary
in the neighbourhood of Epping. How that attempt had failed and how
Levi Lefton had purposely kept back his share of the notes, at the same
time telling the prisoner that he had parted with them.

"As to the rest of the notes?" counsel asked.

"These I produce," Medway said. "I have them here for the inspection of
the Court."

As those fatal scraps were handed round for the Judge and jury to
examine, Tanberg for the first time showed signs that he was feeling
the strain.

"Where did you find these?" counsel questioned.

"In a cottage at Barcombe in Sussex where the prisoner has a week-end
cottage, and where he is known as Alexis. They were discovered behind
a picture frame. In fact the picture frame had a double back. When I
removed this, the notes were found."

Tanberg passed a hand across his heated face. But no other sign did he
give and no question did he ask.

Then came another sensation when Vera came forward to give her
testimony. When the name of Vera Zaroof was announced and Miss Goff
stepped into the witness-box, Tanberg started and fixed a long look
upon her. There was both rage and fear in his sombre eyes as he
recognised the child he had known years ago. What a fool he had been
not to have known her when last they had met!

Vera told her simple story which earned conviction with it to every
listener in Court. When she had finished, she had stripped every rag of
respectability from Tanberg's shoulders. Nor was the prisoner in better
case by the time that Lord Glenday had told his side of the history of
the gold cup.

But all this was very far from bringing home the actual crime to the
man in the dock. Not until Ronald Brentford had told what he had
discovered and how he had followed it up did Tanberg begin to realise
that the shadow of the rope was closing round his neck.

And so the mystery of the Garnstone fortress and the one way into it
was explained at last. Those innocent-looking bamboo poles were the
instruments sending a man to his death.

Finally when Ling Choo left the witness-box there was not a soul in
Court who was not ready to pronounce Tanberg guilty. By this time he
seemed to have abandoned all hope. His face was pinched and haggard,
his eyes dilated with fear.

"That is my case m'lord," Crown counsel said. "The rest is in the hands
of the jury."

His lordship summed up dead against the prisoner. He could see nothing
to mitigate against a verdict which----

And so on for the best part of an hour, after which the jury retired
for consultation. They were not long away, and when they returned it
was plain to see what the verdict was.

"You are agreed on your verdict?" came the question.

"We are," the foreman replied. "We are unanimously of opinion that John
Garnstone met with his death at the hands of the prisoner whom we find
guilty."

"A verdict in which I concur," the Judge said. "Prisoner at the bar,
have you anything to say before I proceed to pass sentence upon you?"

Tanberg shook his head. He was past words. He sagged in the dock and
would have collapsed like an empty sack but for the fact that a warder
supported him. He did not hear the solemn words from the bench nor the
invocation to a higher power.

It was all over and the excited spectators streamed out of court.
Almost before they were all in the street there came the newsboys
yelling of the latest phase in the fortress murder, and the word
"Verdict" on the posters.

"And what now?" Brentford asked Medway as they made their way through
the throng. "Somehow I can't feel that this is the finish. Justice has
been done, but we won't know now why Tanberg killed his victim."

"And I don't suppose we ever will," Medway replied. "To my mind
criminal and dead man were in leagues together in some way which ended
in a quarrel after which Tanberg was out for revenge. But let us go
somewhere and discuss the matter over a meal. And bring Miss Zaroff
along. I expect that this business has been a bit of a strain for her."

For the moment Brentford had forgotten Vera. Anyway she could not be
far off, neither was she, being in the midst of a mob of reporters all
eager to discover something for their readers concerning a romantic and
tragic history. To rescue her was a work of some difficulty, but it
was accomplished at last so that the trio was at length free to seek
privacy.

"The Carlton," Medway suggested. "Miss Zaroff, you look absolutely
fagged out. I suggest something in the pt de foi gras line with a
couple of glasses of champagne."

"It was an ordeal," Vera admitted. "I was so thankful that that man
only looked at me once. But this is not the end of the mystery surely.
The empty safe, the missing will. Please do not think me mercenary.
That old man was very kind to me and I am grateful. Also he was a
friend of my family. And I am sure that all his money was not made
dishonestly."

"It will be difficult to separate the sheep from the goats," Medway
pointed out. "You would not care to touch money that was in any way
tainted, I am sure."

"Of course not," Vera agreed. "But the safe was empty except for the
gold cup. Where has everything gone? What has become of all Lord
Glenday's treasures?"

"I'd like to have another look at that safe," Medway said thoughtfully.
"Remember we only examined it visually and thought no more about it
when it proved to be empty. What do you say to a visit to the flat when
we have refreshed ourselves and with no higher command to bother us."

Without much hope of any latent discovery, they proceeded to the flat
where Vera produced the key to the safe. This was built in one corner
of the room, so that only the great steel door showed in the centre of
the masonry. There was no sign of anything inside, though Medway probed
the sides of the interior with a poker taken from the fireplace.

"Absolutely nothing," he said forlornly.

The poker slipped from his hand and clanged on the floor of the safe.
The hollow boom followed, at the sound of which Medway pricked up his
ears.

"Something strange here," he said. "Just as if there was something in
the way of a cavity under the steel door."

"I expect there is," Vera said. "The safe was built over a lift shaft,
so Mr. Garnstone told me once."

"You don't say!" Medway cried. "Let me have a light here. Anyone of
those electric bulbs will do. Unship one, Mr. Brentford, and let me
have it. Miss Zaroff, is there such a thing in the flat as a length of
flex."

"In the conservatory," Vera explained. "There are a lot of temporary
lights there."

With the aid of his impromptu apparatus, Medway began a close
examination of the interior of the safe. Here and there were certain
knobs corresponding to others the opposite side. With these Medway
began to play. Then something clicked sharply, and immediately the door
of the safe began to rise until it fitted like a glove into a series of
slots.

But that was not all. With a sort of rumble something came up from the
bottom of the old lift shaft and rattled down on the floor of the safe,
making a fresh bottom altogether.

"Mr. Garnstone's little secret," Medway chuckled. "He must have
employed two separate safe-makers--the second lot that arranged this
clever contrivance."

"But look at it!" Brentford cried. "Practically a new safe, and not
empty. Packed with stuff."

It was even as he had said. Here was a new deposit crammed with
valuables and arranged on shelves, two complete sets of business
ledgers and books. There was one lot under the other, and on the top a
sealed envelope addressed to Ronald Brentford and Vera Zaroff. It was
endorsed in bold lettering. And the endorsement was:


"My Will. To be opened only by those to whom it is addressed."


"Something like a find!" Medway exclaimed. "Better open that envelope
without delay."




CHAPTER XXVI.

With trembling fingers Vera proceeded to do so. Inside was a smaller
envelope containing the Will itself, but covering a letter which Vera
proceeded to read.

"This is addressed to you and me, Ronald," she said by way of
introduction. "Shall I go on with it?"

Both Brentford and Medway signified assent. Then in a low voice, Vera
read as follows:--


"My dear young friends--Sooner or later one must die, and I am no
exception to the rule. I am an old man feeling that my time is short.
But quite apart from the stern decrees of nature, I have an enemy who
will, given the opportunity, anticipate the inevitable end. Whether
I deserve that enemy or not is beside the question. When two master
criminals fall out, one of them has to go, and that one, I feel sure,
will be myself. Hence my fortress home which was not entirely designed
for the baffling of thieves though it afforded me an excuse for
something dramatic in the way of protection.

"Yes, I am a master criminal. For years I have been living a double
life and piling up money at the expense of those who have trusted me
and regarded me as the soul of honour. But never have I betrayed the
confidence of a friend.

"In common parlance I am a receiver of stolen goods. Perhaps the
greatest that ever lived. For years the international police have been
searching for me, never dreaming that Professor Garnstone, the leading
authority on art treasures was the man.

"But the danger was always there. As I began so I had to continue, and
I might have died with my secret buried in the grave. Or I might be
murdered before I could make any move in the way of restitution. If
I do fall before the knife of my enemy it is possible that the whole
sorry story will be told. I am guarding against that as far as I can.

"When the secret of my safe comes to light as it must, I desire that so
far as possible my memory shall not be blackened more than is necessary.

"Therefore, ever since my criminal career began I have kept two
entirely separate sets of books showing both my legitimate dealings and
the fortune arising therefrom and the other fortune I have collected
through downright criminal methods. These sets of books will be found
in the safe, that is when its secret comes to light. The set of books
marked 'A' show the cloven hoof, the set marked 'B' deal only with
clean and honest money.

"That part of my fortune is my own, and I can leave it to whom I like.
It is a very large sum of money, and you will see by my will that I
leave it all to you two in equal shares. In the 'B' ledgers you will
find a list of my securities and share certificates which are in the
hands of a certain bank in the name of which you will find in one of
the honest ledgers.

"But the greater bulk of my money--called 'mine' for the sake of
explanation--is in the hands of the bank from whence I draw what is
required for illegitimate purposes."


Vera paused, and looked up inquiringly.

"He means," Medway explained, "that the latter bank is whence he drew
that 1,000 on the morning of his death. He was careful to keep the two
banking accounts quite separate, so that his executors--who will have
to know everything needful--can dispose of those ill-gotten gains to
the best advantage. You will probably find that these executors are his
solicitors. But I shall be greatly surprised if there is any mention of
a double set of ledgers in the will."

Vera proceeded with her reading.


"My will does not mention my two accounts. That part is for the ear of
you two alone. But my executors must be told. In any case, they could
not act legally otherwise."


Vera looked up with a puzzled expression.

"But why make it worse for his memory," she asked.

"It doesn't," Medway said. "Wills are deposited at Somerset House, and
anybody on payment of one shilling can read them. Any inquisitive Press
man might take it into his head to read the will, and if he did; could
make a whole lot of sensational matter out of it. The main contents
will be published in the newspapers, especially the amount left, and
the beneficiaries, but who is to know, when it becomes necessary to
obtain probate with a view to legacy and succession duty, how much the
estate is divided between the honest and criminal side? The executors
will know that, of course, but so long as the income tax people are
satisfied, it matters little how the residue is divided. And there is
no reason why you people should refuse to accept the money which is
proved to have been honestly earned. It is not often that people who
lead a double life are so careful to discriminate."

"Sounds like a logical argument," Brentford said. "But go on Vera. We
are interrupting you."

"There is very little more," Vera said. With that she took up the story
again.


"I nominate as my executors the firm of solicitors whose name appears
in this will. They drew up the document, and have a draft of it. I am
getting tired of writing, and my head is so in a whirl that I repeat
myself. I do hope that this money will bring you more happiness than it
has ever brought me, and if you decide to share it as man and wife, it
will mean a consummation I have long desired.

"Your affectionate friend,"

"John Garnstone."



There was a long silence as Vera concluded.

"And the next thing to do?" Brentford asked.

"The lawyers," Medway suggested. "The rest is up to them. If I were
you I should lock up the safe, and lose no time in getting round to
Lincoln's Inn Fields with a view to placing both the key and the will
in the hands of the executors. I shouldn't open one of those books
even."

Brentford seemed to think this good advice so that he and Vera set
out at once for the offices of the lawyers who would handle the case
in future. After some little time they managed to obtain an interview
with the head of the firm, who, for once in his dry, legal life, was
astonished at the story his clients had to tell. He sat for quite
a long time grasping his chin when he had read the letter. Then he
compared it with the will before he ventured on an opinion.

"You did quite right in coming straight here," he said in his most
judicial manner. "Really a most amazing story. Of course certain
things, not to the credit of my late client, came out at the trial of
Tanberg, but that will soon be forgotten and we can manage to keep the
rest a secret between us. Also it was wise to bring us the key of the
safe. For the moment things must remain in our hands."

"Of course," Brentford agreed.

"So for the present, we will wish you good morning."

* * * *

It was some months before the tangled skein was unravelled, but the
time came when the executors reported that everything was in order, and
restitution as far as it was possible made to those who had suffered
at Garnstone's hands. When the safe came to be examined it was found
to contain a wealth of treasures including most of the priceless stuff
stolen from Lord Glenday. No doubt, as Medway pointed out, this was
what Tanberg was after when Garnstone met his death. But as to that
Tanberg said nothing. He went to his appointed end without saying one
single word about himself from the day of his conviction until he stood
on the scaffold with the hangman's rope about his neck.

With the future more or less assured, Brentford failed to see why he
and Vera should wait any longer. Ronnie's idea was to buy some ideal
house in the country and settle down there as a sportsman and gentleman
farmer. "I have had quite enough wandering," he told Vera, "and you
don't want any more adventures."

"Indeed, I don't darling," Vera agreed fervently. "A country life in
England would be ideal."

"Then why wait any longer," Brentford urged. "Let us lose no time in
looking around. What else is our new car for? Do you mind trying Sussex
first?"

"Anywhere so long as it is with you," Vera murmured.

And so it was decided. The Ideal Sussex house was found complete with
its Jacobean furniture, and only a quiet wedding was needed now to
round off the romance. Medway acted as best man in an otherwise empty
church after which the party made their way to the Carlton for a modest
wedding breakfast.

And there a surprise awaited them in the person of Lord Glenday
apparently in jovial mood.

"I feel very much hurt," he said. "All things considered I think
I ought to have been asked to the wedding. I only learnt of it by
accident at the last moment. But I am not going to be done out of my
one chance of saluting the bride and giving her a suitable wedding
present."

With that the great man stooped and laid his lips on Vera's blushing
cheek. At the same time he handed her a substantial looking packet.
"Just a little reminder," he said. "Open it."

Vera gave a little cry of pleasure as she tore off the covering, and
exposed the famous gold cup to view.

"Oh, how generous of you," she cried. "I shall treasure this always,
the one thing that links my old home to the new. I am the happiest girl
in England, to-day!"


THE END.

Project Gutenberg Australia

