
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: A Lesson in Tactics
Author: "Dunbar" a.k.a. Frederick William Mole
* A Project Gutenberg Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 1900371.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: March 2019
Date last updated: march 2019

Produced by: Maurie Mulcahy

Project Gutenberg Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg Australia Licence which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: A Lesson in Tactics
Author: "Dunbar" a.k.a. Frederick William Mole

*

A Lesson in Tactics


BY "DUNBAR" aka Frederick William Mole


Published in Telegraph (Brisbane, Qld. : 1872 1947), Wednesday 8 June
1927, and also in The Week (Brisbane) 17 June, 1927



Without a preliminary knock, without a warning of any kind, the door
leading to the private office of Captain John Dolman, chairman of
directors of the shipping firm of John Dolman and Sons, Limited, was
opened, and in walked a truculent individual with all the arrogance of
a bloated capitalist or a labour boss.

Captain John Dolman looked up from his desk, surprised at this sudden
intrusion, and the muscles of his weather browned face twitched
ominously, as he took stock of his uninvited visitor.

Without being invited to be seated, the truculent individual, without
removing his hat, sat down on a chair opposite Captain John Dolman and
said: "I'm the secretary of the Seamen's Union, and I've come to lodge
a formal complaint against your company."

Without immediately replying, Captain John Dolman, in as leisurely a
manner as possible, reached over and took a cigar from a box on his
office table, deliberately pierced it, and still more deliberately
struck a match and lit it. Then, after a few deliberate staccato puffs,
he fixed his keen grey eyes on the truculent individual, and deigned to
say: "Oh, you have, have you? And what is the nature of your complaint?"

"The crew of the Nirvana are very dissatisfied at the way in which the
boat is provisioned, and they have complained to my union."

"Is that so, but why complain to me? Why not go to the captain of the
ship?"

"I did."

"Well?"

"Well, he ordered me off the boat, and threatened to throw me into the
river if I didn't clear out at once."

"Surely," said Captain John Dolman, smiling, "that would have been a
very highhanded proceeding on the part of the captain."

"You may smile," replied the truculent individual, incensed, "but I now
intend to see the matter through, so I've come to you as head of your
company, to save trouble, yer know."

"Precisely, and what is the nature of the crew's complaint?" asked
Captain Dolman as he calmly surveyed the upward curling smoke from his
cigar.

"The complaint is a general one. The crew are dissatisfied at the
manner in which the boat is provisioned-- victualled, yer know."

"Oh, come. That's no good. I must have specific charges," and
Captain Dolman turned round on his revolving chair, and sternly and
deliberately faced the truculent individual, who began to squirm.
"Come, out with them," he snapped.

"Oh well, the men complain, for one thing, there's no Worcestershire
sauce served with their meals."

"No Worcestershire sauce, eh? What else?"

"Then the food is not sufficient. If a man asks for an extra chop he
can't get it, yer know. He has to put up with steak, or a sausage,
instead. That's against the spirit of the Navigation Act, yer know."

"Oh! Is it? Anything else?"

"Yes, the cooking utensils are not what the men like. They strongly
object to their food being cooked in chipped enamelled ware. It hurts
their dignity."

"It does, does it? Very well. I shall have these complaints recorded
and investigated. I'll have them typed out and you'll sign them."

"Oh, no, I won't. I'll sign nothin'."

"Oh, but you will. You'll not leave this room till you do," and Captain
John Dolman deliberately got up, walked to the outside door and locked
it. Placing the key in his pocket he resumed his seat at his table, and
rang for his typist.

"Look 'ere. I've made the complaints as requested by the crew, and it's
for your company to rectify them. Isn't that enough?"

"No. It's not enough," thundered Captain Dolman. "Unless those
complaints are reduced to writing and you sign them, no notice will be
taken."

"Oh, orl right. If you insist. But you'll hear more about this, yer
know."

"So will you," replied Captain John Dolman, grimly.

In a few minutes the complaints were typed, and the sheet duly signed
by the truculent individual.

"Now, you may go," ordered Captain John Dolman, getting up and opening
the door.

Later, at the request of Captain John Dolman, the chief steward of the
Nirvana called at his office, when he was given the list of complaints
to read.

"But this is all bosh, sir," (bosh wasn't the word he intended to
use), remarked the chief steward indignantly, handing the list back to
Captain John Dolman. "There's nothing in any one of these complaints,
so far as I'm aware. The food is more than sufficient. I have heard no
grumblings from any one of the crew."

"Well, what are you going to do about the matter?" asked Captain John
Dolman, with a humorous smile.

"Will you leave it to me, sir. I'll consult the captain and the cook."

"Very well, steward. I'll give you a free hand. Report to me later."

Captain John Dolman handed back the typewritten list of complaints to
the chief steward.

Returning to the Nirvana, the chief steward handed the document to the
captain for his perusal.

"So, the blighter has gone to Captain John Dolman with his complaints,
has he? Very well. Just ask the cook to step into my cabin, will you,
steward?"

When the cook arrived, and had read the complaints, his remark was
"Piffle!" as he handed the document back to the captain.

"Then you are of the opinion, cook, that these complaints are trumped
up for a purpose?" asked the captain.

"I am, sir. The crew are not dissatisfied. The food and the
appointments of the Nirvana are as good as, if not better than, on any
other coaster I know."

"But someone must have lodged a complaint with the Seamen's Union?"

"That is so, sir, and if you ask me, I think it is that damn Swede Olaf
Olafsen."

"Yes," interjected the chief steward, "that blighter is always making
trouble. He didn't know what good food and good quarters were until he
joined the Australian coastal service."

"I've had my eye on that man for some time," said the captain. "In
fact, I've only been waiting an opportunity to fire him; but he's too
cunning, and you know I can't fire him for making these complaints to
his union. Besides, we must first satisfy ourselves that it was he who
lodged the complaints."

"In my own mind, I have no doubt that he's the man," said the cook.

"Then I'll bluff him. You make yourself scarce, and meet me here at
four o'clock."

The captain of the Nirvana made it his business to waylay able-bodied,
seaman Olaf Olafsen, and remarked to him casually, "Er, by the way,
Olafsen, it has been reported to me that you have lodged certain
complaints concerning this ship to your union, and I've been requested
by the company to inquire into them." The captain mentioned the nature
of the complaints.

"Dat iss so. Der conditions on dis boat ain't satisfying to me, and I
make a gomplaint vot you say."

"Very well, Olafsen. That's what I wanted to find out--the man who
complained to the Seamen's Union."

When the captain, chief steward, and the cook met again in the
captain's cabin at the appointed time, and the captain reported the
result of his interview with Olafsen, the cook said: "Well, captain,
as these complaints are a reflection on the Cooks' Union, I move, as a
member of that union, that I be empowered to bring same before it."

"Those who are in favour? Carried!" snapped the captain.

"And I desire to add," remarked the chief steward, "that as the
complaint concerning the cooking utensils is a reflection on the
Stewards' Union, I be empowered to bring same under its notice."

"Those who are in favour? Carried!" said the captain.

In due course, the matter of the complaints was duly debated by the
Cooks' Union and by the Stewards' Union, when it was resolved that
a delegation representing both these unions wait on the Seamen's
Union with a fire request that Olaf Olafsen, a member of the Seamen's
Union, be pulled out of the Nirvana forthwith, for making trivial and
unfounded complaints reflecting on the Cooks' and the Stewards' Unions,
with the ostensible purpose of creating a disturbance among the seamen
in the employ of John Dolman and Company, Limited. Falling immediate
compliance with this request, the cooks and the stewards of the Nirvana
will walk out and hang up that boat indefinitely, thereby creating an
industrial disturbance detrimental to the interests of all the other
seamen in the employ of John Dolman and Company, Limited."

This request, with such a solid backing, was unconditionally compiled
with by the Seamen's Union, but with a very bad grace.

THE END

Project Gutenberg Australia