
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: The Robe of Lucifer
Author: Fred M White
* A Project Gutenberg Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 1901161.txt
Language: English
Date first posted:  2019
Date last updated:  2019

Produced by: Maurie Mulcahy

Project Gutenberg Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg Australia Licence which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE ROBE OF LUCIFER


BY


FREDERICK WHITE,



AUTHOR OF "A GOLDEN ARGOSY," "BY ORDER OF THE LEAGUE," ETC.



LONDON:

A. D. INNES & CO.,

BEDFORD STREET.

1896.



CONTENTS.

CHAPTER

PROLOGUE

I. THE EXPERIMENT OP THE DAMASK ORCHID

II. THE EXPERIMENT OP THE COTTAGE BY THE SEA

III. THE EXPERIMENT OP THE BISHOP AND THE BEGUM'S DIAMONDS

IV. THE EXPERIMENT OF THE BOOMING OF LYDIA LOBB

V. THE EXPERIMENT OF THE PURITAN AND THE PAINTED LADY

VI. THE PURPLE FAN

VII. THE EXPERIMENT OF THE WHITE CHRYSANTHEMUM

VIII. THE EXPERIMENT OF THE DICTATED MANUSCRIPT

IX. THE EXPERIMENT OF THE LEGAL DIARIES

X. THE EXPERIMENT OF THE LOBELGUNA CONCESSION

XI. THE EXPERIMENT OF KING RAMESES' SCARAB

XII. THE PASTEL TO THE EXPERIMENT OF THE RAMESES' SCARAB

XIII. THE EXPERIMENT OF THE MAMMON'S PLAGUE-SHIP

XIV. THE LAST EXPERIMENT OF ALL

XV. THE EXPERIMENT COMPLETED

XVI. "GOOD-BYE, AND CHRIST BE WITH YOU"



THE ROBE OF LUCIFER.




PROLOGUE.

I.

ONE traveller alighted at Port Gwyn Road, accepting his environments
upon faith. There was a slip of worn platform, obviously pensioned from
more prosperous areas, and now dank and mouldering an Lethe's Wharf. A
hut, fashioned in the trunk of a decayed tree, served the dual purpose
of waiting-room and ticket-office. A small steady rain pattered on the
crumbling boards. Beyond lay a shelving sandbank and the sea — the
only thing in motion there.

The traveller was quite alone, the station functionary having
disappeared. A battered portmanteau stood at the traveller's feet.
Under such circumstances, the most seasoned wanderer had fain been
excused a resigned melancholy. Visions of cheerful hotels might have
been fostered in that dreary spot. But Arthur Greenstrand was filled
with the beatitude of a new sensation.

He turned out of the station, carrying his bag. Greenstrand had a
destination and a welcome awaiting him on a contiguous spur of that
ironclad coast. He saw the cliffs sweeping upwards, lifting their
shoulders to the grey mist; he saw a clutch of white houses to his
left, and boats keel-deep in the gritty sand. Despite the rain, a
group of fisher-folk foregathered on what at one time might have been
a granite quay. Thus Greenstrand's introduction to Cornwall. On the
whole, he was rather disposed to like it.

No spot is devoid of redeeming features; even hell may possess natural
advantages. At any rate, it is impossible for any one to refute the
theory at present. Thus, the air of this place was superb. It came
booming up from the Atlantic fields, crisp and fresh, and reeking with
salt spume, nitrous as old wine. Greenstrand made his way across to the
fishermen with a curious feeling of expansion and lightness. The group
before him was picturesque enough, and lacking the vice of curiosity.
There were grey beards and brown, there were deep-set eyes blue as the
sea itself, there were hands oaken and wrinkled as the sails, nails
with a firm rim of tar under them. The presence of a stranger excited
no curiosity, and aroused no comment.

"I want to go to Port Gwyn," Greenstrand remarked.

An old sea-dog regarded him with a gaze so blank that the speaker was
conscious of some confusion. He felt like a seal in the net.

"Well, you can go," the native responded gravely.

Nobody laughed, because neither rudeness nor repartee were intended.
Whereupon the fishers fell to sea-chat again. As a matter of fact, they
talked nothing else. They rarely saw a paper; letters came to them as
birthdays, marked with gentle enthusiasm. But of all the human race,
Cornish fishermen and country parsons have tapped the well-spring of
true idleness; the rest are merely amateurs.

These men fish one tide daily for mackerel with hook and line; the rest
of the time they spend in bed, or sitting on the shingle. To sit for
hours on shingle and be happy is an art. In the winter they subsist
upon salt herrings and potatoes, and sit upon a bench. Believe me,
there are worse lives.

Greenstrand returned to the attack again. A man who can command the
servile attention of millions is not to be baffled by a mere fisherman.
The richest man in the world stood there before those primitive people,
neglected and alone. Still, the situation was not without its charm.

"Do you happen to know," he asked with becoming humility, "where Mr.
Julien Ray lives? I am on my way to his house."

Every face was turned quietly in his direction. Did Greenstrand but
know it, this was enthusiasm, or the nearest approach to it to which
the Cornish fishers aim. And it encouraged Greenstrand. Evidently Ray's
fame had penetrated down here.

"Take yonder path over the cliff," one of the men explained, "and
follow it till you come to the village. There's only one house there
you can properly call a house, and that's Mr. Ray's. You see the path
there?"

"Don't unnecessarily fatigue yourself," Greenstrand murmured as the
speaker rose, the better to point out the way. "Will any one carry my
bag?"

No reply came. Carrying the bag obviously implied largesse therefor,
but what is vile dross compared with artistic laziness? So Greenstrand
bore his own burden, like Christian of old, and rather enjoyed the
sensation. He had reached a limit of civilization where money appeared
to be a negative force.

And this man had literally the command of millions. He was in a
position to make as much money as he desired. Did he require a yacht,
or a continent, or a dodo, or a specially rare kind of canvas-back
duck, he had only to give the order, and it was executed. He had
everything he wanted. Yet this fact did not prevent his dragging a
heavy portmanteau along three miles of vile cliff road in the pouring
rain, and on an exceedingly empty stomach. For the nonce the tenant of
an acre of furzy common and eke owner of a donkey was better equipped
than he.

Greenstrand was, however, neither miserable nor unhappy. His old
cynical boredom, his want of sympathy with humanity, seemed to have
fallen from shoulders burdened with many millions. He saw the spume
breaking on the rocks below, he saw the sea-wrack trailing in crystal
pools, like a dead maiden's hair. The great heart of the sea throbbed
responsive to his own. His lips were salt, a sense of sweetness filled
his nostrils, underneath his feet the crushed wild thyme exuded a dying
pungent perfume. Hundreds of ghostly sea-birds fluttered round his
head, crying like familiar spirits. And God had the ocean in the hollow
of His hand; the tide, spilt through His fingers, crashed upon the
forehead of the world. The mystery of the sea is the mystery of life.

A benign sense of his own littleness filled Greenstrand; the
consciousness of this had never been so forcibly brought home to him
before. In the town he was great, men lisped his name with awe; here
he was a mere unit — a wet one, without an umbrella. You can get
a very good one for a guinea; but they are not to be purchased in
the wilderness, even by the Squire of Golconda, who plays upon the
money-market as on a barrel-organ.

The whimsical side of the argument tickled Greenstrand. What on earth
was the good of all his money to him at this moment? Here, the unit
plodded along in the wet; there, the capitalist was all-powerful.
To-morrow he could say to himself, "I will go out and make some
millions;" to-day he couldn't smoke a cigarette, because he hadn't any
matches. You can't light a pipe with a cheque-book, though you may
set a continent ablaze with one. And what is the use of tobacco at a
guinea a pound when the rain gets into one's pouch? For once in a way
Greenstrand could afford to indulge in the philosophy of the poor, a
luxury usually denied to the rich.

And he was rich beyond the dreams of a philanthropist, or a religious
man of business. Fortune had selected him as the recipient of her
most frequent favours. In plain English, Arthur Greenstrand's late
lamented father had invented a chemical process by which coal — or,
at any rate, an equally good substitute — could be manufactured from
refuse matter. The thing was simplicity itself. You had only to take a
waste piece of ground, a huge pile of matter out of place — anything
material, in fact — and charge the whole mass with the formula. A few
hours afterwards it was, to all practical purposes, coal. Just think
what this means!

It means one of the great necessities of life at the door of every
dweller in towns. It means the same thing in every great ocean port
all over the world. It means something like solid profit for allowing
people to take away, at a fancy price, what you do not require for
yourself. It means that you can shut up any coal-field in the country
by depreciating the market value, and then demanding anything you like
for your own article. In Greenstrand's case it meant the possession
of so much money that he was bent, and almost broken, under the
weight of it. Not that he had taken any unfair advantage of the
family discovery to the detriment of others; he was too honest for
that. But the possession of so large a fortune was to him the salt in
the herring-barrel, the hair in the cider-press. It had crushed all
ambition, all that was good out of him. Ambition, to the possessor of
millions, is impossible. Why strive for fame or reputation in politics,
or art in letters, when you can buy it as a cabman does his beer — by
the quart? Consider what a man can do in politics — provided that he
has means — by keeping one hand rigidly over his mouth, and the other
constantly in his pocket!

It may be urged, perhaps, that a man of genuine ambition could put this
wealth out of his life, and start from scratch, like the other runners
in the race. But, whatever his faults might have been, Greenstrand
was no fool. On the contrary, he was a man who knew his world very
well indeed. He knew that genius does not necessarily imply success;
besides, he did not labour under the delusion that the afflatus divine
was his. Looking round him, he could see that the huckster's instinct
was requisite to-day to turn "Shakespeare and the musical glasses" into
good business, and that "the popular taste" — a thing he abhorred  — 
was the thing to cater for to become successful. Suppleness Greenstrand
did not possess. No; success, as we understand her to-day, was not for
him.

It is a great deal easier, and more soothing, to be misunderstood and
shunned with a large income and a house in Park Lane, than it is in a
cottage furnished on the hire system. The slights are not so pointed.
Also, your blighted genius has his corners, like the rest of us.
Greenstrand preferred to view the drama from the stalls. The pit may
be the best place in the house, but there would not be much trouble in
persuading the pittite to change seats with an occupant of the dress
circle.

Yet, without doubt, the possession of so much money embittered
Greenstrand's life. Blessed — or cursed — with a sense of humour
and a cynical temper, he judged the sycophants who fawned upon him
correctly. He saw the worst and most sordid side of life; he gradually
lost his faith in all that is good and pure. Belief in God or man he
had none; in his eyes every action had a motive. There was no future
state — nothing. The rest was a blank, and every man a devil in
disguise. He had no friends, and all those who knew him were actuated
by designs upon the coaly millions. Greenstrand hated the world, but he
hated himself most of all. There was only one thing worse than life  — 
death.

There is a certain temptation to the rich man to become his own deity.
What can one expect else from the being whose calves are all golden
ones?

Thus Greenstrand. He had tried everything, and found it empty. Society
he had exhausted in a year. He could discern no real difference between
Lady Midas, prating of the price of her carpets, and the Duchess of
Sang Azul, smothered in diamonds what time there was an execution in
Prehistoria Castle. The same vulgar ostentation ruled all, and reduced
them to a common plane. In his despair, Greenstrand had even tried
religions — not one of which he had found to fit. The bishop in lawn,
escorted to the pulpit by a cringing throng of acolytes, and preaching
the simple doctrine of a single Christ, drove back his soul in revolt
from the blasphemy; the Methodist, unlettered, agibe with jealousy, and
spattering frantic diatribes, flavoured with the gall-political, at
those he would fain rub shoulders with, disgusted him.

There was a certain egotism underlying Greenstrand's lack of faith
in everything. Had he been less clever, he had been a happier man.
Instead of which, he was driven back upon himself by the open flattery
of others. Perhaps none really cared for him, because he took no pains
to conceal his contempt for others. If he had one grain of Platonic
affection in his nature, it was for Julien Ray, the poet. Ray was the
tonic his consumptive vanity needed, the North wind blowing over the
hotbed of schisms and doubts which choked a really kindly nature.

Now, here was a man possessing unlimited wealth, a fine intellect,
good health, and a fair presence, and yet there was no more unhappy
individual in England. Why? It would have puzzled Greenstrand to answer
the question. What is termed the perfectly happy man, the one who has
everything he can require, and no wish ungratified, must be intensely
miserable. Fancy any human being with nothing to long for, no ultimate
goal to reach, no Promised Land afore! Picture the misery of him!
Greenstrand was the individual in question.

Think of it! This man might have done anything, become anything. With
his wealth and intelligence, nothing was impossible to him. That
probably accounted for the fact that he was standing at this moment,
tired and wet, dragging a portmanteau along, and regarding a little
village lying in a hollow at his feet, girt in by broomy hills, and
washed by the creamy tide. Our refined tramp stood there with a look
of something like admiration in his eyes. However extravagant her
moods are, Nature is never a snob; her work is thoroughly artistic.
Greenstrand smiled with the feeling of one who stumbles by accident
upon a perfect picture.


II.


GREENTSTAND'S exotic enthusiasm was not misplaced. A spur of the sea
ran like a spear into the green heart of the mainland, whilst terraces
of foliage uprose on either side, crowned by rocky diadems. The tiny
bay formed a perfect harbour of refuge, where ships ran what time
the west wind raged along that cruel coast. There were many cottages
peeping out of the foliage here and there, but Greenstrand saw that
most of them were ruined and deserted. The only house of any note  — 
and that anything but a dominant one — stood upon a rocky shelf on the
opposite side; a ferny hollow lay behind, and a pretty garden in front.
There was nothing else that suggested the Home of Poesy.

A ragged ray of light, penetrating the hood of cloudland, lighted up
Port Gwyn for a brief moment, but nothing disturbed the perfect silence
there. There were no boats on the silver strand, and consequently no
fishermen either. Was there yet another somnolent way of getting a
living in these parts, Greenstrand wondered?

He dropped into the valley, and climbed up the other side. Before the
comparative cottage of gentility he stopped. Under the thatched roof
the swallows were building, on the tiny stretch of lawn a few dove-hued
gulls were squatting. A tall fuchsia covered the front of the cottage,
begonias and maiden-hair fern ran riot in the borders.

Greenland rapped with his knuckles on the door, and a voice bade him
enter.

The traveller had made no mistake, he knew that voice well enough. Few
people heard it save in song; therein it was familiar enough everywhere
that the Queen's writ runs. There was no inky controversy as to Julien
Ray's position as the foremost of modern poets; even the Superlatives
admitted the fact in guarded aphorism.

The poet rose from a white deal table, innocent of a cloth, on which,
from a pewter platter, he was making a hearty tea on brown bread and
fried mackerel. In figure he was tall and spare, his hair was cropped
short to the long lean head, his eyes were blue and tranquil. There
was absolutely nothing striking-looking about him. In the company of
Cornish farmers he would pass as one of themselves, for Ray had a fine
faculty for adapting himself to his company; he had mastered the art of
being at home everywhere.

"I did not expect to see you for some days," he said; "indeed, you are
so erratic that I really did not expect to see you at all."

"The very reason why you might have looked for my coming at any time,"
Greenstrand replied gravely. "Julien, I'm wet through."

Ray replied that he was glad to hear it. A millionaire, wet, and
draggled, and miserable, is a sight that reconciles poverty to the
inevitable.

"Of course, I can give you a bed," Ray went on; "only you will have to
take your share in the work of the house, because I keep no servant,
and do everything myself. This is my living-room, drawing-room, and
library, all in one. Like the Irishman's description of a wigwam, so is
this house. If you want to go from the drawing-room to the library, you
just stay where you are."

Greenstrand looked around him with some interest. The door of this
double-fronted cottage gave directly upon one room. On the stone floor
lay a Turkey carpet. The uncurtained windows were full of flowers. The
furniture was of the plainest. A few pictures on the walls were set off
by gleaming domestic utensils. One wall was entirely lined with books;
and under a window, let into the centre of these tomes, and commanding
a magnificent view seaward, was the one handsome piece of upholstery
there, an oak writing-table littered with papers. There was a double
settle round the fireplace for use on cold or winter evenings. From the
bagman point of view, five and twenty pounds would have covered the
lot, the books excepted.

"I suppose you find eccentricity pays," Greenstrand remarked.
"Commercially, it must be good business for a poet of your standing to
live in a workman's cottage. That's where Salisbury gets the pull of
Rosebery — one possesses a mysterious, Janus-like reserve, whilst the
other is compelled to grin through the horse-collar of politics. During
the seven years you have been here, you must have saved a lot of money."

"I haven't a penny," Ray responded cheerfully. "I had to borrow five
pounds this morning from a farmer friend to pay a county court summons
from a bookseller. The people about here take all my earnings as fast
as I get them. But things are getting better; it's nothing like such a
struggle as I had last year."

"You mean to say that you keep half the people about you?"

"My dear fellow, it's no exaggeration to say that I keep them all.
You can be a great poet, and earn far less money than a third-rate
novelist. In the spring I was so hard put to it, that I came very near
to writing a detective romance, but happily the tragedy was averted. An
American pork-packer started the fashion for early editions of my first
volume, and I was saved. I happened to have a lot of copies by me."

"And you are actually happy here, Julien?"

"Greenstrand, I believe I am the happiest man alive. I have dreamed
and hoped of fame, and it has come to me at thirty-five. Think of
that! Again, I have not an enemy in the world. My health is perfect,
my wants are few. With my limited means, I do more good than you with
your millions. I have brought happiness here. When I came to Port Gwyn
first, the people were starving — you should see them now. Port Gwyn
lace will be as valuable as Rose-point some of these days."

"I heard that you had started a lace industry here. I read it in one of
the evening papers, coupled with the information that you cleaned your
teeth with cigar ash. There was also something about the kind of socks
you wear; but I forget that priceless item."

"I have studied lace-making for years," Ray observed. "The people here
used to catch pilchards in due season, and live on the proceeds for the
rest of the year. But the pilchards don't come any more, and the people
were starving. Perhaps you noticed the deserted cottages as you came
along. Well, I taught the women how to make the lace."

"Incidentally finding the capital, I presume?"

"Of course. Where else do you suppose it came from? They took to the
work splendidly. The men are picking it up too, but much more slowly.
What we want now is a market, plus a call for our goods. The price
obtained up to now hardly keeps body and soul together. So I buy it
all myself, And sell it for what it will fetch. With your money and
influence you might make the thing go for as."

"You mean as a commercial speculation for yourself?"

"Nothing of the kind," Ray cried indignantly. "I'm not a tradesman. If
I could see a fair wage for my poor people I should be quite content.
Then I could put a lot more hands on, all of whom want work at present.
The greater the demand, the greater the profit for them. I should
refuse to touch a penny of the money."

Greenstrand declined curtly. He was a trifle annoyed to find the hated
topic of his money cropping up directly, even here. He had hoped to get
away from that. The old familiar demon danced before him as he changed
in his tiny bedroom. Ray was after his shekels already, like the rest
 —  even Ray, to whom money was as last year's leaves. Doubtless before
long the poet would be asking him for a subsidy, and artfully luring
him into a broad scheme of philanthropy. Legions of hypocrites had
tried the same thing before. Utopian programmes breathing Arcadian
atmospheres — with a large margin for current expenses. Blest is the
patron blind to the balance-sheet, only he is getting extinct.

Greenstrand came down to his brown bread and fried mackerel moodily.
In his mind's eye he could see the sycophants who were fattening upon
Ray's mistaken generosity. They would have none of his, for certain.
Yet Dives enjoyed his meal as he had not relished one for many days;
he expanded as he ate. Ray produced tobacco afterwards, and two clay
pipes, also creamy ale in stone mugs.

"This is practically your fare whilst you are here," the poet
explained. "More or less, I live on fish and potatoes. But, if you
prefer a change, I'll go over to Port Jacob and get some meat for you,
Greenstrand."

"No, thanks," Greenstrand said dryly. "You are a sufficiently good poet
to be an indifferent cook. Besides, I came down here to get well out
of the beaten track. I came quite alone, having given my secretary the
slip at Bristol. But he knows my intentions, and I dare say he will
find his way down here in a day or two. Death is a necessity to me. I
suppose you can find room for him somewhere?"

"There is a furnished attic overhead," Ray replied hospitably. "I shall
be glad to see Death again; the fellow is an enigma to me, and I am
never tired of studying him. Let him come, by all means."

"Death is a curiosity," Greenstrand resumed. "You and he are the poles
in emotional feeling. You have them all; Death has none. I believe that
man to be absolutely devoid of feeling of any kind. If you stuck a pin
in him, he would be none the wiser. Did you ever see him smile? He has
a face like a wax mask. He would have made a magnificent judge, so
great is his sense of fairness. He would acquit his greatest enemy on
a nice technicality, and hang his own mother upon another. Misfortune
marked that man for her own years ago, and pursued him as relentlessly
as one Christian quarrelling with another on a point of faith. I
dragged him out of a blacking factory, for which he was writing
poetical advertisements — a Balliol scholar and Newdigate prizeman!
That man will do anything I tell him; he never asks questions. Yes,
Death is a curiosity."

"He is a very faithful servant," Ray remarked.

"Precisely. I pay him liberally, buying his virtues by the pound."

Ray smiled slightly. Friendship was not a cardinal virtue at all in
Greenstrand's eyes. It existed only in books.

"I'm glad your views are not mine," the poet said; "if they were, I
should be compelled to shut up shop to-morrow. It must be a horrible
thing to believe in nothing, Arthur. And yet I have found goodness and
faith and honour enough in the world. I believe it to be a good world,
and the people in it good people."

Greenstrand paced the floor impatiently. A trailing wreath of smoke
drifted round his head as he went. His dark grey eyes gleamed with
scornful anger. He felt a passionate contempt, an envious contempt
for Ray's happiness.

"Am I angry, or am I jealous to hear you talk thus?" he exclaimed.
"What do you owe the world? Absolutely nothing. For years you were
crushed and beaten down. Those who reviled you then come cringing to
kiss your feet now. And yet you speak as if you had been cradled in
purple."

"Well, it was a pull," Ray admitted, "but I am the better now for it.
Is there nothing in fighting fortune as successfully as I have done?"

"You say nothing of three years' semi-starvation."

"It was worse than that," Ray said cheerfully. "More than once I have
known the real want of food. The hard life killed one of the sweetest
and dearest women that God ever gave to a struggling mortal. For five
years I only tasted meat by accident, as it were; ay, I have picked up
and eaten bread from the gutter. Once, when I was nearly crazy with
hunger, I picked up a sovereign. What do you know about money, Arthur?
Wait till you find a gold coin under the same circumstances. And all
that time, thank God, I never lost faith in myself, my fellows, or my
Maker."

"I am not acquainted with the disease," Greenstrand said cynically.

"No, unfortunately. Far better for you if you were. Without faith I
should have gone headlong to perdition. I placed my trust in God."

"I have heard of others who are prone to lean upon the shoulder of
Jupiter," Greenstrand replied thoughtfully. "You pray for assistance
in the same faint hope that a struggling man goes to his banker for
an overdraft — not that you expect it to come, but because it is the
proper kind of thing to do. How truly English and insular, this asking
the Almighty to back our bills for us! My poor mother used to say that
unless I went to church I should never prosper. Therefore going to
church is a pure matter of business, in which case the rich man could
send a clerk instead. Ergo, the more clerks, the more pious."

"You speak as if there were no God," said Ray.

"There is no God," Greenstrand replied passionately. "It is a mere
chimera. And if your God is the God of writ, how much greater is the
devil? You call him a fallen angel, in revolt against the Deity. In
revolt! Why, the devil is master of the universe! What a splendid
lieutenant I should make with all my money. Backed by the power of the
gold I have at my command, I could corrupt a continent I could place
such temptations in the way of the best of people that they would fall
miserably. At the outlay of a few thousands I could turn your little
paradise here into a hell."

"There are thousands of good people beyond your power,'' Ray cried.

Greenstrand smiled as he took up his candle, a tallow one, in an
earthern candlestick. The argument was not worth pursuing further.

"Good night, my simple child," he said, "and may you sleep better than
I shall."

The rain pattered on the casement of Greenstrand's tiny room, the roar
of the sea sounded hollow in his ears. Yet he lay back upon the coarse
linen pillow, and slept as he had not slept for years.


III.


MORNING came with a wind fresh from the North-west. The sea lay bright
and crisp; the sunshine danced on the blue jewels of the waters. Ray,
early astir, dragged Greenstrand from the snug somnolence of the coarse
brown sheets, and placed a towel in his hand.

"We are going to bathe before breakfast," he explained. "Into your
garments quickly. Do not tarry for the sleep-berries to leave your
eyes, but dress and come."

Greenstrand complied laggardly. A heavy surf was plunging upon the
crisp sand, the rocks were dank and chill to his unfamiliar feet.
Like a white arrow shot from a bow, Ray flashed into the grey bath of
spume, shimmering like some great fish in a fathom of crystal flood.
Greenstrand followed down to the tangled sea-wrack. The flying spume
lashed his shoulders; the salt sting was on his forehead, wild and
glorious. A new vigour thrilled in every limb; Samson before meeting
Delilah felt no stronger.

"That's fine!" he gasped, as he emerged from the bath. "I feel like
another man. I shall be quite ready for breakfast by the time we get
back."

"Death is cooking the soles," Ray replied. "I forgot to tell you that
he turned up an hour ago. He got a conveyance from Port Jacob, and
drove."

"So like him," Greenstrand murmured, as they started back. "Now, at
Port Jacob, yesterday, I could get no conveyance for love or money.
If Death and I were stranded in the Great Sahara, and I asked him to
do his best, he would find me a caravan in half an hour. And if I
requested the same day's Times under the same circumstances, it
would be forthcoming. I——"

Greenstrand suddenly paused. Like some predatory Adam under parallel
circumstances, he felt comparatively startled by what he saw. For,
coming towards them, of a verity, was Eve in the guise of Aphrodite.
She was tall and dark and queenly. She wore a dress of rough grey cloth
with a divine grace. Her long hair was streaming in the breeze; her
bare white feet kissed the sand. But for the milky feet, Aphrodite
might have been the bride of broad acres. She carried her head
haughtily and well. A smile cleft her red lips, and lingered in her
splendid eyes. She seemed to see nothing strange in the two figures
before her.

"Can't we go and hide ourselves?" Greenstrand suggested. "The lady
might——"

But Ray was innocent of confusion. From his point of view, the
situation was natural enough. At Port Gwyn they had gone back to
the better part of nature. He shook hands with the glowing goddess,
who blushed not, for the simple reason that she saw nothing whereat
to blush in her lack of hose, and extended her taper fingers to
Greenstrand.

"I have heard of you," she said. "I am glad to meet you. But you must
not keep me now, because I am going down to the lobster pots."

"What a lovely lunatic!" Greenstrand remarked, as the stately figure
passed on. "Have you any more eccentric angels of the same kind here,
Julien?"

"There is very little of the lunatic about Margaret Trefroch," Ray
said seriously. "You are a bit annoyed because her simple virtue and
innocent chastity were too much for your boasted self-possession.
You may admire that "front of brass" contact with the world brings,
but it is nothing compared to the pure gaze of a little child. And
yet Margaret is no child, apart from her unworldliness. Her father
was accounted fairly well off until these cottages were deserted.
Now he has to work like the rest. But Margaret and her brother Mark
— for whom I have procured a situation in London — possess a rare
intelligence. I educated Margaret myself; for five years she has been
my pupil."

"Take care that she does not become your mistress," Greenstrand
laughed. "Nay, man, I mean in the Elizabethan sense of the word, not as
it is perverted to-day."

"I shall never marry again," Ray said gravely. "I buried my heart in my
wife's grave. Yet Margaret could be a mate for any man. She has beauty
and intellect. Few women in England are better educated, though I say
it."

Greenstrand pursued the subject no further. Yet this chance meeting
with the ocean goddess occupied his sole attention whilst dressing. Not
that his speculations prevented a complete enjoyment of the fish and
coffee prepared by Death.

The latter greeted his employer quietly enough. George Death never
spoke unless spoken to first; he sat through the simple meal, his face
disguised as a mask. There was no expression there, no speculation in
his hard steel-grey eyes. He allowed himself to be quietly ignored; the
others took no notice of his presence there.

After breakfast he rose, and quietly proceeded to wash the dishes. He
appeared to be perfectly at home at the task, as he would have been
waiting upon a Cabinet Minister. He was equally ready to negotiate the
purchase of an estate for his employer. Liberally paid, everything came
in the day's work.

Death invariably dressed in black; he wore no jewellery; he had no
tastes or habits, and no dislikes or prejudices. What he did with his
money, Greenstrand neither knew nor cared. He did know that Death
was scrupulously honest in all his dealings; he was quite aware that
his right-hand man could have robbed him of thousands had he liked.
And Death professed no liking for or gratitude to his employer. His
keen sense of justice told him that the arrangement between them was
perfectly mutual.

The morning passed quickly with an examination of the place, and an
inspection of the house where the lace-manufacture was in progress.
Ray was doing a good work, perhaps, but it smacked of professional
philanthropy too much for Greenstrand.

"Let us go on the cliffs and smoke," he said presently. "I'm getting
somewhat tired of these ceaseless expressions of gratitude one hears
from these people. Besides, I have been dragged over these kind of
places so often before. I shall give you nothing."

Ray led the way up the cliffs. The boyish gaiety contrasted strongly
with Greenstrand's sombre mood. They sat looking over the wrinkled
sea, flushed with the love of the sunshine. The great heart beat and
throbbed upon the rocks; there were voices in the wind.

"Why can't I be happy like you?" Greenstrand cried suddenly. "Why am I
so full of discontent?"

"Because you have nothing to do," Ray replied. "And yet you have a fine
intellect. With your opportunities and advantages you might become
anything. Literature——"

"I might become a minor poet," Greenstrand sneered. "I can write verses
sufficiently badly for that. And I should certainly be exploited in the
evening papers. The more rude I was to them, the more they would extol
my virtues. A rich man's failings are a poor man's vices. No; on the
whole, I think I will steer clear of literature."

"Then why not politics ? It is the pastime of tin prosperous."

"Because I could succeed in attaining any position I required. My
dear Julien, consider the want of stimulus politics offer to one in
my position. With the millions at my disposal, I could actually found
a party. Suppose I take up the occupation of waste lands. I might
establish industries in the desert; whether they paid or not would
matter little, because the subsidy would be always fattening. With
money I could bribe the electors. I could choose my own candidates, and
endow them with ample funds. There are hundreds of men of influence,
apparently in a prosperous condition, who are tottering to ruin.
Indirectly, I could buy the electorate as I would a flock of sheep. In
five years I should become Premier. And where would the satisfaction
be? My wealth, and not myself, would deserve the praise. No; I can see
nothing in politics."

"Then why not deprive yourself of your money altogether?" Ray asked.

Greenstrand hesitated for a moment before he replied.

"Because I dare not," he murmured with the tone of one who makes a
humiliating confession. "I lack the necessary belief in myself. So many
better men never rise superior to circumstance. Should I, given your
genius, have ever forced my way to the front? I think not. I have had
a better opportunity of judging the greed of humanity than yourself.
I have but one weapon, and I dare not lay that aside. And yet its
might is crushing me. I want some mission, some occupation that money
cannot buy. Everything has been tried. I thought I had found it once in
philanthropy, but I was mistaken. On the whole, that seems to me to be
the most sordid business of the lot."

"It seems to be a pitiable state of things," Ray remarked.

"Pitiable is no word for it. I am without hope, and without faith.
Julien, do you believe, really and truly believe, that there is a God
directing us somewhere?"

"I am certain of it," Ray cried. "I have proved it. I feel that God
is, and will be. I feel His presence now; I seem to see evidence of
it in the great waters. Without the help of Christ I should have gone
down into desolation and darkness. Do not mistake what I say for the
Shibboleth of the Churches; in the cant phrase of the day, I am not a
religious man. For instance, I never by any chance enter a place of
worship. The set parrot prayers day by day drive me to madness. The
sermon is an invention of the devil. Fancy the smug, narrow sectarian
preaching Christ's holy charity, and denying a dissenter burial in his
churchyard — God's Acre, mind you! Picture the Nonconformist minister
yelling his hideous secular politics, and quoting the Deity in support
of his argument, as if God were a Gladstonian. See the prelate at the
altar marrying innocent crushed May to scrofulous December, and telling
his perfumed gallery that whom God has joined together no man shall put
asunder. Oh, the pity of it! And yet one can feel the life of Christ
to be the true one. God is everywhere, the just kind God that Jesus
spoke of, and He prevails."

"I don't believe a word of it," Greenstrand retorted. "You evoke all
this out of your brilliant imagination. If things are as you say, why
is Satan all-powerful? I could be Satan myself. I could spoil your
Arcadia here in a week. If I could but put a dozen men to the test,
place in their way blazing temptations, and find them come out of the
ordeal unscathed, I think I could believe myself."

"You think all men are corrupt at heart, then?"

"I am absolutely certain of it. My worldly experience has never shown
me a single instance to the contrary. Mind, I grant there are certain
instances where you must make the bribe big enough, or disguise the
bait carefully. Julien, I have a great mind to turn devil, and test my
theory practically."

"You would fail," Ray cried—"fail miserably. And if you did succeed
in breaking up and ruining a home or two, what then? What would you do
with your victims?"

"Send them down here to make lace," Greenstrand smiled grimly. "I
should feel that I owed them something for the sport they had given me,
in which case I should not mind giving you money for an extension of
the colony."

Ray caught his breath quickly. He saw a way to extending his scheme,
and confounding his friend at the same time. It might also be possible
to fill Greenstrand with the faith through which real happiness alone
lies.

"I have a great mind to accept your challenge," he said thoughtfully.
"There are other places besides Port Gwyn along the coast where help is
sorely needed, and I confess to a great desire to handle some of the
thousands which represent so little to you. But what a Nemesis would be
yours, were you to make the attempt."

"Why? The devil flourishes after the lapse of countless years. He has
revolted successfully. There is no reason why I should not go and do
likewise."

"You really are prepared to make the attempt, then?"

"Since you challenge me, I may say that I am both willing and eager."

Ray's eyes glowed with the light of battle. He was for humanity against
mammon.

"So be it, then," he cried. "You shall go out into the world and tempt
man, you shall play upon his weakness and his vanity, you shall fall
like Lucifer. The collapse will be great, but God is merciful to all. I
believe you will not succeed in one solitary instance, arrogant as the
power of your money renders you. But who is to select the victims?"

"That shall be Death's portion," Greenstrand said eagerly. "And I will
inform him that none but the strongest are to be chosen. My intention
is not to pick out those who are in difficulties or dangers. Let us
see what the best are made of. Death's strong sense of justice will
be your safeguard; you can rely upon him thoroughly. He shall have
carte blanche to go through the country and select subjects for my
experiment, as a collector of old china goes afield for curios. And you
will judge as to fair play."

"I shall certainly live to rejoice in your discomfiture," Ray replied.

"The challenge is made and accepted," Greenstrand cried. "Already I
feel that I have an object in life. I am itching to be at work. Let us
dispatch Death upon his errand without delay. Meanwhile, I shall remain
here till Death returns. He will show no surprise when he hears what he
has to do."

Greenstrand did not exaggerate. Death listened to the commands of his
employer with no signs of animation or surprise upon his graven face.

"I am to start at once," he replied, "and I have no limit as to space,
provided that I confine myself to England. It will cost a deal of
money."

"It will," Greenstrand agreed. "You will want a blank signed
cheque-book, and use your own discretion as to what you spend. And take
your time."

Death departed like a shadow. For good or evil the die was cast.
Ray's face was grave, whilst Greenstrand's features were flushed and
triumphant.

"You fear for me?" be demanded.

"It is in God's hands," the poet replied. "I tell you I am frightened.
Whether I have done right or wrong, the future alone will show. There
is no turning back now."


IV.


NOT without some hesitation, Ray confided the story of the experiment
to Margaret Trefroch. He did this because it was his custom to tell
her everything. To the poet's surprise, Margaret displayed no signs of
anything but pleasure.

The trio were seated on the cliffs at the time. In Margaret's eyes,
something of awesome mystery hung around Greenstrand. The girl
possessed a strong romantic bias. With her head in the mist, she saw
men's virtues looming large; through the same phantascope their faults
became mere miasmas. Greenstrand was a god; in his hands the gold was
Aaron's rod to strike the barren rock, and cause the stream of goodness
to flow until the flood-tide of the millennium was reached.

The girl sincerely pitied his doubts. She saw in the experiment a means
of removing them, and rendering Greenstrand's future peaceful. She only
knew three men — her father, her brother, and Julian Ray, the poet.
And they were all noble.

Therefore mankind must be noble likewise. Greenstrand's experiment
would fail hopelessly. He would realize what a good world it was. The
sunward facet of it dazzled her eyes till the flaw was invisible.

"I am glad," she said simply.

Her long hair was blowing in the wind like a wild mane about her ivory
shoulders; she spoke in prophecies reminiscent of the classics she
had read. She babbled wildly as Cassandra, yet with the gentleness of
Ruth. Greenstrand would be gathered into the fold, the flood-gates of
his millions would be raised, and the golden stream flow over the land
balmily.

"You will fail!" she cried. "I am certain of it. Then you will be
utterly crushed for a time, but your faith will return. But you are not
going to pick those people out who are likely to favour your theory?"

Greenstrand smiled into the beautiful face. "I am no professional
politician, Miss Margaret," he said. "I have not yet learnt the art of
moulding my theories to my facts. On the contrary, failure would please
me particularly. I want to fail. I want to believe that people like
yourself and Ray comprise the lump, and not the leaven. For this reason
I have instructed Death, by letter, to fly at the highest game. Hut he
will not fail."

"He will," Margaret retorted. "I am certain of it. God will not permit
a mere human to stand between Him and the great scheme of salvation.
You must be mad to dream such a thing."

"How do you know that I am not an instrument in God's hands?"
Greenstrand suggested. "The mighty are put down from their seat
sometimes. My whole scheme may be inspired to break the pride of an
arrogant unit, in which case I am not a free agent."

"Heaven ordains everything," Margaret murmured.

"But does it?" Greenstrand urged. "If Heaven ordains everything,
everything is predestined. Therefore, if you commit a murder, you
should not be punished for a thing you cannot help. Your Deity, not
you, is the real criminal. On the other hand, if man is entirely a free
agent——"

"A truce to all this," Ray cried. "Out upon your free-agent theory!
Take the birth and life of a flower, ponder over it, and tell me you
cannot see God's handiwork there if you dare, Arthur. I am sorry, now,
that I had anything to do with your experiment. When the crash comes, I
hope I shall not be too near the ruins."

"The ruins will not be mine," Greenstrand said cynically. "It is a
month now since Death went away, and every day I expect to hear from
him as to the result of the first experiment. All I know, as yet, is
the name of the intended victim."

Ray looked up with languid interest. "I suppose we should be none the
wiser if you were to inform us who it is?" he asked. "Death is anything
but an ambitious man."

"Ambition has nothing to do with it," Greenstrand replied. "What is
mere ambition — only an emotion, at best — compared to the superb
arrogance the contact with much money produces? Death has been with me
long enough to know that gold can procure practically anything. Allied
to this, he has a vivid imagination. He has gone, as I expected he
would, to the top of the tree. After all, a prince is only a man in
disguise. You can't strangle greed with a purple robe, any more than
you can homicide with a rope of hemp. And Wallingford Hope is only
human, like the rest of us."

Ray burst into a hearty laugh. Margaret smiled with amusement.

"Wallingford Hope!" the poet cried. "Is he to be the victim? Why not
the Pope, or Mr. Gladstone, at once? Why, if there is one public man in
this country more than another——"

And Ray paused for sheer lack of words. Everybody knew and admired
the present Secretary of the Continental Department. On his inclusion
in the Cabinet there had been a perfect chorus of praise, even in the
Opposition papers. No words could tell his praises, his virtues were
triumphant, even his microscopic faults were virtues dilapidated. A
man of the people, Wallingford Hope had forced his way to the front by
sheer talent and sterling integrity. He had lately married a wife, who
brought him love and beauty and money. What temptation could be his?

"I am amazed, lost in admiration of Death's audacity," Ray exclaimed.
"Had I been asked to select my beau ideal of a public man, past or
present, I should have unhesitatingly picked out Wallingford Hope.
Why, there is nothing to tempt the man with! He is certain to be the
next Premier; he has almost scornfully refused a peerage; be is a K.G.
Everybody knows that he is persona grata at Court. His seat, at
Wallingford Royal, is an ideal place, for I have been there; and he has
the finest collection of orchids in England. What can Death possibly do
in such a case as this?"

"Spend a couple of millions if he likes," Greenstrand replied
indifferently. "I don't anticipate procuring Wallingford Hope for much
less."

"You have so much faith as that in your money?"

"Naturally. Don't suppose that Death would approach Hope and brutally
request him to betray his trust for so much cash down. I tell you
money can do anything. If the greatest imperial interests tremble in
the balance, if a European war is practically settled, the Rothschilds
can ban the whole thing by a stroke of the pen. Statesmen and armies
forsooth! The destiny of Europe could be solved to-morrow by a handful
of Jews, over a bottle of port and a pound of filberts. Money is the
motive power. Who is the greatest man in Europe?"

"Per se, I suppose you expect me to say the Czar," Ray replied.

"The Czar, decidedly. I shall make no attempt upon the Czar, because
he is not picturesque enough. The late autocrat of all the Russias was
greater than the present one, morally and physically. And yet you will
remember his collapse over the matter of the persecution of the Jews in
his dominions. Who brought that about, I should like to know?"

Ray was silent. Margaret seemed pale and uneasy. Greenstrand was
bringing the gods of her idolatry about her pink ears. A cold haze
uprose from the sea and chilled her; a mist crept across the sky and
veiled the sunshine. Along the headlands a flock of gulls were calling
dismally. Could such things be?

"Oh, you must fail," she cried, "you shall! I cannot believe what you
say. Men are better and nobler than that, and do better things."

"We are not all like you, certainly," Greenstrand said, with a note of
regret in his voice. He was beginning to feel something more than an
idle fancy for Margaret. Her beautiful transparency filled him with
desire — a longing for possession. Were she his wife, he felt that he
would never have occasion to doubt her. She would care for him only.

"I am not different to the rest," Margaret said with some indignation.
"There are thousands better — more useful. We shall convince you yet,
Julien and I. And you will eat the bread of repentance in sackcloth and
ashes."

"Let us hope that I may," Greenstrand replied.

"Novelties are always alluring. For your sake I sincerely hope that
failure will be my portion. At any rate, we shall know in a few days
now. I may hear from Death at any time."

The conversation drifted on to more congenial topics. It was a great
delight of Ray's to draw Margaret out, and display the beauties of her
mind. She lay back upon the short thymy grass, and talked from the
fulness of a ripe understanding. Greenstrand listened; her enthusiasm
stirred him, as a glassy sea is ruffled by the wind. When Margaret rose
to go at length, he pressed her to remain eagerly. But the girl tripped
away down to the valley, saying that the household had need of her
services.

"She is divine," Greenstrand said; "an absolutely perfect woman."

Ray smiled slightly. Such praise from Greenland was rare indeed.

"Strange to hear you say so," the poet responded. "According to your
showing, there is no thing perfect under the sun. She is only human,
after all, you know. How much money would Death want to corrupt her?"

Greenstrand fell into angry mood, therefore illogical. He had been
hoist with his own petard, and no man likes to cut his finger with
his pet weapon. He roundly accused Ray of coarseness, and a desire to
appear for the nonce as a blasé man of the world. It was also a
thing unpardonable that he should point his ribald gibes at so fair a
creature as Margaret.

Ray's features beamed with fun. "Pooh!" he said good-naturedly; "your
armour is only plated, after all. I hit you fairly, my friend; I have
found a weapon with which I can crush you at any time."

"All jewels are not paste," Greenstrand said sulkily.

"No jewels are paste, else they are not jewels. But all diamonds are
merely charcoal — to argue from your recent point of view. I pin my
faith to Margaret. She shall reform you yet, and Death's failure shall
complete the chain. We shall see you a proud father of fair children
and breeder of fat beeves before we have finished the chapter. Now let
us go home and see if there are any letters. There are boiled dabs for
dinner."

There was a pile of letters for Greenstrand, most of which he pitched
into the fire without the formality of opening them. The contents of
most he knew by experience. Beyond these were a bulky packet addressed
by Death, and yesterday's Daily Telephone, forwarded by the same
hand. Greenstrand did passing justice to Ray's cookery before opening
his correspondence. There would be plenty of time whilst Ray was
washing up. The meal despatched, Ray proceeded with his domestic
offices, whilst Greenstrand turned over the Telephone. Presently he
gave a hard chuckle, but his face betrayed no surprise.

"There is an interesting paragraph for you here," he said. "See it for
yourself."

Ray took up the paper. On the fifth page was a sensational heading,
thus—


"FATAL ACCIDENT TO THE CONTINENTAL SECRETARY.

"SUDDEN DEATH OF THE MORGAN AMBASSADOR.

"Just before going to press we are informed that, late this morning,
the Morgan Ambassador was discovered in his library by his valet
quite dead. On retiring to rest, the household left Mr. Wallingford
Hope, M.P., with the Ambassador, and the latter did not leave the
house till daylight. On the police inquiring at the residence of the
latter gentleman in the usual course, they found that the Continental
Secretary had not returned home. Shortly afterwards the startling
intelligence reached Scotland Yard that a body, identified as that
of Mr. Hope, had been found fearfully mangled on the line just
outside Charing Cross station. It is supposed that the right hon.
gentleman must have fallen out of the train, and been killed as he lay
unconscious across the metals. For the present the affair is shrouded
in mystery, and what brought the popular member there it is impossible
to say. The police are investigating the matter. Meanwhile, many
rumours are afloat, but it may be taken that the tragic sequence of
events has no political significance."

"I thought that paragraph would interest you," Greenstrand remarked.

"It's a horrible thing," Ray said hoarsely. "What does Death say?"

"He merely remarks that he sends me a paper whereby I can see for
myself that his efforts have been successful. He goes on to say that
he has placed the facts in the form of a narrative, so that I can see
the result of his first adventure. Death has one or two other victims
marked down, and will advise me as to their experiences in a similar
manner. It should make dramatic reading, and certainly not lack human
interest. Shall I proceed to read you Death's first story?"

"Not yet," Ray protested. "I am too utterly bewildered just at present.
Let us defer it till Margaret can be present. Remember how interested
in the experiment she is. For myself, I feel like a man in a dream."

Greenstrand laid his bulky packet aside. It was evening before Ray
returned with Margaret, who appeared pale and agitated as himself.

"Julien has told me everything," she said. "I could not have believed
it possible. Will you please to read us the story without delay?"

"Certainly," Greenstrand replied. "Push the lamp across the table,
please. I find the narrative to be very clear and succinct. As you
know, it is in the form of a story."

And, followed with breathless interest, Greenstrand read as hereafter
is written.




CHAPTER I. THE EXPERIMENT OF THE DAMASK ORCHID.


No more successful statesman than Wallingford Hope ever held the
Continental portfolio; no orator possessed a greater charm. In one
respect his record was unique; he had represented one constituency
during the whole of his political life.

By rapid strides he had risen to perhaps the most important position
in the Government; even the Opposition newspapers admitted him to be
the right man in the right place — a rare meed of praise when one
considers how profound a student is the modern journalist. It is only
natural that professional Irish patriots and pragmatic Scots should be
less prejudiced where the needs of England are concerned.

Hope possessed a European reputation as a diplomat. He was never
mistaken; anything he foreshadowed usually came to pass. His enemies
said he was dull and stupid; luck favoured him strangely, they
contended. But the Continental Secretary had one golden rule in
diplomacy — a rule so simple and so amazingly successful, that
the wonder is no statesman had ever adopted it before. He used no
diplomatic weapon at all. If a certain line of policy was advanced by
his antagonist, he invariably opposed it, shaping his course in direct
opposition as the other exposed his hand. "Let the policy be your
opponent's, and your business be simply to burke it," was Hope's motto.
No other diplomatist had this view of diplomatic relationship; it had
never occurred to him in his worst moments.

It was difficult to see what Wallingford Hope could require, and what
ambition remained to be gratified. Early in life he had learnt the
lesson that honesty in politics pays best, as it does in every other
trade. He never trimmed, because he was rudely honest; office was by no
means a necessity to a man of his means.

He possessed the outward grace of a D'Orsay, combined with the easy,
polished, worldly courtesy of a Chesterfield. A son of the people,
he found himself at fifty occupying a high position in society, a
favourite at Court. He had, moreover, a beautiful wife, who was devoted
to his interests, and one who had brought him exalted connections by
marriage, and great wealth besides. A Knight of the Garter, and the
certainty of becoming the same of the Thistle, Hope apparently had
nothing to desire. True, he hadn't a tortoiseshell tom cat, or a blue
Mauritius postage-stamp; but these were spots on the sun, and besides,
he didn't want them. His hobby was horticulture, and his proudest boast
that he possessed the finest collection of orchids in the world; he
had them all, with the exception of the Purple Damask. But nobody else
had one either — the only specimen ever found and brought to Europe
unfortunately expired. Most people will remember the gloom cast by that
appalling catastrophe.

This dodo amongst flowers, this blooming auk, so to speak, is
fully described in the "Encyclopaedia Botanica," enshrined in a
special article all to itself, written by no less than four eminent
authorities. Originally discovered in Sumatra by a Dutch hunter, the
latter disposed of it to a local merchant for a pint of rum and a copy
of the "Arabian Nights." From thence the Purple Damask passed into
the hands of a syndicate, who finally sold it by auction to Ambrose
Barclay, Esq. — subsequently brained in a drunken brawl by his dear
friend the Tipton Slasher, of fistic fame. Ten thousand pounds was the
price paid by this gentle patron of the Arts for his treasure; not
because he wanted it, or because he knew an orchid from an orange,
but simply because it struck him as a neat and brilliant way of
disposing of a large sum of money without unnecessary exertion. In this
gentleman's possession the orchid passed away.

To describe the flower: it bore no more than three blooms at one time;
it was a large bell of deep imperial purple, and scored throughout in
rich orange with a pattern so neat and regular, as to resemble fine
Irish linen. To reproduce this treasure, Wallingford Hope spared no
time or expense. Attempts were made by growers to find another; private
collectors, away in primeval forests, were risking their valuable
lives, and perilling their more valuable digestions, to obtain the
reward offered by the Continental Secretary. Rumours, more or less
authenticated, reached England from time to time, to the effect that
the Purple Damask still existed. A millionaire collector in New South
Wales was supposed to possess one, for which he would accept a fabulous
sum. Another was hidden away in Paris by an eccentric grand-duke, who
kept it for his own inspection. He neither denied nor refuted the soft
impeachment, when questioned. Still, as he had lately lost largely at
Monte Carlo, Hope had expectations in this quarter.

But there were other things to occupy his attention besides orchids,
damask or otherwise. During his term of office, the Continental
Secretary had been endeavouring to conclude a treaty with Libania.
Hitherto he had been baffled by the intrigues of Morgany, the Foreign
Minister of which state had thwarted him at every turn. To Morgany,
a treaty between England and Libania meant the thrusting back of the
clock for fifty years, and a consequent check upon Morgany's ambitious
schemes. On the other hand, it represented to England a practically new
route to the East, a new outlet for trade, and additional prestige in
distant Europe. The Grand Hereditary Caliph of Libania had shuffled and
wriggled; he had promised and deferred; but Hope persisted. It was in
for a penny, in for a pound, this time. If successful, popular applause
was his portion; if he failed, it would mean something like political
extinction.

Urged on by Hope, who spoke with undoubted authority, the Cabinet was
deeply pledged to the carrying out of the Libanian Treaty. Latterly
they had been losing credit in the country — also bye-elections —
and the brilliant prestige of this course was expected to restore the
balance of popular favour. He of Libania had been brought to his senses
at length, and there only remained Morgany to be dealt with.

It is hardly necessary to say that the lines of the treaty were a
profound secret. The feather had been nicely drawn over the eyes of
Admiral Mongolifor, Morgany's ambassador at St. James's, and he of
Libania was practically landed. How much money he owed England in cash
and pledged credit the Premier did not care to think; certainly there
would be a pretty fuss in the constituencies if the truth came out.
But if, on the other hand, the treaty was ratified, they could proudly
point out how, at the outlay of a few pecuniary sprats, they had landed
one of the greatest whales from the ocean of finance.

Apparently Mongolifor slept. Hope had assured him that a treaty between
England and Libania had practically been signed. The admiral — a
diplomat to his finger-tips — had immediately set down the information
as a colossal lie, and gone away under the impression that the last
thing England required was a treaty with Libania. He hadn't the least
notion what they wanted; but since Hope informed him that it was a
treaty, he immediately concluded it to be something diametrically
opposite.

Lulled into security, Morgany was apparently doing nothing. The least
inkling of the truth — such, for instance, as an intimation of the
fact that diplomatic relations between England and Libania were broken
off — would have seen fifty thousand Morgan troops on Libanian soil
within twenty-four hours. They would have forced a treaty out of the
fat, lethargic prince before England could interfere. Their superior
geographical position rendered them dangerous; therefore the utmost
secrecy and caution were necessary on the part of ministers.

Still the treaty remained unsigned. Hope pressed the Libanian
ambassador in the latter's more sober moments, then finally threatened.
The ambassador's salary was in arrear two quarters, and he was
desperate. He puffed a cigarette in Hope's private room at the
Continental Office, in defiance of all rules.

"It has come to this," Hope said firmly. "It is no longer a question of
what you intend to do, but what we require you to perform. When are you
ready to sign?"

"Let's drop all official nonsense," Mason Ali replied. "You and I were
at Rugby together, before I made such an ass of myself, and I can't
forget it. Fortune compels me to serve that adipose old scamp over
yonder in various shady ways, and d—d sorry I am. To tell the honest
truth, Hope, we don't intend to sign the treaty at all."

"Then what the devil do you mean to do?"

"Barney, as we used to say at school," Mason Ali replied. "Just barney
as long as we can keep the ball rolling. Those are my instructions, and
I have carried them out well, Lord knows. Oh, he is a downy old rascal,
is my old man."

"I suppose you are alluding to his Majesty, King Selim, of Libania?"
Hope asked grimly.

"That's the bloke," Mason Ali replied. "How familiar the old school
words come, to be sure. Don't be angry, old chap; I'm just as miserable
about it as you are. The fact is, Sancho Panza — I mean Selim — is,
one way and another, pretty well played out. What with his harem, and
his wine, and his gambling, he is frequently as hard up as I am. For
certain considerations you are to have a lien on the harbour-dues, on
the ruby-mines, and further, you are to buy from him the waterway along
the Magnos, and the land for a Marmora Canal. You can't do it, because
these things are all disposed of already.

The Continental Secretary started. Yet he had half feared as much.

"You don't mean that Morgany——" he suggested.

"Nothing of the kind. Morgany is standing off at present — afraid of
Russia, I expect. If they knew you were moving, they would risk it, and
spoil your game quicker than you could dot an i. All the concessions
you speak of were sold two years ago to a Yankee for a quarter of a
million dollars. The sacred dragon jewels were pledged as a guarantee
of good faith, Brother Jonathan being too astute to part without."

"But if Prince Selim should repudiate ————"

"And let the people know that an infidel has the marbles? My dear
fellow, the populace would tear the old man in pieces; his very guards
would murder him. You haven't seen Eastern fanaticism as I have."

"Then we shall have to purchase from the American."

"You can't do that, because another Richmond has been before you.
Hiram L. Cobber has disposed of his grants, including the sacred
alley taw, to a mysterious chap called the Chevalier Beckton, a grim
skull-and-cross-bones individual, with a face like an enamelled mask.
He is living at present in a place he has furnished at Hampstead, and a
veritable little palace. What his game is I can't say."

"You know the Chevalier Beckton?" Hope asked.

"I don't know him," Mason Ali replied. "He's not the kind of man to
permit any one to do that, if I am a judge. But I have dined at his
house more than once. Would you like to try your hand upon him?"

"Like it! My dear Mason, it is absolutely necessary. You must bring us
together."

"On my head be it," Mason Ali replied. "You can tell Beckton that I
mentioned the concessions. Perhaps you may get them at a price. I don't
suppose he bought them to look at. And why don't you get the King of
Fizzihali to squeeze Selim for you?"

He of Fizzihali ruled the dominion adjacent to Libania, an Oriental
prince of some wisdom and unusual sobriety. Add to which his Majesty
was at present in England. Years agone he had received his education
here.

"It never occurred to me," Hope replied. "Ayoub is a man of great
intelligence——"

"And a collector of orchids, to boot," Mason Ali remarked.

It was the great bond of sympathy between the Continental Secretary and
Ayoub II. Ofttimes they had discussed the Purple Damask together, and
deplored its loss.

"That is settled, then," Hope said, looking at his watch. "I meet Ayoub
to-morrow night at the Morgan Embassy, when I will sound him. Meanwhile
you are to procure me an interview with Chevalier Beckton."

"A private one, if possible. Mongolifor has some inkling of the
concession business, therefore the less he knows of the matter the
better. An revoir."

Mason Ali was as good as his word. The same afternoon a note from him
arrived at the Continental Office to the effect that he had seen the
chevalier, who would be at home at eight, when he should be pleased
to see Mr. Wallingford Hope. If the latter called at Bank House,
Hampstead, in the name of Smith, he would find everything satisfactory.

Hope despatched an early dinner, and calling a cab from a rank some
distance from his residence, drove away to Hampstead. Arrived at Bank
House, and giving his name, he was immediately admitted to the library.

The place was large and roomy, and furnished in the most exquisite
taste. Evidently Chevalier Beckton was a man of no ordinary
attainments. His pictures were as well chosen as his books, which was
saying a great deal. Beyond the library was a small conservatory,
lighted by electricity, towards which Hope's footsteps gravitated
naturally. The flowers there were of the rarest kind, and calculated to
delight the heart of the connoisseur. Some of the orchids were almost
unique.

Suddenly Hope caught his breath. He rubbed his eyes. Just before him,
on a bracket, stood a small pot containing a tiny plant, on which
were two blossoms. They were bell-shaped, of a deep imperial purple,
and marked with a distinct chaste design in orange. No starving
miner suddenly stumbling upon a pocket of gold could have been more
powerfully moved than the Continental Secretary. There was no doubt
about the matter — he stood face to face with a living specimen of the
Purple Damask Orchid.

"You are admiring my flowers, Mr. Hope?"

Wallingford Hope started as if the quiet voice in his ear had been a
pistol-shot. He turned to find the Chevalier Beckton standing beside
him. The latter was easy and self-contained, his features expressed
nothing, the man stood behind a mask.

"They fascinate me," Hope replied. "Do you know what this is,
Chevalier?"

"An extremely rare orchid, I believe," the chevalier replied. "I won
it a day or two ago as the result of a gambling bout with a certain
grand-duke, who shall be nameless. The parting was painful, but the
fortunes of war were mine, and væ victis."

Hope was still trembling with agitation. He appeared incapable of
tearing himself away from the contemplation of the velvety blooms; the
orange fire seemed to burn him to the core.

"Are you quite certain it is safe here?" he inquired.

"Perfectly, since I alone know its value. Nobody else is aware that it
is in England. There are two blooms upon it, as you see; there were
three yesterday."

"One was, unfortunately, destroyed?"

"On the contrary, I gave it away. They are perfect flowers."

"They are, indeed," Hope said fervently. "If you should care to dispose
of the plant——"

"I beg your pardon?"

The Continental Secretary flushed, and hastily changed the subject.
After all, he was there to discuss something far more important than
flowers. Returning to the library, Hope plunged into the subject next
his heart with the directness which had stood him in such good stead
where diplomacy and finesse had so often failed. He understood that the
chevalier held certain important concessions from the Prince of Libania
— concessions absolutely secured, and of vital importance for the
Government to obtain.

"In short, what you have to dispose of, we are prepared to purchase,"
Hope concluded. "I presume you are in search of a market for them?"

"The market is not difficult of access," the chevalier said dryly. "It
is not a long journey from here to the Morgan Embassy, for instance."

"Then Mongolifer knows your position?"

"He suspects it. He is not particularly anxious, because Morgany is in
a position to take what you are under the necessity of purchasing. The
thing with me is certainly a matter of business. I am prepared to sell
for a million sterling."

"An exorbitant sum of money, surely."

"Not when the life of a Government depends upon it. You cannot draw
back, and I am master of the situation. I know exactly how matters
stand, because my purse is long enough to command every channel of
information. The lines of your proposed treaty are pretty well known to
me."

"You are an Englishman, I presume, Chevalier Beckton?" Hope asked.

A narrow parting of the chevalier's lips heralded the dawn of a smile,
a still-born one.

"For purposes of identity, yes," he admitted. "Beyond that, my
sovereign is my pocket. The patriotic nerve has been paralyzed for
years."

"Will you be perfectly frank with me?" Hope asked.

"Brutally so, if you like. I make you an offer, which you may accept or
reject, as you please. It is all the same to me, because Morgan gold is
as good as English. One way or another, the matter must be determined
shortly. I am a sufferer from angina pectoris, a disease which may
take me off at any moment. Only yesterday I had the worst attack I
have had for years. My concessions are yours at the price named, and I
give you a day to think them over. Let me have your decision this time
to-morrow, and the Treaty is yours. Your word that the money shall be
forthcoming will be enough for me."

The Continental Secretary took his leave, well pleased, on the whole,
with his interview. He felt no misgivings as to the result. There was a
Cabinet Council the following morning, at which the Libanian question
would be fully discussed, and, doubtless, the million would be found.
It was, after all, a small price to pay for the subsequent magnificent
return. To make assurance doubly sure, it was necessary to enlist the
sympathy of Prince Ayoub of Fizzihali. Hope anticipated meeting the
potentate at the Morgan Embassy the following evening, when he could
introduce the matter. Ayoub was most friendly disposed towards England;
he was known to dislike and despise his royal cousin of Libania; and,
moreover, he had a perfect mania for the collection of orchids.

But things were not destined to go quite as smoothly as Hope
anticipated. With a wrap over his dress-coat, he repaired the following
evening as Smith, via the humble hansom, to Hampstead, as arranged,
with the information that the Government were prepared to accept the
chevalier's offer unconditionally. With some impatience Hope waited
in the library for his host's coming. A solemn functionary in black
appeared instead.

"I extremely regret, sir," he said, "the chevalier cannot be seen. He
has had a heart attack, which has prostrated him; indeed, we fear the
worst."

Hope's heart fell. Somewhere outside two people were talking. The quiet
voice of one could only belong to a doctor.

"Absolutely hopeless!" Hope caught the words— "last till morning.
Couple of hours, perhaps — my professional reputation — fearful
disease. No use my stopping — night."

"Is your master conscious?" Hope asked.

"Oh yes, sir. He has been conscious all along. The pain is what is
killing him."

"Leave me here for ten minutes," Hope directed. "I must write a few
lines to the chevalier, which you can give him at the first favourable
opportunity."

The solemn functionary placed writing materials to Hope's hand, bowed,
and withdrew, closing the door behind him. Wallingford Hope's mind was
in a whirl. The chevalier's death would upset all his delicately laid
plans; the crowning work of his life looked like ending in disastrous
failure. He hastily scribbled a few lines, and then destroyed them.
After all, what was the use? Mechanically he wandered into the small
conservatory. The Purple Damask confronted him.

Failing the chevalier — now a broken reed — there was nobody but
Ayoub of Fizzihali to fall back upon. Could he be really trusted? Was
there any way of bribing him?

The Continental Secretary wiped his forehead. The bribe was to his
hand. He had heard the doctor say that Beckton could not last till
morning. There the Purple Damask stood before him; of its value, of its
presence in the house even, nobody knew. And Ayoub II., like a spoilt
child that he was, was prepared to give half his kingdom for that
diabolical orchid. What a gaudy lure it was! It could be held out, a
promised gift when certain things were accomplished. And in the mean
time Hope could divide the sacred flower so as to possess one himself.
Again, the pot was small, and easily concealed in the long grey wrap
the Continental Secretary wore. Not a single occupant of the house knew
who he was, save as Mr. Smith. And long before morning the chevalier
would be as clay.

Two minutes later the demon orchid lay snugly concealed under the
Continental Secretary's coat. Five minutes after that he was being
rapidly whirled westward, wondering if he would wake presently, and
find it all a dream. Just before ten, he let himself into his own house
with his latch-key, and made his way to the deserted drawing-room. Lady
Ermyntrude Hope had already departed for the Morgan Embassy. Amongst
a back row of pots in the conservatory, Hope placed his treasure. He
touched the velvety trumpet flowers with wet, shaky fingers. Then he
threw off his agitation with a strong effort. There was no danger —
there could be none. The only thing now was to carry the thing off
boldly. He broke off one of the bell-shaped blooms, and replaced it in
his coat for the rose he had been wearing. Ayoub should see it there,
and draw his own conclusions. Further concealment was weakness.

The brilliant reception-rooms of the Morgan Embassy were crowded. A
princess, sister to Admiral Mongolifor, acted as hostess. She was full
of regrets at the absence of the minister; he was detained by important
business, but had faithfully promised to return at midnight. Did not
Mr. Hope know the slavery diplomatic work entailed?

Hope bewailed the common lot gracefully, and passed on. He found his
quarry presently — a little snuff-coloured man, with wrinkled skin and
twinkling almond eyes. He was dressed in European costume of immaculate
cut, and was discussing a new music-hall dancer, with fluid knowledge
of his subject. As he glanced up at Hope, his whole manner changed; his
eyes rolled; he showed his teeth in a fearful grin.

Hope laid his finger on his lips, and walked on. Presently Ayoub joined
him.

"You have got it," he said, in a hoarse whisper. "Ah, I recognized the
glorious flower directly, and seemed to feel its presence in the room.
Had you appeared wearing that bloom at my court, I would have had you
strangled by the guard; I would, Hope, by God!"

"I don't doubt it in the least," Hope smiled dryly. "Your Highness must
admit that Western civilization has its advantages, after all."

"For you — yes. But tell me where you got it. Did you manage to obtain
merely one bloom, or have you a whole plant hidden away somewhere? I
must have it, Hope; I must, or I shall do something desperate. If you
don't oblige me, I'll give Russia that chain of forts on the Pyrus;
I'll resign my claim to the Monte Pass. Lord, I wish you were dead!"

"There is no occasion for you to do anything of the kind, your
Highness," Hope replied. "I have obtained a plant of the orchid; but
how, must remain my secret. And the flower shall be yours later on —
upon certain conditions, of course."

"I didn't suppose you would part with it for nothing," Ayoub growled.
"Speak!"

"You expect harsh conditions, whereas they are nothing of the kind. As
you know very well, I have been trying to bring your neighbour to book
for some time. You must help me. You must throw your influence into the
scale of England. Will you kindly follow me carefully?"

Ayoub listened attentively enough. He had all the Oriental love of
intrigue for its own sake, and an inducement to throw himself into
Hope's scheme which was almost overpowering.

"I will act as you require," he said in conclusion, "and I can soon
bring Selim to his senses. Why didn't you make it worth my while to
move before?"

Hope smiled. Princes, like less favoured mortals, rarely work for
nothing, and the less they are trusted the better. And Opposition
members have a nasty habit of asking questions.

"You must wait till I give you the sign," Hope concluded. "And now, as
I see Mongolifor coming this way, we had better change the subject."

The Morgan minister lounged up to the others. Ayoub's dark eyes
regarded him with astonishment, almost dismay.

"Look at him," he whispered. "The drops of rain do not fall singly. By
the beard of the prophet, but he is wearing a Purple Damask also."

A sudden nausea gripped the Continental Secretary. A bitter taste
filled his mouth. But it was too late to draw back now; too late to
drag the flower from his coat, and crush it into the carpet. Admiral
Mongolifor, a spare little man, whose perils on the deep had been
strictly confined to the Channel passage, smiled shrewdly.

"Where did you get that flower from?" the Prince of Fizzihali demanded.

"Unique, is it not?" Mongolifor asked. "At least, I thought so till I
saw Mr. Hope's. Mine came off a plant with three blossoms. I suspect
it only boasts one now. May I beg the favour of a few words with you
alone, after my guests have departed?"

Hope nodded. Words with him at that moment were as engraved diamonds.
Mongolifor took his seat by Ayoub's side, and began to talk volubly.

"I suppose this flower comes from a rare plant," he said. "I saw the
gentleman who gave me this bloom, not more than half an hour ago! He
tells me that his plant has been stolen. The thief is not likely to get
much for his trouble, as Scotland Yard is already on the alert. My dear
Hope, you do not think of going already?"

"Did I look like it?" Hope responded. "Who is your friend, by the way?"

"A Chevalier Beckton, a really wonderful man, clothed and in his right
mind, and full of the loss of his pet flower. I pity the thief."

"Then pity Hope," Ayoub laughed, "for he has come into possession of a
Purple Damask, which he refuses to give any account of. Strange, is it
not?"

Hope smiled. Yet his heart was sick within him. He would have given
anything at that moment for a decent excuse to get away home, just
for one minute, to destroy that accursed flower. But such a course
was useless, since he had boasted to Prince Ayoub of its possession.
And the Oriental would have sacrificed him ten times over rather than
lose the promised treasure. He was ruined beyond the hope of recovery.
Mongolifor had some deep scheme, some game to play, as Hope could see
by the cunning in his eyes.

By this time the company had dwindled away. Ayoub went yawning off to
his carriage. Mongolifor led the way to his library, and shut the door,
carefully locking it. He motioned Hope to seat, and passed a case of
cigarettes across the table.

"My friend," he said gently, "you are going to give me the lines of
your proposed treaty."

There was no mistaking the threat underlying the apparently courteous
words. The dry, hard face opposite Hope looked like flexible granite.

"I told you we were negotiating a treaty," he said.

"And, actually, I did not believe you. Still, up to a certain point,
I did not mind you going, because I knew that Selim of Libania was
powerless. I was aware that certain concessions had been granted, which
he dared not repudiate. So long as those concessions were alive, I knew
you to be helpless. I knew that Selim was playing with you. At the same
time, I deemed it just as well to have your movements watched. When I
discovered that you had found the concession-holder, I woke up to the
fact that business was meant. To tell you the honest truth, I have
myself been in negotiation with Beckton for the purchase of his rights."

"He never told me that," Hope exclaimed.

"Why should he? Like politics, there is no patriotism in business.
The chevalier's sudden illness was a blow to you. When you got there
to-night, I was in the house. Deeming Beckton to be as good as dead,
you took the orchid——"

"A statement to which I give a complete denial."

"Very good. But denial is useless, when the same is in your
drawing-room at this very moment. Two or three of Beckton's servants
can identify the mysterious Mr. Smith; the chevalier will repeat how
he told you the story of the missing orchid. Again, how are you going
to account for the possession of that unique blossom? You are fairly
trapped."

The Continental Secretary abandoned the useless struggle.

"Get to the point," he said hoarsely. "What do you require?"

"A complete disclosure of the lines of your proposed treaty; nothing
less will satisfy me. I have the interests of my own country to guard.
You dare not refuse. Defy me, and you will be in the hands of the
police within an hour — a common, vulgar thief."

"And if I comply with your request, I am ruined just the same."

"Pardon me, there is all the possible difference. One scandal will be
open and flagrant; the other merely a veiled one. Naturally, I shall
act upon your information, which will cause you an unpleasant hour
or two at your Cabinet Council on Friday. But your colleagues will
not betray you; for the sake of the party, your resignation will be
accepted quietly. I propose giving you an hour to decide."

Hope made one last effort for freedom. The house was perfectly still,
the door was locked, and Hope sat between his antagonist and the bell.

"You do not hold all the winning cards," he said quietly. "In the
first place, who is the Chevalier Beckton, whose word is to be placed
before mine? Contrast our positions, please, in the eyes of the English
electorate. Suppose I destroy the orchid, and deny the whole thing?
What then?"

"Why, then all your pretty schemes with Libania would fall to the
ground."

"Perhaps. But I should save my reputation, and baffle you."

Mongolifor smiled dryly. He liked a good fighter. Still, in the way of
business, clemency was a virtue to be dealt out sparingly.

"You would not baffle me at all," he said. "Forewarned is forearmed."

"Again, perhaps you forget that I have Ayoub on my side."

"Only on condition that you give him the very floral treasure the
existence of which you are prepared to deny. Check, is it not?"

Hope acknowledged the point with a trembling hand.

"Besides," Mongolifor resumed, "Ayoub is not to be depended upon at
all. You must carry out your promise to him, or he will betray you
— certain. If you fail, you throw him into our hands, ready to do
anything to be revenged for your broken promises. And to fulfil your
promise would be political and social suicide."

"You put your points clearly," Hope responded.

"So, you see, all the avenues are closed. Beckton's word against yours
is slight. But, consider everything. There is Beckton prepared to prove
his orchid; he can bring a grand-duke from Paris to do so. The servants
can identify you. I can add my humble testimony. And you may be certain
that Ayoub, who is a prince, mind you, will add his. Come, we are
wasting time here. The treaty."

Hope's face hardened as molten metal cools in a mould.

"One question," he said. "I admit your position. This is a deliberate
plot to snare me."

"Take it as you please. Why so angry? Had you not acted the thief, the
plot had failed."

"True," said Hope. "I suppose you alone know the real reason for this
conspiracy?"

"Practically," Mongolifor returned. "The rest is mere conjecture."

"Ah, then there is one way to preserve my reputation — the only way.
For the present, the kernel of the secret is shared between us. If you
happened to die——"

Mongolifor jumped to his feet. He saw something in Hope's eyes that
caused the blood to leave his shrivelled face. He had gone too far.
Hope had found a way out.

"Hope!" the admiral exclaimed—"Hope, for the love of Heaven——"

He said no more, for the Continental Secretary was upon him. The
struggle was between a trained athlete and a child. Hope bore his
antagonist back upon a couch. Over his mouth and nostrils he placed a
silken antimacassar, tightly rolled into a ball. With cruel force he
pressed this down, pressed it down with the vice of an iron despair. A
few moments later, and Mongolifor had ceased to breathe.

The heart still fluttered. Hope glanced swiftly round the room. A
bottle over the fireplace aroused his attention. At the base thereof
was a red poison-label. It was marked, "The drops at bedtime. Ten drops
only."

Hope smiled. Fortune was favouring him. Mongolifor was not dead yet.
Half the contents of the phial Hope forced down the unconscious man's
throat. Then he placed the body in an armchair close to the table, and
laid the bottle hard by.

By this time Hope was absolutely calm. He took from a writing-case some
paper; he carefully chose a pen. Rapidly he dashed off a letter to his
wife, stating that business had called him out of town, and that he
should not be back till late the next day. Afterwards he sealed and
stamped it. Then he quietly left the house, and walked to Charing Cross
station. The night was full of stars. There was silence everywhere.

* * * * *

At this moment the Purple Damask is in the possession of Prince Ayoub,
presented to him by the Chevalier Beckton, whose concessions from
Libania are unfortunately no longer valuable, a Morgan occupation being
followed by the flight of Selim XII.

The strange death of Wallingford Hope is likely to remain a mystery;
but as to the disaster which robbed Morgany of one of its brightest
ornaments, the thing was perfectly clear. Like a great many other
brilliant men, Admiral Mongolifor suffered from insomnia, and, as many
clever men have done before, carelessness with narcotics had resulted
in disaster. As to Hope, his letter to his wife was, to a certain
extent, an explanation. A poor relation, a mauvais sujet, had
suddenly become troublesome, and had to be got out of the way without
delay. No doubt the door of the carriage had been carelessly closed
by a sleepy porter, and the rest followed. Only one man could have
told the story by conjecture, and he held his tongue; and that man was
Chevalier Beckton, who, a few days later, was seated in a first-class
carriage, alone on his way to Dover.

The chevalier smiled to himself as the train steamed out of the
station. Before unfolding his Times, he took the ticket out of
the leathern direction-tablet of his one portmanteau, and, tearing
it up, replaced it with another. On the latter, written neatly on a
visiting-card, was the legend —



"Death,

"Passenger to Dover."




CHAPTER II.—THE EXPERIMENT OF THE COTTAGE BY THE SEA.


WHEN the history of modern advancement comes to be written, it is hoped
that the salt herring will be accorded its proper place. There is a
romance about the herring — salted. Save as an article of food, it is
entitled to the highest veneration.

Without it, much Scotch divinity would never have been written; but
for its sustaining influence, Alma Mater had been robbed of some of
her most brilliant sons; save for its saline properties, medicine
might have lagged considerably. How many Olympians, vide history,
have departed from the Highlands with a mother's blessing and a barrel
of salt herrings, to Glasgow or Edinburgh, and coined their scaly
sustainers into fame?

But for the keg of fish in question, plus another of oatmeal, the
career of Donald McManus might have remained unwritten and unsung. The
son of a Caithness cotter, McManus had, at an early age, developed
a talent for drawing. This gift had been fostered and encouraged by
his dominie, and subsequently by a travelling artist, who, being an
egregious failure himself, naturally retained his early enthusiasm.
Only the successful abandon hope, and clothe themselves in gloomy
prophecy.

The praise sufficed for Donald. He had the ingrained Scotch faculty of
stern self-denial; no privation daunted him. He would become a great
artist; he would paint pictures redolent of the soul, and breathing the
true atmosphere. The soul of the painter was there; the scent of the
heather was as the breath of his nostrils. The lad was a poet born,
only he spoke by the brush, and not by the pen.

The beauty of the summer sea, the glorious grandeur of the winter
storm, the misty pall of a swelling sunrise behind the hills, thrilled
him to the finger-tips. To have a fair home of his own, overlooking
some wide expanse of tossing water, where he could paint his pictures,
was the zenith of his ambition. For the rest, he was not bad to look
upon, this brown-skinned, grey-eyed Kelt, with the strong sinewy limbs
and lips indicative of dogged honest resolution.

So he had fared for the South in due season, with the herrings and
the oatmeal, the mother's blessing, and four pounds in silver, all en
règle. Then for a time a mighty octopus, called, in rude language,
London, held him bound.

McManus lived, God knows how. But he did live; he took medals and
scholarships; he passed over to Rome and Paris on the strength of
these. Masters and critics prophesied a fine fortune for him. As a
natural consequence, he found himself, at the end of three years, more
or less in pawn to his frame-maker, and doing drawings for a firm of
religious publishers at two and ninepence each. There was gold in the
tents of Shem, but Donald would have none of it. Other men — sons of
Belial, they — drew the baud liberal of leg and kindly as to pectoral
development, and lo! wine flowed in their tabernacles; but Donald
turned from them. His stern rugged honesty kept him from this. He knew
that success would come at length; but there were times when he beat
his breast against the bars, and longed for the briny gust and the
slumbrous roar of the wild North Sea.

Donald sat in his ragged coat, working at his black and white. His
features were pinched and drawn, there were blue hollows under his
eyes. To tell the truth, he had eaten nothing since breakfast time, for
obvious reasons. But it was characteristic of Donald that he owed his
landlady nothing. Therefore, when there came a knock at the door, he
boldly bade the intruder enter; for in his heart there was no fear of a
creditor.

There came into the room a slim figure, clad in the neatest black. He
appeared to be the beau ideal of a gentleman's servant. His manner
was smooth and deferent, as if he had found himself in the dazzling
presence of a duchess. But the face of the man seemed to be hidden
behind a mask.

"I think you are Mr. Donald McManus, sir," he said.

Donald admitted the correctness of this thesis, and waited. An
Englishman would have asked the other's business. This is a point where
a Scotchman shows superiority.

"My name is Barker," the intruder resumed. "I am employed by Lord
Marcus Barrs."

"A poor creature, with more money than sense," McManus said sotto
voce.

"Quite so, sir. But his lordship is a better judge of pictures than you
may suppose. He has one or two of yours which he has picked up——"

"Cheap," Donald interrupted. "Man, your employer has lucid intervals."

"He has one at present, sir," Mr. Barker replied, without a ghost of a
smile. "His lordship is staying at his place at Cromer, where the yacht
is lying. Miss Agnes Maitland and her mother are staying with my lord.
You have heard of the lady, sir?"

Donald nodded curtly. In his quaint vocabulary, Agnes Maitland was a
play-actress. Her record was less dubious than that of others less
beautiful; she had never leased a theatre, for instance, backed by
a blasé capitalist, and she carried her mother about everywhere,
as part of her personal luggage. She was too vicious to be anything
but virtuous; she was the stuff to marry well eventually, and develop
serious qualities. Meanwhile, she was a beautiful mummer, desirous of
becoming Lady Marcus Barrs without delay.

"What has the lady to do with it?" Donald demanded.

"Well, sir, she is a rather important factor," was the reply. "In
short, I am deputed to ask if you can see your way to coming to Cromer,
and painting Miss Maitland's picture. Of course, you will come on your
own terms."

Donald hesitated — and was lost. A sweltering heat rose from the
blistering asphalte outside; the air was insufferable. Down yonder,
the blue waves would be rolling in crisp from the sea; visions of dark
pools under great dank rocks, and of yellow corn lying to the wind,
rose before Donald's eyes. Why not? Miss Maitland's grasp upon her
character was still robust; there was no open scandal. This argument
has a weird fascination for the Calvinistic mind, and it swayed
McManus. Again, there was something in the refined luxury of a country
house. Because a man practises rigid economy, it is no proof that he
does not appreciate the couch of silk and the cooking of the lively
Gaul.

"I'll just come," Donald said shortly. "When shall I be there?"

Mr. Barker indicated a likely train on the following afternoon, with an
intimation that a carriage should meet the same at Cromer. Also, with
commendable delicacy, he produced a sum of money which he hinted might
be regarded as expenses. But McManus had no false pride of that kind.
He certainly expected his expenses to be paid, and whether the money
came first or last was a matter of indifference.

The next afternoon found Donald at Cromer. The whiff of the sea, the
wide expanse of blue trending away to the horizon, filled him with
delight. Presently the carriage drove up to a long low white house with
trim lawns in front, and a belt of trees behind. The place was small,
but appointed in the most exquisite taste. It was the beau ideal of the
model residence of Donald's dreams. A place like that, with economy,
could be supported upon £500 a year. Lord Marcus was a man to be
envied, assuredly.

"A nice place, sir," remarked Barker, who had accompanied McManus. "It
used to be a farmhouse till my lord found the tenant a residence on the
other side. This house and the farm was left his lordship by an uncle;
it produces about £600 a-year, sir. A good many people would be content
with this, Mr. McManus."

Donald agreed cordially. A certain unreasoning jealousy of Lord Marcus
possessed him. That man had inherited a million of money, besides the
reversion of the family estates on the death of his elder brother, a
confirmed invalid. True, most of the million, derived from a godfather,
was pretty well exhausted, but what of that?

McManus descended to dinner in a sarcastic frame of mind. He found
his host lounging in the drawing-room, a slight fair man with white
hair and eyebrows, and features bearing a ludicrous likeness to those
of a rabbit. He was dressed in the last stage of fashion, and looked
uneasily miserable.

"You're a good chappie to come down here, you know," Lord Marcus
observed. "I hope you won't find it a fearful bore, and all that kind
of thing, you know."

"I'll just try and make the best of it, my lord," McManus said dryly.

Why should he explain to this fatuous idiot his delight at the sight
of the wrinkled blue waves? Donald asked himself. And no man gains by
belittling himself.

"You'll have to sell me a lot of pictures, you know," Lord Marcus
went on. "Send for all you've got, dear chappie; I'll buy 'em from
you. Tarter — you know Tarter, the critic — says they're a good
investment. A good investment would be rather a novelty for me."

Donald professed his gratitude. He knew perfectly well that there would
be money in his pictures some day. Why should not he have his share of
the million? The stage and the ring — both of the rings — had had
their percentage. There was money in the idea. Before Donald left that
night he had written to London for all his recent productions.

The dinner-party was completed presently by a counterpart of Lord
Marcus, who rejoiced in the name of Dodo. He was a considerably finer
animal than his lordship, and, if possible, more fatuous. He also,
Donald found, rejoiced in the possession of much money. For purposes of
identification, he appeared on the bookmakers' account — debit side —
as Mr. Guy Warner.

Warner's present mission in life appeared to be his devotion to Miss
Agnes Maitland. The spoilt beauty ignored him as she did Donald,
also her mother, a faded woman of dejected aspect, like a crushed
cabbage-rose, whose forlorn helplessness was somewhat militated by the
possession of a pair of keen, greedy, hawk-like eyes.

Miss Maitland's mission, on the other hand, was to marry Lord Marcus.
The dissipation of the penultimate million mattered but little, since
in a short time he would become Earl St. Molyneux, with estates in half
a dozen countries. Despite her brilliancy and engaging manners, it
seemed to Donald that Lord Marcus was more afraid of his charmer than
anything else, and would cheerfully have freed himself from her charms.

Apart from the strangeness of the surroundings, Donald enjoyed his
dinner. The artistic confusion of glittering silver and red-shaded
lamps, the blend of white and silver, and feathery ferns, appealed to
the painter instinct. Red peaches blushed against their russet leaves,
the scarlet fragrance of strawberries filled the air. A pool of light
fell upon the table, leaving the rest of the room in Rembrandtesque
shadow.

Presently a servant entered and tendered Lord Marcus a telegram on a
silver tray. He gave a slight groan as he laid it on the table.

"The bulldog's dead, for a million," Dodo murmured with deep sympathy.

"Worse, dear chap," Lord Marcus replied. "Ethel's passing through here
to-morrow on her way from Scotland with Lady Malmsbury, and proposes to
lunch with us:"

Miss Maitland laughed merrily. But the light in her eye was the lurid
glare of combat. The cause of strife Dodo explained to McManus over a
confidential cigarette after coffee.

"Lady Ethel Malmsbury's going to marry Marky," he said, "that's if Aggy
don't. There's pots of money on it at the clubs; but I've backed Ethel
for three monkeys at evens. It's a good bet, because I could hedge to
win, but I shan't."

"I should have fancied you would have favoured Miss Maitland," Donald
said dryly.

"I tumble," Dodo responded in the friendliest possible spirit. "I'm
dead gone on Aggy. I would marry her to-morrow, if she'd take me, which
she would if Marky was out of the way. My mater's in a deuce of a way
about it. She's a Plymouth Brethren, dear boy, same as the old man was."

"There is likely to be a little friction to-morrow?" Donald asked.

"Rather. Ethel's come on purpose to bring matters to a head. I
shouldn't be at all surprised if Marky bolts. Lady Ethel is no fool,
and her marriage is a family arrangement. She'll fight for her head
every inch of the way."

Breakfast next morning was ominously quiet, a gloom overspread the
table. But for Miss Maitland's gaiety the feast was unduly funereal.
The lady was dressed with unusual splendour of attire, à la Watteau,
with a dash of Bouchier in it. She announced her intention of sitting
for her portrait without delay.

McManus set up his easel in the drawing-room, where there was a good
light. He painted whilst Miss Maitland posed. The morning passed
quietly enough till just before luncheon, when the sound of wheels
outside broke the silence. A minute or two later, Lord Marcus crept
disconsolately in, followed by a tall, fair girl with a pretty,
determined face. In her neat, plain, tailor-made dress and straw hat,
she presented a vivid contrast to Agnes Maitland. Instantly they both
smiled delightfully.

"Aunt couldn't come," Lady Ethel explained to Lord Marcus; "she has one
of her headaches, so I was compelled to leave her at the hotel. I shall
stay to luncheon. Miss Maitland, here, will do very well as a chaperon."

Miss Maitland positively beamed with pleasure. "I trust that I shall be
equal to the task," she murmured.

"Of course," came the prompt reply. "If a lady, who has been a reigning
favourite for twenty odd years, is not equal to the protection of an
innocent young girl, who is?"

A chuckle came from the dimness of the hall. It was Dodo's. But Lady
Ethel did not perform in public. She swept the young men away, and
closed the drawing-room door. McManus did not count any more than a
spiritual umpire might have done. Like most people who get into a show
free, he was disposed to depreciate the performance.

"Are you staying here long, Miss Maitland?" Lady Ethel asked.

"That entirely depends upon Lord Marcus," Miss Maitland smiled.

"Quite so. You find him such a delightful companion; so intellectual,
so witty."

"Really, you seem to have made quite a sympathetic study of his
character."

"What could be more natural in the case of one's future husband?"

All this, with smiles and much display of white teeth, engagingly. But
Lady Ethel's pink nails were beating their filbert ends upon the arm
of her chair, and Miss Maitland's gilt-heeled slipper was marking a
devil's tattoo upon the carpet. Furthermore, each lady was flushed with
a dainty red, like a lake under an angry sky.

"Strange that I have heard nothing of this," Miss Maitland murmured.

"Not at all. Marcus is unusually shy where his heart is concerned. To
get him to speak of his feelings is a very difficult matter. Probably
you have found the same thing."

"Lord Marcus is probably bolder in the bosom of his family. And yet I
have heard of these domestic arrangements being upset. I was under the
impression Lord Marcus had placed his affections elsewhere. I may be
wrong, of course."

"Indeed you are. Your friend has deceived you. And Lord Marcus is so
nice as to wounding the feelings of others. For instance, I don't
suppose he has informed you that next week he is starting upon a
yachting expedition with some friends of ours?"

At this point McManus slipped from the room. He saw that the outposts
had been driven in, and that the main lines were advancing to the fray.
After an interval, Lady Ethel came in to luncheon alone, Miss Maitland
having retired to her room with a headache. The smell of paint had
been too much for her. Lady Ethel remarked that hardened sailors were
sea-sick at times, which might account for the mystery.

Otherwise she was serene and calm. Dodo beamed tranquilly upon his
cutlets. McManus remarked that Lady Ethel partook of a remarkably good
luncheon. A woman who could do that after so trying a conflict could be
no ordinary being.

"We are going on to London this evening," she said; "returning on
Tuesday to Oban. You will meet us there on the following Saturday with
the Seapink, Marcus. Mind, I shall not be put off with an excuse the
same as last time. Now put your hat on, and come down to the hotel and
pay your respects to Lady Malmsbury."

Lord Marcus departed unwillingly. What transpired on the journey he
never said. He returned presently, and in a small still voice requested
a cigarette and brandy and soda. Asked as to the quantity of brandy, he
remarked that it would be all the same a hundred years hence.

Dodo placed a liberal construction upon this wisdom, and presently Lord
Marcus affirmed himself better. Then Dodo gently broke the news that
Aggy was asking for her host. And Lord Marcus returned from that
pleasing interview, looking like one who had lost a kingdom.

"It's no use," he groaned; "she won't let me off. I'm in for a big
breach-of-promise case certain, damages a hundred thousand quid, and
Ethel will make me fight it. Aggy says now that I promised her this
place as a wedding present. I do remember some stuff of the kind, but
I swear I never promised. And that old cat backs her up. Cocky, if
you ever do marry Aggy, shunt that ancient mariner, or there'll be
trouble."

"If you kick, she's certain to take me," Dodo said hopefully.

"Well, I've got to kick," Lord Marcus groaned. "The long and short
of it is, Ethel has made up her mind to stand no more nonsense. Poor
Billy's infernally bad, and may go off at any time. I've promised the
marriage shan't be later than the middle of September, so that we can
get back for the hunting. What the devil shall I do?"

"I shouldn't give her this place, if I were you," Dodo observed, with
Solon-like gravity. "In case we hit it off together, I don't want her
to be in a position to defy me. Tell you what, you ask Barker. He's a
deuced long-headed fellow, Barker. Bet you a guinea he finds some way
out of the difficulty."

Two days passed without anything further transpiring. In the mean time
McManus had received his pictures, which he duly submitted to Lord
Marcus's judgment. The latter viewed them with indifferent gloom.

"They'll do for my place in Surrey," he said. "I'll take the lot, dear
boy. I'm a bit short of ready oof just at present, but that will be all
right after a time. Look here — between ourselves — I'm going to make
a bolt of it in the morning; off in the yacht somewhere. Fact is, I've
made a fool of myself over the Maitland, and I'm best out of the way.
You stay, if you like, with the others, and go when you please. I'll
pay for the picture, whether you finish it or not. There's going to be
a jolly smash hereabouts in a day or two, and my name's Walker, dear
boy. Only mum's the word."

McManus found himself alone in the smoking-room late the same night. He
had been at The Hut quite long enough to appreciate its luxury, and to
discover that intimidads are better smoking than red rag tobacco. The
house was perfectly quiet, and apparently the servants had retired to
bed. Donald was somewhat surprised when Barker entered, and closed the
door behind him quietly.

He wore his softest and most deferential manner. In his hand he carried
a piece of yellow parchment, evidently a deed of some kind.

"I trust you will not be offended, sir, by what I am going to say," he
remarked; "but I have the interest of my employer at heart, and I do
not see him robbed where I can prevent it. You certainly are not blind,
sir, to what is taking place in this house."

"You may pass that point without further argument," McManus said dryly.

"Quite so, sir; indeed, Lord Marcus informs me he has been perfectly
candid with you. It becomes necessary to avoid what may be a grave
public scandal. Miss Maitland is certain to take action, in any case.
She claims this house under a promise, and, if something is not done,
she will get it. But it will not make any difference to the ultimate
result. May I ask you, sir, at what you value the pictures disposed of
by you to his lordship?"

"They are honestly worth two thousand pounds to-day," McManus said
defiantly.

"A modest estimate, if I may be permitted to say so," Barker coughed,
"but in the present most unsatisfactory state of the picture-market,
not bad, sir. Now, I have here a deed duly drawn up by his lordship, in
which it states that in return for the pictures — cash being scarce
— Lord Marcus makes over this property to you. The deed is signed and
witnessed, Mr. McManus. You quite appreciate my ulterior motive, sir.
Eventually the money you mention will be paid to you, and the deed
destroyed."

McManus nodded. He had no objection to the harmless plot to place The
Hut and its farm lands beyond Miss Maitland's grasp; and, being a
Scotchman, he had no objection to holding an undoubtedly good security
for his money. He glanced over the deed, which appeared to be executed
in due legal form.

"You can leave this with me," he said. "I suppose it is quite correct?"

"Quite, sir," Barker replied. "It was drafted by a lawyer in blank,
and the stamp is proper value. I have to thank you, and wish you good
night, sir."

The following morning the Seapink dropped out to sea with the tide.
A note from Lord Marcus to Agnes Maitland informed her that he had gone
away for a day or two, and requested her to make herself quite at home
for the present. She smiled grimly; she was very comfortable where she
was, she said, and had no intention of removing elsewhere.

Five days passed without any news of the fugitive, during which time
the portrait made more or less satisfactory progress. It was during
dinner on the fifth night that Barker entered, his usually passive face
a prey to agitation.

"I have some bad news," he gasped, "some very bad news indeed. I have
been as far as Norwich, sir, and saw it in an evening paper there."

All turned to the speaker, who carried a flimsy sheet in his hand. Some
day a daring editor will devise, and startle the world by producing, an
evening journal readable by the naked eye.

Dodo snatched the paper from Barker's nerveless hand. He read aloud as
follows: —


"SHOCKING YACHTING FATALITY.

"LORD MARCUS BARRS DROWNED.

"THE UNFORTUNATE GENTLEMAN WASHED OVERBOARD.


"Information reached us from Strathspey of a shocking accident there.
It appears that, during a squall last night, Lord Marcus Barrs's yacht,
the Seapink, was dragged from her moorings, and the owner washed
overboard. The unfortunate gentleman was not missed till morning, he
having been supposed to have returned to his cabin; but a search being
subsequently made, he was nowhere to be found. Lord Marcus, who was
gifted with great mental attainments, was shortly to lead to the altar
Lady Ethel Malmsbury, for whom much sympathy is felt. Up to the time of
going to press, the body had not been recovered."

"Draw all the blinds at once," Agnes requested. "'In the midst of life
we are in death.' Excuse my retiring, gentlemen. This sad news has been
too much for me."

Needless to say, society was shocked by the cutting off of a brilliant
ornament. For a day or two Agnes Maitland was quite prostrated with
grief. But hope springs eternal in the human breast, and there was Dodo
to fall back upon. The charming actress arrayed herself in becoming
cerements, she flourished a lace handkerchief of some twin-tear
capacity, and announced her intention of returning to London.

"It seems like leaving home," she said, with real grief, "and, but
for an accident, this would have been my own. I am a most unfortunate
creature."

It was Dodo who accompanied her, and she dried her tears. Lord
Marcus's loss was his gain. After all, if one cannot have a title, the
possession of much money has its advantages.

But the one who felt the change most was McManus. The artistic
temperament is invariably a luxurious one in grain, and Donald returned
laggardly to his dingy Lares. There was money coming to him in due
time, but that did not lessen his dissatisfaction with the metropolitan
egg, or cozen him to the sinewy hog of transatlantic parentage.

The evening after his return, Barker called once more.

"I have come to settle that little matter of business," he said. "I
have the money, sir, now, and all we have to do is to exchange it for
the deed."

McManus pointed to a seat. His mouth was firm and hard, though his
hands trembled slightly. His gaze was less direct than usual.

"I heard a little information this afternoon," he said; "perhaps
you will tell me if it is correct. I am told that Miss Maitland was
privately married this morning to the gentleman known as Dodo. Is that
correct, Mr. Barker?"

"Quite correct, sir; as an unbidden guest I attended the ceremony."

"A function which did not surprise you in the least, Barker."

"Quite so, sir. I should have been surprised had the ultimate result
been otherwise."

"Very good. I understand how things are exactly. Under the
circumstances, any action Mrs. Dodo might have contemplated against
your late master is abandoned. You come here to settle my claim against
Lord Marcus Barrs' estate. I am perfectly satisfied as I am."

"You mean to say, sir——"

"I do mean to say," McManus replied. "I will retain the estate, Barker."

Barker was obviously shocked. McManus had implied a distinct fraud.
Whereupon McManus lapsed into broad Scotch, and assumed a sufficiently
sanctimonious manner. When a Scotchman is going to do anything wrong,
he generally does.

"Always take the golden moment, Barker," he said. "I am a genius, ye
ken; but genius will no boil the kailpot. And it's vera far from being
successful the day. I loo' the sea and the breeze, and The Hut suits me
to pairfection. We'll just bide where we are, Barker, mon."

Barker protested. The estate was worth six hundred a-year clear, and
the whole thing was obviously intended to defeat the sinister designs
of Miss Maitland. But McManus was firm; he had given the matter due
consideration, and was quite prepared to accept the consequence of his
perfidy.

"It is nothing less than a robbery, sir," the outraged Barker cried.
"Besides, we are not absolutely certain yet that my lord is dead. If
his life has been spared by any chance, you may stand in a felon's dock
yet."

"Ah, well," McManus declared piously, "I'll trust the Lord for a' that."

He had made up his mind to act the rascal. He had shown his hand,
and to go back would be weakness indeed. To retreat now would be to
proclaim his rascality, to allow it to go out to the world without
being one penny the better.

The man of iron resolution and impeachable integrity had fallen. The
temptation in the shape of the dream of his life had been offered him,
and he had succumbed. Besides, had he not tasted of the fleshpots of
Egypt, and found them good?

"You are just powerless," he said to the pale, discomfited Barker, "and
ye are no such a fule as to cackle as to your part in the conspeeracy."

Barker retired crestfallen. He had another card to play yet. He
was sorely baffled; yet he did not altogether despair. To drop his
pseudonym and come to his real name, Death had hitherto been so
successful in his diabolical scheme that this defeat was quite bitter
for him to swallow.

The morning following McManus received a letter, asking him to call at
a certain address in St. James's Street, ostensibly on business. He
went, wondering. On his way he picked up a Standard from the bottom
of his ‘bus — for he was not lavish in trifles — and began to scan
the news. A paragraph in the column headed "The Provinces" immediately
invited his attention —


"It happily transpires," it said, "that Lord Marcus Barr is not
drowned, after all. His Lordship was washed overboard, as stated, but
was picked up immediately afterwards by a herring-boat. The rough
weather drove the craft in question into Mull, where they were detained
till yesterday, and afterwards proceeded to Strathspey, where Lord
Marcus telegraphed to his friends. This story has been confirmed upon
inquiry last night."


Marcus looked grave for a moment; then he relapsed into a chuckle. His
quick shrewd sense read something more than the lines of a newspaper
paragraph. Therefore, he was not in the least surprised, on arriving at
St. James's Street, to find himself confronted by Barker. The latter
was polite, and blandly triumphant. But McManus had one good card to
play yet.

"I thought it as well to give you a chance, sir," Barker said. "My lord
has been mercifully saved."

"I have just read the joyful news in the Standard," McManus replied
dryly. "I have come here to offer his lordship my most sincere
congratulations.

"And also to bring the deed with you, sir?"

"I didn't deem that to be necessary," McManus replied.

"In that case I must leave you to settle matters with his lordship,
sir. When I told him everything last night, he was absolutely amazed.
Angry was no word for it."

"We shall soothe him, no doubt," McManus said tranquilly. "And I am
rather inclined to think you were not so surprised to see his lordship,
after all."

"Sir? Like the rest, I deemed my master to be——"

"You didn't, you rascal," McManus roared. "The whole thing was a plant.
The idea of transferring The Hut property was a bit of an afterthought,
to save it from that scarlet woman; but ye thought I was a poor bit
painter creature you could do anything with. As to the rest, it was
designed to get Miss Maitland married to that feckless Dodo. The
dispensation of that handy fishing-boat was bought and paid for. Where
is your master?"

Barker had no reply handy. He showed McManus into the room where Lord
Marcus was breakfasting. The latter looked brown and hardy; also he was
eating a meal with a zest foreign to his usual nature.

"Well, Sandy," he cried, "I am not dead, you see. What's this that
Barker tells me, dear boy?"

"As much of the truth as he finds compatible with his financial
position," McManus muttered; "and, as for The Hut property, ye can just
whustle for it, ma mannie."

"Oh, come," Lord Marcus protested, "that's forgery and fraud, and all
that kind of thing. I might make it hot for you, don't you know."

"And my friends on the press could make it warm for you," McManus
replied. "It's no bad thing pretending to be dead awhile to get out
of a lawful marriage contract. Ye ken, it sae happens, my lord, that
the skipper of the boatie that stood by when ye jumpit overboard the
Seapink, was ain cousin to maself. Nae, nae, keep the pictures, my
lord, and ye'll hae nay the wairst of the bargain the while. I've a
that I've been eating my heart out for, and I mean to keep the same.
And if I was after telling Lady Ethel the truth, is it the brecks ye'd
he wearing again?"

"Will you please to ring the bell?" Lord Marcus asked feebly.

McManus did so, and Barker entered.

"We are discovered, Barker," his lordship said. "Mr. McManus has found
out our trick. You will please to consider the incident closed, Barker.
After all, I am well out of a tight place. To make the thing complete,
Mr. McManus, I will ask my lawyer to send you the title-deeds of your
new property. And, really, upon my word, now, you are a most amazingly
clever Johnny, don't you know."

"Perhaps your lordship will pay for Miss Maitland's picture?" Barker
suggested.

"Nay, nay," cried McManus, not to be outdone in generosity; "I'll put
up with the loss there, and say no more about it."

Shortly after the exit of McManus, Barker respectfully gave his
employer notice. As the latter was going to he married shortly, he
would have no further need for the services of a confidential servant.

"I shall not go into service again, my lord," he concluded. "And, as
your lordship is going off on a cruise, and I cannot endure the sea, I
should take it as a favour if you will consider my services dispensed
with from to-day."

Lord Marcus fully agreed; strength of character formed no part of his
nature. So Barker departed, by no means satisfied with the way he had
passed the last two months. Later the same evening, clothed and in his
right mind, he ruminated over a late dinner in the sanctity of his own
club.

"I might have been more successful," he said; "and Greenstrand will
be anything but pleased. At the same time, a man of apparently rugged
honesty has stooped to palter for gain. In so far I have not failed.
The man played the rascal, undoubtedly; but he escaped the punishment I
had intended for him. And I very much doubt if the devil ever got the
better of a Scotchman."




CHAPTER III.—THE EXPERIMENT OF THE BISHOP AND THE BEGUM'S DIAMONDS.


FOR once Christian England witnessed a thing as touching as it was
unique. Every denomination found itself in accord upon one point. They
unanimously agreed that the appointment of Paul Fry to the See of St.
Agnes was an inspiration. After which, as if half-ashamed of this
kindly feeling, and fearful lest it really might end in some permanent
good to darkest Britain, they fell to quarrelling and inveigling again
with new vigour. When the first zeal had spent itself, calmer spirits
saw the danger of extreme cordiality between the Churches, and resolved
to be more careful in future. Three of the Establishment — bachelors
— embraced the Scarlet Woman next week, and Albion breathed again.

Paul Fry, D.D., Fellow and Tutor of St. Peter's College, Camford, had
greatly distinguished himself as Rector of Ironborough, Lancashire.
Even if his career there had been marked by no special feature, the
possessor of a face so calm and benignant, and a beard so long and
silky, must have attained the lawn and mitre.

But Dr. Fry was no ordinary man. In his early college days he
distinguished himself by tandem-driving and jumping twenty-two feet
six inches in the Inter-University Sports. The son of a poor country
parson, Paul Fry lived in the best set, and ruffled it with the most
exalted of them. In those days he was an avowed Atheist, a creed
which lasted him a whole term. Coming up after the Easter vacation,
he proclaimed himself to be a Calvinist, in which faith he remained
exactly six weeks, at the end of that time turning Jesuit. He had a
marvellous digestion for creeds, bolting them at the rate of three
a term, until he took Orders, and finally settled down to a college
living, at the command, it is said, of his wine-merchant, who began to
be anxious about his money.

But be that as it may, Paul Fry had a wide toleration for the tenets
of others. He would be equally at home on the throne of St. Agnes, or
preaching in a black gown in some conventicle run by a fancy brand of
dissent. Fry was somewhat partial to tinned religions; you never know
what you are going to find inside.

Surely there could have been no thorns in this spiritual diaper, no
ghostly flea under the wide sleeves of spotless lawn. Forty-five, in
perfect health, and a bachelor, Paul Fry's lines had assuredly fallen
in fat and juicy places. Jordan is at best but a narrow stream, and
the Mecca of Lambeth is but a stepping-stone removed from St. Agnes.
However expensive a man's tastes, he should manage on £6000 per annum.
It certainly is a great stimulus to the gospel of peace and contentment
with the lot human.

But even bishops, under a material government, are amenable to the
laws ruling those less au fait with Providence. A prelate in the
county court, or summoned to appear to a judgment summons, has not
yet been vouchsafed to those self-elect who seek for the downfall of
Establishment; still that spectacle might have been, but for one of
those philanthropists who not only lend people money, but disburse
large sums yearly in advertising the fact.

To put the matter plainly, Bishop Fry was up to his ears in debt. An
early taste for tandem-driving and personal adornment, to say nothing
of select wines, had laid the foundation for subsequent pecuniary
embarrassment. The extraordinary patience of the University tradesman
is only equalled by his subsequent pertinacity. Directly Paul Fry got
his college living, bills and requests for payment came in by the
score. Shillings had become pounds, and tens, hundreds. There was
nothing to be gained by kicking against the pricks; to go through the
primrose path of bankruptcy meant clerical ruin; to have the living
sequestrated was the same thing.

In this desperate condition of things, Paul Fry had recourse to the
usurers. Ten years before, he had borrowed two sums of two hundred
each, and in the mean time no permanent settlement had been arrived
at. Consequently, by that fascinating and plastic form of arithmetic
practised by the Tribes, Fry found himself, on induction, in debt to
the tune of £11,000.

He had no ready capital to speak of, and the Palace at St. Agnes had
to be furnished. With considerable misgivings, Fry plunged deeper into
trouble. A bachelor, with a large income at command, he calculated that
five years would see him free. Alas! for this sanguine calculation.
There is no more costly amusement than the renewal of bills, as Paul
Fry discovered.

Now, a handsome bachelor bishop, unless he is prepared to make a
determined stand, will, sooner or later, find himself under the
dominion of the petticoat. It was only natural that the women should
flock round Paul Fry, and gradually lure him into schemes and fads,
more or less chimerical.

The abandonment of the opium traffic was one of these. A bishop with
the gift of oratory is ever in great request at great public meetings,
and gradually Paul Fry found himself dragged into the heated atmosphere
of moral politics. A caustic criticism of a recent speech, in one of
the leading reviews, touched his vanity, and spurred his zeal. Within a
short time, the public generally came to regard the Bishop of St. Agnes
as the leader of the Society for the Abolition of Opium.

With so able a general, small wonder that there should be so much
zeal amongst subordinates. And amongst the latter, the Duchess of
Longwater took first place. She subscribed liberally to the charity and
parent society, and she it was who secured the lions necessary to give
éclat to the frequent public meetings. St. Agnes's people were a
little inclined to grumble at the constant absence of their bishop in
London, but the consolation remained that he was engaged in a great and
good work.

It was about this time that the duchess made a notable capture. The
big fish in question was no less a person than the Begum of Banapore,
an eastern potentate, with a large territory of her own in North-west
India, and at present on a visit to England. The begum, a dusky
personage of uncertain age and no uncertain adipose tissue, had a
weakness for western modes and manners, and consequently fell an easy
prey to the duchess. Her knowledge of our language was passably good,
and her disposition amiable. As opium, in no shape or form, entered
into her state or her revenues, there was no trouble in converting her
to the society, to which, through her secretary, she subscribed.

"You will be charmed with the begum, bishop," the duchess remarked
enthusiastically, when detailing the history of her capture. "She
really is a most intelligent creature, and already heart and soul in
our cause. For the ordinary social business she cares nothing, and her
diamonds are something wonderful. You will come and meet her to-night
at dinner?"

The bishop promised vaguely. His thoughts were far away at that moment.
No errand of mercy or philanthropy had brought him to town on this
occasion. His Semitic creditor was pressing him for a little something
on account, taking the pleasing form of £5000, and he of St. Agnes had
returned to his hotel with the assurance that if the sum in question
was not forthcoming within a fortnight, something extremely unpleasant
was likely to happen.

Fry was at his wits' end. To borrow the money from a friend was
impossible; to seek another lender, involved as he was with Mr. Mostyn
— once Moses — useless. To use a chaste and original metaphor,
ruin stared him in the face. A fortnight's grace, like a fortnight's
holiday, passes with marvellous celerity.

"Delighted to meet so distinguished a convert," the bishop murmured.
"I trust she may be of great assistance to the good cause. Half-past
seven, I think?"

"Whereupon, her Grace of Longwater departed in her glittering equipage,
with its powdered servants, big bouquets, and all en règle, to take
the chair at a meeting of the committee for the suppression of personal
adornment. Her Grace was always suppressing something.

A select party dined at Longwater House that evening to meet the begum.
There was a cabinet minister, who was also a licensed preacher; a pious
journalist, whose writings less religious people regarded as distinctly
blasphemous; together with a few minor lights. The begum, who was a
blaze of diamonds, beamed pleasantly upon all those assembled. She
appeared more or less bored, save at dinner, when she entered into the
proceedings with pleasing zest. One English institution apparently met
with marked favour, and that was the champagne, of which the dusky
magnate partook freely.

Presently, a grave individual next the bishop rose quietly from his
chair, and whispered a word to the butler. From that moment the
champagne ceased to circulate. Fry made a note of the fact. He also
saw the begum was regarding his neighbour with an eye of peculiar
malevolence.

Mr. Cunningham shrugged his shoulders. Then his glance and the bishop's
met. The latter saw a tall clean-shaven man, with a powerful face,
the features of which were under perfect control, giving the man a
mask-like appearance.

"I see you noticed my movements, my lord," Cunningham said easily. "My
post as secretary and confidential adviser to the begum is no sinecure,
I assure you."

"You have been with her long?" Fry asked.

"Only a few weeks, and I wish myself well out of it," Cunningham smiled
frankly. "Shortly before her trip to England, my predecessor resigned.
I thought the post would suit, and applied for it through a friend
in India, and got it. For a month or two we have been doing Europe.
The begum is naturally amiable, but——" And Cunningham shrugged his
shoulders.

"We have all our little weaknesses," the bishop observed sententiously.

"And the begum's is champagne, as you might have seen. When she becomes
over-excited, she is somewhat difficult. I do not allow her to carry
any money, for fear of consequences. You would be surprised to know how
fond she is of wandering about alone in London."

"Without any attendant?"

"Absolutely. She always returns in due course. You must allow caged
animals a little latitude. Fortunately, the champagne incident does not
happen every day. Once in Brussels, when the fit was on, and the begum
without money, she pawned her diamonds for ten francs, and subsequently
returned to our hotel in a condition of marked hilarity."

The bishop was profoundly interested. "We must make allowances," he
said with kindly toleration; "still, it must be a source of great
anxiety to you. And the diamonds?"

"Fortunately, one of the servants found the ticket — the pawn ticket,
you understand."

"In my undergraduate days——" Fry began.

"Quite so," Cunningham smiled. "I am pleased to find myself understood.
We had a little trouble with the pawnbroker, but a hint as to the
police sufficed. Since then the begum has repeated the experiment here,
never asking for more than ten shillings. You see, she has no notion of
the value of money, and ten shillings produces the amount of Pommery
she requires."

"But, my good sir, think of the risk."

"There is no risk now," Cunningham replied. "When we were at Amsterdam
I hit upon the idea of having the diamonds faithfully copied in paste.
When I see the distressing symptoms coming on, I substitute the paste
for the real gems. The begum is none the wiser, and I am relieved from
considerable anxiety. So long as the copies fetch the money, the begum
is perfectly happy. She is wearing the paste now."

The bishop expressed his astonishment. The begum's neck and head
appeared to be surrounded by a stream of living fire. And Paul Fry had
a natural eye for stones, having made some study of them when dabbling
in "stinks" at Camford.

"I could hardly have believed it," he said.

"Nevertheless it is perfectly true," Cunningham replied. "If you could
see the reverse of that necklet you would notice the difference at
once. Paste is never set plain, you know, like real stones. The latter
are practically gold-threaded. I am not speaking as an expert, but
merely repeating the information I gleaned at Amsterdam."

The bishop sighed gently. With one of these gauds in his possession,
he would have no difficulty in once for all ridding himself of his
troubles. Really, it almost seemed to him that the decree of fate was
open to criticism. Here was a pillar of the church on the verge of
ruin, and there sat a mere human document, a champagne label, so to
speak, with the wherewithal to set him free once more.

He brooded over the matter on his return to his hotel, a quiet select
retreat not far from Brook Street. The begum occupied his attention
to the exclusion of holier things. Therefore it came upon him as no
surprise as he went upstairs, plated candlestick in hand, to find the
begum on the landing, on the point of retiring to her room, followed by
two tiring-maids. Cunningham was hovering discreetly in the background.
The begum presented an aspect of smiling, yet faded gaiety; she gave a
Hindustani ejaculation which, in rude English, would have passed for a
hiccough.

"She will be herself in the morning," Cunningham murmured; "the attack
is passing away. There will not be another for a day or two."

"You may rely upon my discretion," the bishop replied. "It is rather
strange that I should meet you again so soon, and in so quiet a place.
I should have thought——"

"Quite so. You are staying here at present?"

"It is my house when in London. I am here for a few days on business."

"We shall make it our headquarters during our stay in London,"
Cunningham explained. "The very quietness of the place is what we most
desire. Waiters and servants talk so, and things get into the papers
mysteriously; and, afflicted as the begum is——"

"Quite so," replied the bishop. "Good night, Mr. Cunningham."

A week passed quietly by without anything further happening. Nothing
satisfactory had transpired regarding the debt which hung like a
millstone about Fry's neck. More than one application to the financial
gentry had ended dismally. It seemed wonderful how they appeared to
hang together. Indeed, in going from one office to another, the bishop
was startled to find how much was known of his private concerns.

He kept the best till last; but here again disappointment met him. The
financier in question might have been a prelate himself, so far as
appearances were concerned.

"I regret that I cannot see my way to assist you, my lord," he said;
"but Mostyn's security seems to have covered the ground. Unfortunately,
your income ceases with your life; in case anything happened to you, I
should lose my money. A good name, or possibly two, as sureties would
make all the difference."

"And without them you can do nothing?"

"Absolutely nothing. I suppose you haven't anything in the way of
pictures or plate, now? Or jewellery? Good jewellery is always a
valuable commodity."

But the bishop had nothing save what was legally given into the maw
of Mostyn. The begum and her diamonds rose up before his mind's eye.
Those dazzling streams of flame mocked and dazed him. He saw them as he
walked along Piccadilly, and turned into a quiet restaurant there for
sherry and soup.

The place was comparatively empty. In the far corner sat a dusky figure
with a glass and a bottle of Pommery before her. It was the begum.
There was a somnolent smile on her face, and she was absolutely bereft
of jewellery. The bishop walked out.

The same evening, dining out, he met her at dinner again. The weakness
must have passed away for a time, because the begum partook of nothing
but water. During dinner the conversation was almost wholly of opium,
and its concomitant evils. A great meeting was to take place the
following evening at the Albert Hall, for which a prince — made in
Germany, it is true, but still a prince — had been captured. The begum
also had signified her intention of being present, and altogether it
was hoped that the gathering would force the Government to do something
— nobody knew what; but that was a detail.

"I hope you are prepared with something special for the meeting," the
Duchess of Longwater beamed upon the bishop. "We look to you for great
things."

"What meeting?" the bishop said vaguely. "Oh yes, certainly. I was
thinking of something else."

As a matter of fact, the great gathering of the Clan of the Bonneted
Bee had entirely escaped his mind. Up to the present moment he had
neither made a note, nor evolved an impromptu; and only a few hours
remained between now and the meeting.

"I will do my best not to disappoint your Grace," Fry responded, with a
somewhat melancholy smile. "I dare say I shall be ready when the hour
arrives."

There was only one way to be ready, as the speaker very well knew.
Of late years the midnight oil had not smelt in his nostrils to any
damaging extent; at any rate, not since he took his double-first and
got his cricket blue in the same year. He had all the necessary books
and papers in his portmanteau; and by sitting up all night, he could be
ready for the fray on the morrow.

It was not till midnight that he found himself once more alone. In the
next room to his own reclined the begum, who was crooning to herself
some ditty which, doubtless, in her distant possessions, passed for
music. At the same time it might have been a snatch from some modern
composer, patented by a malevolent superior critic.

Presently the music ceased, and the trumpet-note common to nations
succeeded. A man may be a poor linguist, and snore in many languages.
But the bishop struggled bravely on, and by eight o'clock his oration
was complete.

He felt fagged and worn out with want of sleep and anxiety. He rang
his bell with a view to obtaining a cup of coffee, but no reply came.
Looking out into the corridor, the bishop could see no one. Presently a
substantial shadow crept along and descended the stairs with ponderous
caution. It was that ubiquitous begum.

She was dressed for the street, and evidently off upon one of her
alcoholic rambles. In a vague, uncertain way the bishop followed. After
his long toil, it struck him that a walk would freshen up his jaded
faculties.

Not a soul witnessed the exodus. The respectable family hotel was
anything but an early place; they did not cater for the class of
visitor whose mission in life it is to be sacrificed on the altar of
Bradshaw of the pearly dawn. The key of the bishop's room was in his
pocket, for all his papers were still littered in confusion.

Just in front was the begum. After loitering a little, she increased
her pace as if she had some ulterior object in view. The bishop noted
presently that the potentate carried in her hand a shabby leathern
case. Suspicion became certainty presently, when the lady paused before
a small jeweller's shop in a side street — a shop over which were
suspended three gilt balls in pleasing symmetry. A minute or two later
the begum had swiftly disappeared by a side door.

The bishop had not long to wait. Presently his quarry reappeared, minus
her case and plus a fatuous smile to balance things. With a sportive
air she cast from her a yellow ticket, which the wind fluttered to the
watcher's feet. He picked it up curiously.

As an artistic production it was a failure; from a curt business point
of view the docket left nothing to be desired. It merely contained
a legend to the effect that Sara Jones — the bishop smiled — had
pledged with John Müller certain chemical diamonds for the sum of ten
shillings.

For a little while the bishop stood contemplating the card. A certain
boyish buoyancy possessed him. If such a sensation is possible in a
prelate, he felt "larky." Yielding to the spirit of the moment, he
stepped into the pawnshop and tendered the card to the assistant.

"Unless I am greatly mistaken," he said, "the thing mentioned here was
pledged with you by a lady. She is — er — in short, given to that
kind of thing. A little mental weakness, you understand. I should like
to redeem the article."

"Right you are," the assistant replied. "Ten and a tanner, please. I
thought the old party was a bit off it, but as the thing was of no
value, it seemed all correct. There's your change; no, I'll keep that
card, if you don't mind."

Paul Fry pocketed the case, and left the shop hurriedly. He had been
a bishop quite long enough to resent the awful familiarity of that
young man. A little ruffled, he returned to his hotel. He passed up the
stairs, and into his own room, without encountering any one, as before.
After breakfast he could return the case to Cunningham, and doubtless
would amuse the discreet secretary with an account of his adventure. He
felt quite gay over the matter. He packed up his papers, and took the
shabby case from his pocket, and opened the same in a spirit of idle
curiosity. The full morning light fell upon the contents thereof.

The Bishop of St. Agnes gave a gasping cry. No dull muddy lustre met
his eye; instead, the wonderful yellow fire perfectly dazzled him.
The stones leapt and tumbled as they shook in his hand, like orange
cascades flecked with blue electricity. Without doubt, he had come into
possession of the begum's diamonds.

These jewels were no paste; the little knowledge he possessed of such
things told him that. Besides, they were not set flat, as paste usually
is, but practically were gold-threaded. The bishop tried them on his
water-bottle, the result being a deep scratch. Then he took from his
dressing-case a finely tempered nail-file, and tested the facets of a
large stone. The file slipped over the polished surface, leaving no
trace behind.

The bishop dropped on the edge of his bed, trembling from head to foot.
Not a soul had seen him enter or leave his hotel; the tiny dungeon from
whence he had obtained the gems was so dark as to render it impossible
to identify him. Again, the flippant assistant had not the remotest
idea of the value of the article pledged.

And to-morrow, in the ordinary course of events, an execution would be
put into the palace at St. Agnes. He would be the first, and perhaps
the last, bishop ever destined to dispense hospitality to a man in
possession. In a few hours the whole thing would be public property; he
would be compelled to resign his see, and sink into oblivion, a ruined,
dishonoured man. Nothing could save him.

But could nothing save him? Had he not the means of salvation in his
hands? By no possible chance could anybody learn the truth. All he
had to do was to remove the stones from their setting — an easy task
— and dispose of them without delay. What they were worth the bishop
could not say, probably £10,000, or more. With the money they were
likely to fetch, he could not only pay Mostyn the sum demanded on
account, but get rid of him altogether; it meant salvation, indeed.

The bishop hesitated no longer. Once he had made up his mind, the
fit of trembling passed away. His plan of action was decided upon
without delay. By way of divesting any semblance of suspicion, he
ordered breakfast in his room, and this being despatched, called for
the Times. On one of the advertisement pages there a notice caught
his eye. It was to the effect that Messrs. Noble & Co., of Fenchurch
Street, were prepared to buy old plate and jewellery to any extent, and
pay for the same promptly.

An hour later the Bishop of St. Agnes stepped into the somewhat dingy
establishment of Noble and Co., and demanded to see the proprietor. A
little man, with a shy, nervous manner, conducted him into a back den,
and asked his business. The bishop explained it in the frankest manner.
He was concerned for a friend, he said; there need be no disguise,
but publicity had to be avoided as much as possible. Messrs. Noble
were purchasers of precious stones, and he had a quantity of fine ones
to dispose of, with which the loose diamonds were produced from his
pocket. Mr. Abner Noble started as his eyes fell on them.

"They are very fine," he said, with an effort at coolness, "very fine
indeed; but, unfortunately, diamonds are to a certain extent a drug in
the market at present. If they were pearls now! If you will excuse me I
will consult my partner."

The shy little man returned presently with a face of resigned
melancholy, and the intelligence that his partner could not see his way
beyond £14,500. If that sum would suffice, the transaction might be
settled in the course of an hour. It was merely a matter of arrangement
with bankers. Before lunchtime the bishop was in a position to call
upon Mr. Mostyn and pay that gentleman off, to his mingled chagrin and
delight.

The bishop was absolutely free, he had nothing further to fear. The
haunting nightmare had passed away; ruin no longer mocked his footsteps
and leered in his face. Nevertheless, he did not dine at the hotel
alone; he was afraid of his own society. He wanted to get away from
himself, and he looked forward to the great meeting with positive
relief. His speech was the speech of the evening; never had he been so
brilliant, never had his points been so clear, his arguments so cogent
and effective.

Only once during his oration had he faltered, and that was when the
begum, rather late, came on to the platform, blazing as usual. The
bishop almost broke down for a moment; he could hardly believe his
eyes. There was the necklace and tiara he had disposed of, adorning
that ample form. What did it all mean?

But then the bishop recovered himself. He would rather have avoided
the begum and her secretary the same evening, but Cunningham willed it
otherwise. The two parties reached the hotel simultaneously. Supper was
laid in the dining-room for the bishop. Hardly had he finished when
Cunningham came in and took a seat. Save the two men in question, the
great dreary apartment was absolutely deserted.

"A fine effort of yours to-night, my lord," Cunningham said—" a
memorable one, considering it is your last in your present capacity."

The bishop beamed benignly upon the speaker. "I do not understand you,"
he said. "Any one, to hear you speak, would be under the impression
that I was about to resign my bishopric."

"And they would not be mistaken."

There was a metallic hardness in Cunningham's dominant note. The
bishop's smile was suddenly arrested and frozen on his lips.

"If this is pleasantry, sir, I——"

"Nothing was further from my intention," Cunningham replied. "I merely
stated a fact. When you have heard all that I have to say, you will
come to precisely the same conclusion. This morning you were indebted
to one Mostyn, a money-lender, to a large sum; at the present moment
you are quit of his claim. This morning my mistress had a valuable set
of diamonds, which she pledged."

"But she was wearing them this evening!"

"Precisely. Only the possession of much money can work miracles of that
kind. And only fools, when they extract jewels from their settings,
leave the latter in a portmanteau."

The bishop groaned. All the dignity in him suddenly became flabby and
invertebrate. He waited dully for Cunningham to proceed.

"This morning the begum went out, as frequently happens. She had with
her her diamonds — the real ones. The fact was known to me. This
unusual course was permitted, because the paste copies were pawned a
day or two ago, and the ticket mislaid owing to the carelessness of a
native servant. To lay an embargo on the begum is dangerous, because
her civilization is so much veneer. So the real gems were entrusted
to her, and a careful watch kept. What happened early this morning I
need not detail. But when you made no sign, the watching process was
transferred to you. Need I enlarge upon the visit to Noble and Co., and
the subsequent financial transaction?"

"You know everything?" the bishop said unsteadily.

"Everything, indeed. I can enlighten you upon a few points. Up to now
your conduct is a profound secret. I had no difficulty in obtaining the
stones without delay, as money was no object. They cost a great deal
more than you sold them for; indeed, Noble and Co. may be congratulated
upon an excellent day's work. The settings, removed from your
portmanteau, and the jewels, were handed to another firm, who speedily
repaired the mischief. I have merely to ask now what you are going to
do."

"I must have a day or two to think," the bishop murmured. "I propose to
return to St. Agnes to-morrow, and after that——"

"Quite so. I have no objection. In a day or two you will write me here.
For the present there is no more to be said."

Cunningham bowed himself out of the room, and the bishop retired to
his bed. He slept peacefully through the night, and the following day
returned to St. Agnes. In the evening he called upon a chemist for a
sleeping potion, complaining that his rest had been greatly disturbed
of late. The chemist complied with the request, with an injunction to
be careful as to the dose. Never had the compounder of pills seen his
lordship so affable and genial, so free from care. Therefore, when it
transpired the following morning that the Bishop of St. Agnes had been
found in his bed stone dead, like many of his fellow countrymen he was
greatly shocked.

There was an inquest, of course, a perfunctory affair, nicely glossed
over by the coroner, who chanced to be the bishop's secretary as well;
no blame was attached to any one, and justice was satisfied. The
overstrained mind — a thing that bishops suffer from to a distressing
degree — had given way under a pressure of work — also an episcopal
malady — and relief had been sought in drugs. A little carelessness,
and the late ornament of the bench was no more.

Cunningham read the account of the disaster in the evening paper with
unclouded appetite and untroubled nerves. Paul Fry had taken the
course he had anticipated. Whereupon Cunningham, whose real identity
has already been guessed, dined quietly, and subsequently tendered his
resignation to the begum. So far as he was concerned, the incident was
at an end; the traditional jewels were restored, and the cost of the
experiment was Greenstrand's. It had been dear, but big game is always
expensive.

In the first place, it had meant much money to obtain the position
on the begum's staff at the opportune moment, but that was a trifle
compared to the repurchase of the diamonds. The only person benefiting
by the transaction, apparently, was the money-lender; but that was
in accordance with the eternal fitness of things. The rest had been
brought about by patience, and perseverance, and an expensive inquiry
into the past life of the late Bishop of St. Agnes. Luck had served
Death a little more quickly than he anticipated; but he had had several
means of decoying his game, nor had he any doubts from the moment when
he had assured himself as to the bishop's financial position.

"The third out of the catalogue," he reflected over his cigar. "At this
rate, two years will see me through this hateful task, and then I shall
be free. And when the end comes, my master, you will give all your
millions, past and future, to recall the day when you bought my soul,
and sent me out on such a task as this."




CHAPTER IV.—THE EXPERIMENT OF THE BOOMING OF LYDIA LOBB.


GIVEN a fair literary ability and a sexual problem, there is no reason
why the average woman should not become successful in the trade of
authorship. If she mixes up her petticoats and primroses judiciously,
the thing is accomplished; she may even attain the rare distinction of
the Free Library Embargo — a distinction vouchsafed to few. But there
is no reason why this crumb from the gods should be reserved for the
great, seeing that it is only a matter of comparative indecency.

Lydia Lobb was a case in point. She had many natural advantages. To
begin with, her name was ugly enough to make the fortune of a novel
without anything else; her personal appearance was striking, and she
possessed a large fund of that child-like faith in personal ability
which was less pregnable than the brass front of a labour leader. Added
to this, Lydia came of respectable parentage, with money to spare, and
awe of their only offspring. That her parents had been lawfully married
in the old-fashioned way was a grief to Lydia — so she said. As no
man had ever summoned up courage to marry her, she professed the
Cairdic faith in the matter of matrimony. She wrote "Minor Keys," and
"Studies," and the like, all of them according to the teaching of the
Yellow Bible.

Still, Lydia Lobb had not boomed. Perhaps the bourgeois home
surroundings had fettered her to a considerable extent. She yearned
for publication in slim tomes, and to be denounced from pulpits — the
Daily Telegraph would have done admirably. To have her photograph in
the Sketch, with a thumbnail interview attached, was her ambition.

At one time it seemed as if fortune meant to smile upon her endeavours.
An early study of hers in the Cerulean had attracted the attention
of no less a person than Azalia Leigh, the famous author of "Stockings
and Stark Madness." Thousands of readers of an older generation, now
quite five years ago, will remember the sensation caused by that work.
The motif, as will be recalled, is the domestic misery caused in an
alternately happy household by the fact that an otherwise perfect wife
will persist in wearing garters below the knee, thus inducing wrinkled
hose. The anguish of the refined husband is very finely portrayed.
His subsequent liaisons with a Sappho who is more hidebound on the
garter question, form the episodes of the book. What might have been
the ultimate circulation of that volume it would have been impossible
to tell, for its realistic reputation was wrecked by a Humanity
Reviewer, who suddenly sprung upon the world the fact that every
modern woman wore suspenders, occupying three pages of close type to
prove the point. The crux was felt to be a false one, and from that
hour "Stockings and Stark Madness" rapidly declined in popularity.

But true genius cannot he crushed. Azalia Leigh immediately set
up housekeeping with an atheist poet, who never washed himself,
on principle, and thus kept up the boom. Under these auspices she
published "Scarlet Sketches," a defence of free love so lurid that
the moral authorities interfered, and she and her partner, also
a contributor, suffered three months' imprisonment. During his
incarceration, the poet was thoughtlessly cleansed by the authorities,
and in consequence of the severity of the shock, died. Subsequently
Azalia became serious in gaol, and on emerging from her dungeon allowed
herself to be married to a pious young man who rashly imagined that her
conversion was permanent, after which Azalia so far forgot herself as
to have two children. But these misfortunes are always on the knees of
the gods.

It was just before this episode that Lydia Lobb's work first attracted
Azalia Leigh's attention; she wrote the former a letter so daring and
startling that Lydia was charmed. Azalia had found the kindred soul
for which she had been longing; she offered her ripe experience, her
invaluable tuition and advice in return for the pure love for which
her soul craved. They should come together, and their twin affection
should surpass that of David and Jonathan; Damon and Pythias should
pale their ineffectual fires, and the lamps of Orestes and Pylades
be extinguished. Would Lydia come to Azalia, bringing nought but her
transparent soul, and as little else as was compatible with the absurd
prejudice in favour of sartorial adornment?

Thereupon Lydia procured an elaborate trousseau from Paris for this
spiritual union, and went.

For two years they practically lived together, publishing in new
magazines of erratic tastes and delicate constitutions. The world was
promised something great before long, but it did not come, and Lydia
benefited very little by Azalia's friendship. Perhaps the latter
required all the kudos for herself. Therefore the inevitable quarrel
came.

After this Azalia abandoned the luxurious flat in Manchester Street,
which she had feelingly allowed Lydia to furnish and maintain, and
went off to her liberally encrusted poet. For the time being, this was
the death-blow to Lydia's hopes. Save an occasional copy of verses,
the better periodicals would have none of her; publishers declined her
novels.

A year or two passed, during which Azalia shone dimly; then, as was
inevitable, she startled the world again. She left her husband and
small children for the garret of a juvenile Shakespeare of seventeen,
who, some day, was to convulse a waiting world. This was going a little
further than even society could tolerate, and not even the Yellow Bible
dared print any of her work any more. The budding Shakespeare fell back
upon tales for children for a moral house, and Azalia drifted abroad,
where it was understood she had perished miserably, and under the most
indigent circumstances.

All the gall in Lydia Lobb's nature was aroused. She felt she had been
fooled. Five years of her life had been wasted, and to-day she stood on
no higher rung of the ladder than she did at the outset of her literary
career. Indeed, she was considerably worse off, for the taint of Azalia
clung to her still. Up to a certain point, Azalia's friendship had been
one to be proud of; but the pampered hound of to-day is frequently the
mangy cur of the morrow. Azalia became as the leper, and those who have
been near the leper are not much better, and thus Lydia suffered.

She was ready for anything by this time; it was all the same to her
whether her model was the cleanly, pure-minded Besant, or the prurient
realistic — Well, no matter. In those very rooms, where she and
Azalia had scoffed at so many scarlet crises, she sat down and wrote a
novelette for the British Monthly, which was courteously rejected.
She haunted the society of literary people until the imperturbable
Binder, of Sleek and Binder, Paternoster Row, declared that he could
not keep the woman out of the house.

"She's a perfect nuisance," he remarked to the individual who had
lately purchased the New Chronicle, that leading light amongst
journals. "I can't free myself anyway. What the deuce do I know or
care about views? I'm a tradesman, and all authors are merely so many
commercial travellers to me. Sell me what I want, and I don't ask any
more. But I'm not going to buy anything of Lydia Lobb's."

The new proprietor of the New Chronicle smiled behind his mask.
His name was Death once more, and this time there was no disguise.
Nobody asked his pedigree, or his qualifications to judge the merits or
condemn the faults of others. He was simply the proprietor of the most
powerful of organs, and that sufficed.

Death seemed to have taken a fancy to Lydia Lobb from the first. The
brethren of the pen foregathered strongly at Binder's luxurious mansion
in Portland Place twice a week, and most of them owed something to the
eminent publisher, who knew less about literature and produced more
annual successes than any one in the trade.

Lydia Lobb's inordinate conceit, her vast belief in herself, and
her insane jealousy of others, touched Death's cynicism. He was
half inclined to give her a commission to write a novel for the
Chronicle. He was in a position to boom her work, for the despised
critic has his uses. How many hidden beauties, how many gems of
analysis and subtle meaning, utterly unsuspected by the author, do they
find in books from year to year? How frequently do they prove to the
humble individual his own undreamt greatness?

Death had peculiar faculties for booming Lydia Lobb. He had purchased
the New Chronicle with quite another purpose, but chance had removed
his intended prey beyond his reach, and he was on the look out for
another victim in the literary world.

Lydia Lobb presented many facilities for the purpose. Being well-to-do
and unattached, she had no temptations to do wrong. She had a restless
ambition and a pretty talent for smart writing; her egotism and
self-assurance were unbounded.

*  *  *  *  *  *

Death crossed the drawing-room, leaving his host discussing the
advantages of bone manure for mangels with a perfervid poet of
distinction, and took his place by Lydia's side. She made room for him
with a serene smile. Miss Lobb was quite alive to the advantage of
cultivating the good offices of the New Chronicle director.

"I saw a little thing of yours in the Owl, yesterday," Death said;
"I was very much taken with it. It reminded me of the better and
earlier manner of Azalia Leigh."

"I was her pupil before she became impossible," Lydia smiled. "That
Owl piece was only a fragment from a complete work I am trying to
find a publisher for."

"Publishers are conservative, and so commercial," Death replied. "Send
your work to Wanless, and I will see that it is favourably read. I
cannot say any more, you understand."

Lydia nodded brightly. Wanless was a publisher with a craze for new
people, over whom he had more or less crippled himself. He also ran
a class magazine. Before Lydia slept that night she had posted her
manuscript to Wanless and Co.

Death listened as Lydia favoured him with her opinion of Azalia Leigh,
couched in that strain of bitterness which quondam bosom friends use
towards one another. The ordeal came to an end at length, and Death
made his escape. By this time the rooms were practically empty. Death
lured his host into the smoking-room for a final cigar.

"Do you know," he said presently, "that I am going to boom Lydia Lobb?"

"It's time your journal took up somebody fresh," Binder chuckled. "But
you take my tip — drop the analytical-nasty business, because it's
played out. I'm all for Fielding-and-Water at present. It was only by a
bit of bad luck that I missed having a finger in the Scotch boom. We're
going back to beans and bacon for a time, and a good job too. I'm tired
of these filthy-minded works."

"I shall boom Lydia, whatever she writes," Death replied. "Books are
like soaps, if you puff them properly they are certain to go. Azalia
Leigh's manner——"

"Played out," Binder remarked, with a wave of his cigar; "gone,
exploded. I've got a novel of Azalia's in my safe here at this moment;
a manuscript novel I bought four years ago, and gave a deal of money
for. I haven't read it myself, but my taster was most enthusiastic at
the time. Then the corner in Azalia's petered out, and the stock is on
my hands."

Death's eyes gleamed redly behind his cigar; his face grew more
mask-like than ever.

"What do you intend to do with it?" he asked.

"Keep it, of course. One can never tell what is going to happen in the
book trade. Most people think that Azalia Leigh is dead, but they are
wrong. She's living very quietly at Berne, on a trifle that one or two
of us allow her; but this in confidence. She does not write now."

"Would you mind letting me see this story?" Death suggested; "or, I'll
buy it from you at the price you gave for it. What do you say?"

"Done," Binder replied with alacrity. "Don't you get publishing the
story at present; wait till Azalia has drunk herself to death, which
won't be very long. Then some sap-headed author is sure to discover the
fact, and make a lot of sympathetic copy out of it. There is always a
revulsion when public opinion is violent one way, and you may land a
bit out of the backwash. Tone down a trifle when the time comes, and
serve the posthumous work up hot."

Thus discussed the publisher in private. When Death left an hour
later, he took the manuscript with him, forwarding a cheque for the
same the next day. Binder congratulated himself upon a good deal, and
straightway forgot all about the matter.

At the end of a fortnight, to Lydia Lobb's great joy, Wanless & Co
reported favourably upon her novel, and accompanied the flattering
note with a request for an interview. Lydia found a little dark man in
spectacles awaiting her.

"Your book is somewhat slight, Miss Lobb," Wanless said, "but it will
suit our purpose admirably. We are, as I dare say you have seen,
bringing out a series of one-and-fourpenny popular novels. Our initial
author has disappointed us, and we therefore propose to make your work
the first of the series. The royalty will be——"

The royalty was perfectly satisfactory. Within a week the proof-sheets
were corrected, and eight days later, "A Woman and Some Men" was on the
market. Plot in this story there was absolutely none. There was plenty
of subtle analysis, some cheap and nasty philosophy, and a good deal of
heart-searching in the life of an American woman, who had been divorced
and married three times, only to revert for the second time to the
original husband. It will at once be conceded that the scope afforded
for the requirement of the modern lady-novel was more than ample. With
outward indifference, but really in an agony of impatience, Lydia
awaited the verdict of the superior persons.

The New Chronicle led the way. The next issue of that journal came
out with a leaded leader, calling attention to the new departure in
fiction. They were charmed and delighted at the fresh vigour and
indomitable courage displayed by the author. In her work they saw
traces of the teaching of Azalia Leigh at her best. A new and great
master had arisen, who was not afraid to preach the doctrine of real
freedom. Maida Vale might hold hands uplifted, but the prophet of the
true would prevail.

"What do we find here?" cried the pioneer of thought. "A woman who, in
the struggle for human felicity, has not scrupled, has not hesitated to
place herself in the wrong in the eyes of the world. Read the story of
her parting with Charles Seabright, her first husband. Can anything be
more subtly true than the first sneer over the toughness of the fried
potatoes, which leads up to the final quarrel and parting? Is there
anything artistic in fried potatoes, the cynic may ask? Read the book,
ponder over the broken dish, see the second husband looming like a
vision out of the mists illuminated by Cynthia's cry, ‘Heaven, merciful
Heaven! it is a kitchen-maid this man should have wed.' And then the
tourist Travers comes upon the scene; Charles has gone. Travers is
hungry and athirst. In the bitterness of her despair, Cynthia hands
Travers the potatoes, which he eats and praises. The next day they are
married. The intervening analysis is worthy of a Spencer or a Meredith,
and is quite as lucidly clear. Assuredly the veil has been lifted——"
And two columns more.

Lydia read every word again and again in a rapture of delight. How
great a writer she was she had never known before. Simple sentences,
mere padding behind the jewels of her imagination, became so much
diamond dust in the eyes of the reviewer. Every note of interrogation
had its meaning, every comma was replete with understanding.

A day or two elapsed before anything further transpired. After all, the
New Chronicle was not the only journal of note. There were others
capable of undoing the excellent beginning. But, as a rule, the other
weeklies followed the initial opening faithfully. Two of the great
dailies, whilst guardedly admitting the brilliancy of the volume,
condemned the morality in the roundest terms, with the result that
Mrs. Grundy's grown-up daughters began to ask for the volume at the
libraries, and its popularity was thus complete.

The dream of Lydia Lobb's life was apparently realized. In a month
she had risen from comparative obscurity to the top of the tree.
Her portrait appeared in the illustrated papers. A prominent divine
refused to shake hands with her at a big reception, and within a week
five thousand more copies of the book had been disposed of. As yet no
Free Library Committee had banned the novel, which was disappointing,
especially as Lydia had composed a letter in the event of the same
happening.

Yet, strange as it may seem, there were no publishing Oliver Twists
asking for more. Not a single commission resulted from the good
fortune; no magazine editor wrote, offering his space and a blank
cheque for anything Miss Lobb liked to produce. One editor of note
actually returned a manuscript, with a mere printed form of thanks.

Even the usually sanguine Wanless displayed no alacrity at Lydia's
offer of another novel. He was sufficiently in the know to be aware
that the magazines would have none of her, and there is no permanent
success in literature without that favour. To Lydia's surprise and
mortification, an old story hastily furbished up was returned by her
publisher.

"Take my advice," he said in quite a different manner, "and try
something higher and better. Second books on the same lines are never
successful. One of the happiest and truest sayings of a leading painter
is, that the plain of popularity is strewn with the bones of men of
many editions. You can call to mind a dozen cases in point. And take
your time."

Lydia shook the dust of that office from her feet, and started in high
dudgeon to call upon Death at the New Chronicle. It was the kind
of idea only likely to occur to a woman, and a spoilt literary one at
that. She was furiously angry with Wanless, and her vanity required
soothing. And who more likely to administer the deserved pabulum than
the enlightened journalist who had exposed her brilliant genius to the
world? Had Miss Lobb been aware that Wanless's action had been inspired
by Death she might have been less eager.

Death received his visitor courteously enough. To a certain extent he
shared Wanless's opinions.

"Believe me," he said, "the kind of literature you are engaged upon
at present is too ephemeral. With your talent, I should certainly
look higher; indeed, I am looking for something specially good for
my journal. My dear lady, I know of nobody more capable of filling
my requirements than yourself. If you have something more solid,
more substantial, I shall be prepared to give it my most favourable
consideration."

Lydia returned to her flat somewhat soothed and less ruffled. She
had been sufficiently wise to conceal the fact that she had at home
some two hundred pounds avoirdupois of stories in various stages of
progress. On more than one occasion she and Azalia Leigh had discussed
the production of a pastoral story, something to be a combination of
"Adam Bede" and the "Vicar of Wakefield," with a dash of "Lorna Doone"
thrown in. Amongst other things, she had a pile of manuscript from the
office of the New Chronicle to examine — a legacy left Death by his
predecessor, who published from time to time. These had been found in a
safe, it being Lydia's business to destroy all those beyond identity,
and to return those where possible.

Perhaps there might be something good there, Lydia thought. They were
all stories evidently abandoned by their authors. Pearls are sometimes
discovered in mussels; Lydia might find a gem there. If so, it might
be cut and polished, so as to be impossible of identification by the
original bivalve.

Lydia lighted her lamp and scattered the pile on the table. She was
angry still, and her faith in the guileless publisher yet unrestored.
There was no honesty in the world; why, then, should she damage herself
by the cultivation of so obsolete a quality? Story after story she
tossed aside after reading a page or two, until she came to a bulky
packet halfway through.

It was neatly bound and fastened, and written in a hand familiar to the
reader. Lydia's pulses quickened as she glanced at the pages. The story
was one of Azalia Leigh's, and, from the date at the end, had evidently
been compiled at a time when she and Lydia were friends.

"The wretch!" Lydia murmured; "and she never told me a word about it. I
suppose she deemed it too good to allow me to collaborate."

But Lydia's sneer vanished as she read the first four pages. There was
nothing prurient in the story, nothing to which even a man of the world
could take objection. Lydia's lamp burnt low, and finally flickered out
fragrantly. With a mixed sigh of hope and unreasoning jealousy, Lydia
retired to rest, but not to sleep.

She was up betimes in the morning, and by breakfast had finished
Azalia's story. Lydia was naturally a judge of good work — in others
— and she recognized that she had of the best here. And Azalia Leigh
was no more. The thing was absolutely safe; here was a real literary
reputation absolutely thrust upon her. In the light of this new
treasure, Lydia could not fail to recognize the thin artificiality of
her own work.

Her mind was made up. Within a little time the precious manuscript
was in the hands of a city office devoted to the gentle art of
type-writing, with an intimation that the work must be returned
complete within forty-eight hours. The sub-division of a large office
provided for this, and at the specified time the clear copy was
returned, together with the original folios. Lydia went through them
carefully, counting them in proper rotation; not one was missing. A
short but brilliant conflagration, and all evidence of the deed was
destroyed.

With a sense of elation, Lydia drove off to the New Chronicle
office. Death was there, and received her courteously, smiling blandly
at the bulky parcel.

"You have not lost any time," he smiled.

"Because I am egotistical enough to imagine that I have found what you
require," Lydia returned. "I cannot think how I have overlooked it so
long. I have had the soiled copy typed, so you will have no excuse for
delay in the reading."

Death did not delay. Within a week he had written complimenting Lydia
upon her story. He intended to publish the novel, which was not too
long, as the summer number of his journal, and had already instructed
the artists in the matter. There would be no delay, and Lydia would
please to sign the enclosed contract.

Where was Wanless now? Lydia wondered triumphantly. It never occurred
to her that she was acting entirely upon that individual's despised
advice.

The expiration of a month saw not only the production of the wonderful
summer number, but also a series of notices of Miss Lobb's brilliant
story. They all spoke of it as a brilliant story. When the lexicons of
critics find no such word as "brilliant," it will be a bad day for the
reviewers. But there was in the present outburst of praise a sincerity
that previous notices lacked. There was no straining after effect, no
mention, even, of analysis or subtle motive. There was not an epigram
or a paradox to be found from first to last. There was no great demand
for the number; but, all the same, Lydia found herself in real request
this time.

Yet she derived no enjoyment from her triumph; she felt no shame, but
rather a feeling of resentment against Azalia Leigh for writing such a
book. Why could not the same have been shared by her long ago, instead
of being held over in this way?

Lydia came back to town one evening, after a two days' absence, and
proceeded to array herself for a literary "at home," which would
otherwise have been incomplete without her presence. She was sick of
the country already, and yearning afresh for flattery and adulation.

But this evening it was lacking. It took the successful novelist some
time to discover the fact that she was being positively avoided by
the rest of the guests there, but, when the truth dawned upon her,
she could only attribute it to jealousy. She found herself presently
alongside of the latest thing in the way of a minor poetess, who had no
aversion to fling the stone which the others hesitated to do, though
they all carried flints in their pockets.

"What on earth is the matter with everybody to-night?" Lydia asked.

"Haven't you seen to-day's Telephone?" burning Sappho asked.

"My dear madam, I haven't seen a paper for three days."

"Ah, that accounts for it," was the enigmatic reply, as the speaker
moved on.

Lydia went away raging, and yet suspecting no catastrophe. From the
porter on the ground floor of her flat she borrowed the Telephone,
and carried it to her room. After a hurried search she found something
calculated to illuminate the darkness. It was a letter headed, "A
Serious Accusation," and the signature at the foot was that of Azalia
Leigh.

Lydia's head grew singularly light for a moment She had a curious
feeling of having been buried, and suddenly come to life again. Then
she read as follows —


"SIR,

"It is some years since the pen fell from my wearied fingers, and I
relinquished for ever, as I thought, my connection with the press and
the publishers' bookshelves. Thousands of my former admirers deemed me
dead, and I was content to leave them in that faith. I trusted to the
gentle hand of time to heal their sorrow.

"A reviewer of note once said that my bitterest foe was myself. Up to
three days ago I regarded that opinion as a wise one. But I have a
bitterer enemy still, and that, I need hardly say, in the form of a
once trusted and beloved friend.

"That friend was Lydia Lobb — that enemy is the same person.
Putting her tinsel talent aside, all she has she owes to me. She was my
favourite pupil; I guided her tottering footsteps until she was strong
enough to run the primrose way alone. I linked her name to mine in many
a literary production. She did but write from dictation, sir; I even
corrected the spelling.

"And when the dogs turned upon me and hounded me from public life, as
they have done with nobler animals before, my pupil was first in the
yelling pack. This I expected; this caused me no concern. But that is
not all.

"Shortly before I left England for all time, I finished a novel.
I disposed of that novel. For years it has reposed with a certain
publisher, whose conventional prejudice apparently did not rise
superior to popular prudery, for it has never appeared — till lately.

"By the irony of fate, I find my story appearing as the work of my
whilom friend. Even the title has not been changed. I accuse Lydia
Lobb of stealing my story wholesale, by what means I do not know, and
passing it off as her own.

"I say no more; I leave matters here. I sign my own name to this; of
my address I make no secret. Let Miss Lobb accept my challenge if she
dares; my proofs are ready. For the present, I pause for a reply.



"AZALIA LEIGH."


For a little time Lydia was crushed. What was possible under the
circumstances? But why not proceed to deny the letter in toto?
Azalia Leigh could prove nothing. There was only the word of one woman
against another, and the one an outcast, discredited.

Who was the publisher referred to in the letter? And would he remember
the novel in question? Probably not, as he had not deemed it worthy of
preservation. On the whole, Lydia decided that a bold denial of the
accusation was the correct card to play.

She scribbled off a hasty letter to the editor of the Telephone, and
despatched it at once, in the hope that it might appear in the next
day's issue. Then she went carefully over her ground, until too utterly
confused to think any more. The sanguine side of the human temperament
flourishes best in the gaslight, the morning air being too chilly and
bracing for so sensitive a plant; therefore daybreak saw no repetition
of roseate dreams.

Lydia felt anxious and uneasy. Her letter had been printed without
comment of any kind, but she could not rest with that. To wait was out
of the question. Lydia would go and see what George Death thought of
the matter.

At that very moment a telegram from Death was handed in. It contained
a request that Miss Lobb would favour him with a call. Lydia suddenly
realized that she had no wish to see Death, but she was literally
forced to comply.

There was nothing reassuring in Death's unusual gravity. He motioned
Lydia to a chair. Was it her legs, or those of the chair, that were so
shaky?

"You have seen yesterday's Telephone, I presume?" Death asked.

"I might reply to your question with another, and ask if you have seen
to-day's?" Lydia replied.

"Very well; we will take your side of the case first," said Death. "The
accusation is a serious one. What do you intend to do?"

"What can I do, but deny the whole story? Azalia Leigh is utterly
discreditable and discredited. She has chosen to attack me this way out
of pure spite. You have only to consider the story in dispute, and come
to the conclusion that it cannot be hers."

"Would not the same test of past works apply to yours?" Death replied.

"Well, it might," Lydia admitted. "But the story came from me. I have
no proof but my own word, and Azalia Leigh no proof but hers."

"I have not come to that conclusion from her letter."

"You mean her letter to the Telephone?"

"No; I mean a private communication addressed to me, as editor of the
New Chronicle. She said therein that the novel in question was
disposed of to Mr. Binder, and that he did not choose to publish it,
for certain obvious reasons. The novel was purchased absolutely, and
there was an end of the matter so far as Miss Leigh is concerned. But,
after seeing our summer number, she could not maintain silence any
longer. Now, I am absolutely certain that Mr. Binder spoke the truth,
because, with an eye to future contingencies, I purchased Miss Leigh's
story from him. I looked for it yesterday, and it could not be found."

"That is very remarkable," Lydia stammered.

Death called up his tube, and his chief assistant shortly entered.

"You remember my giving you that story of Miss Leigh's?" the principal
said. "Will you be good enough to tell me where you placed it?"

"In the safe there, of which I have a duplicate key," was the prompt
reply. "The other safe is only opened by yourself, sir."

Death dismissed his assistant. His face grew more mask-like still.

"You heard what Mr. Dalziel said," he went on. "Now, I gave you all the
manuscript in that safe to look through for me. I make no accusation at
present. I simply say that Miss Leigh's story passed into your hands.
Where is it?"

"I must have destroyed it," Lydia murmured.

"Strange, very strange indeed; ominous, I may say. Assuming for the
moment that Miss Leigh is telling the truth, nobody but herself, with
one exception, has seen the story — Mr. Binder taking it on the faith
of the author's reputation."

"And this exception is, of course, unfortunately dead?" Lydia managed
to say.

"On the contrary, he is fortunately very much alive," Death replied.
"He is Mr. Binder's reader, and at my request he has read our summer
number. Will you see what he says?"

Death passed a letter across to Lydia. It was short, but pregnant.


"DEAR SIR (it ran),

"In response to your request, I have perused the story which composes
your special issue of 14th July last, and in reply have no hesitation
in saying that the story therein is identically the same as the one of
Miss Leigh's recommended by me to Mr. Binder.

"Yours faithfully,

"HENRY SHORTHOUSE."


The silence which followed became uncomfortable at length.

"What do you require me to do?" Lydia almost whispered.

"Do I understand, then, that you admit the — er — misunderstanding?"

"Certainly; I have nothing further to say. The temptation was too much
for me. I — I — thought Azalia was dead. I deemed it no great harm.
The story was not yours, or so I thought, and you had good value for
the money. Be merciful to me."

Death turned his face away for a moment. The pleading misery of the
girl's face almost touched him; he felt contempt for the miserable
part he was playing. After all, that vain little butterfly had been
deliberately crushed by him. But for him, it might have fluttered out
its giddy life, unscorned by other moths.

"I shall do nothing," he said at length. "You will go away and write a
full confession, and you will send a cheque for the amount I paid you
to the woman you have defrauded. I have finished."

Lydia caught Death's hand to her lips in a broken spasm of gratitude.
He wrenched it away, as if the hot scarlet had scalded the flesh. Hard
as he was, he was not quite devoid of feeling. He pointed sternly to
the door.

"You owe me nothing," he said hoarsely. "God! if you only knew that —
Go!"

Lydia crept away, broken; not ungrateful. But for Death's clemency,
things had gone hard with her. He listened till her footsteps had died
away. His face was bitter; there was a passionate look of self-scorn in
his eyes.

He struck his hand upon the table, bruising the white flesh.

"What a creature, what a loathsome snake, I am!" he cried. "And yet I
must earn money, or share a similar fate. I shall share a similar
fate, or a worse one. Yet that woman regards me as a man who walks
upright!"




CHAPTER V.—THE EXPERIMENT OF THE PURITAN AND THE PAINTED LADY.


IN the equipment of youth for the battle of life, sufficient care is
seldom bestowed upon his religion. Considering the number of fancy
brands in the market, it would be difficult to find a good excuse
for this laxity. That of a Jew is perhaps the best for a mercantile
aspirant, because it is capable of giving a man seven days' work in the
week without arousing the distrust of his neighbours.

But if Judaism and finance go together, Nonconformity is equally good.
It is impossible to build up colossal concerns like Glasgow Banks and
Liberator Securities without a solid substratum of distinguished piety.
Nothing in this country balances the weight of a ledger so well as a
Family Bible.

In a similar way, Mr. Luke Prout had practised these valuable precepts.
Left at an early age with a father's blessing, and a little cash
dubiously obtained, he had pushed his way up until, at the age of
fifty, he found himself a respected citizen, a borough magistrate, and
chairman of the Licensing Committee of the Maryborough County Council,
Maryborough being a county-borough in view of its prosperity and
importance.

No man enjoyed a greater meed of respect than Luke Prout. He dwelt
in High Street, immediately over the shop, and for five and twenty
years no Sunday had seen him absent from his pew in the sacred
edifice devoted to Evangelistic Calvinism in Maryborough. A tall
man, with a bald, shining dome, intensely respectable nose of the
large retroussé type, and the slack mouth of bourgeoisie, Prout
naturally appealed to confidence.

A man of great mien, Luke was supposed to be comfortably endowed. At
the same time, an application for £2000 trust-money, held for a distant
relative, was causing him considerable anxiety just now.

It would mean a sacrifice, and sacrifices of that kind are not
palatable. True, a sale of "bargains" at advanced prices might have
produced the money; but the man who followed the dictum as to putting
one's trust in princes was nothing like so squeamish where outside
brokers were concerned.

A depression of the market had produced a somewhat similar sympathetic
result upon the corners of Prout's mouth. Therefore, when an assistant
entered the office with the information that a lady desired to see Mr.
Prout, the latter gave the order for her admission gloomily enough.

The lady followed a neat, highly glazed card, on which the legend,
"Mrs. Oscar Vereker," was inscribed in small Roman capitals. A dainty
figure clad in sealskin stood before Luke Prout. That she was a shade
made-up, even his worldly and slightly bilious eyes could see. The
effect, on the whole, however, was pleasing enough, for the lady was
young, and her hair was as the glory of the morning.

"I am sorry to disturb you, Mr. Prout," she said in the most seductive
of tones, her smile warming the heavy heart of her vis-à-vis, "but
I have been directed to come to you on a little matter of business
regarding the premises next door."

Proud bowed. He was thawing a little, in spite of himself. Even a
Puritan with seven children may not be insensible to womanly beauty.

"I desire to buy it under certain conditions," Mrs. Vereker explained.

Prout's interest increased. The premises next door were in the
occupation of one Corcoran, a carpet dealer, who occasionally trembled
so nearly on the verge of bankruptcy, that the United Evangelical
Calvinists had given him more than one broad hint that he might find a
more elastic religion elsewhere. Had Corcoran not been a magistrate and
county councillor also, the fiat would have gone forth before.

"May I ask why you approach me on the subject?" Prout asked.

"Because I understand that you hold the mortgage," Mrs. Vereker said
with engaging frankness. "I may be doing wrong in speaking so plainly,
but I want the place for a concert and music-hall."

Prout gasped. A raging Valhalla next to his own house!

"A music-hall?" he stammered, "with drinking, and — Why, there is
not such a thing in the town! Nothing of the kind exists here. My
committee——"

"That is exactly why I want the premises," Mrs. Vereker smiled. "Your
voice on the committee will turn the tide in my favour. When I heard
you preach on Sunday evening, I said to myself, 'There is the man to
assist me.' I have plenty of money, Mr. Prout, and I have set my heart
upon providing your people here with rational amusement."

"It cannot possibly be done," Prout replied firmly.

"And I am prepared to give £18,000 for the premises."

Mrs. Vereker spoke as if she considered the matter already completed.
In any case, would Mr. Prout consider the interview as confidential?
she asked. Perhaps Mr. Prout would call upon her the same evening, and
let her know further. She was at present lodging with Mrs. Brown, in
the Homefield Road.

"A most estimable woman," said Prout, "and a member of our Church."

"Then you will come," Mrs. Vereker responded with a flashing smile.
"There was a point or two in your sermon on Sunday night which —
Good-bye."

Nothing should induce Prout to call on that woman, he told himself. The
idea of a music-hall in Maryborough was horrible! Luke swelled with
proud humility. How many men in his position would be able to resist
such a temptation? There were several sons of Belial, both on the Bench
and County Council, and the change of a vote or two would make all the
difference. Corcoran was in low water, his property was mortgaged to
Prout to its value already, and at the offer of a few hundred pounds
would readily change hands. Mrs. Vereker was prepared to give —— What
a very easy way to a small fortune, and pay off that £2000, without any
distressing sacrifice!

Filled with this virtuous pride, and fully convinced of his superiority
to the great majority of his fellow men, Prout found himself by easy
stages working his conscience and himself towards the residence of Mrs.
Brown that same evening.

Not that he intended to call there. But £18,000 is a deal of money.
Anyway, there was no harm in seeing Mrs. Brown, with a view to asking a
few questions concerning her fascinating lodger. It might be all done
in a few weeks, and that troublesome trust-money paid off without worry
or annoyance.

It will come as no shock to the cynic to learn that half an hour later
Luke Prout was sitting opposite Mrs. Vereker, a cigarette between his
lips. There was another person present during the earlier part of the
evening, a quiet person with a face like an ivory mask, who appeared to
be Mrs. Vereker's secretary.

Prout enjoyed his cigarette in a carnal fashion. He subsequently
partook of some sole à la Princesse, with a piquant sauce prepared
by Mrs. Vereker's fair hands, and, to fill up the measure of his
iniquity, crushed a cup of Mumm, a seductive liquid which in some vague
way he identified with Anno Domini 1884. On the whole, the conclusion
was forced upon Prout that there are suppers in the land of Belial
which can compare favourably with bread-and-cheese and cider.

"And now, Mr. Prout," quoth the lady, what time Prout's eyes shone
with a metallic glitter, and his legs were thrust out like those of an
untrussed knight, "regarding the premises next to yours. I must have
them; will you negotiate the transaction for me? You know my price.
If you could buy the place yourself, and then transfer them to me, it
would be better,"

"And your license?" Prout asked.

Mrs. Vereker's eyes twinkled as the diamonds on her fingers.

"I am prepared to risk that," she said. "Depend upon it, I shall bring
a majority round to my way of thinking; and as to the conduct of the
place——"

"It will leave nothing to be desired," Prout said thickly. "Recreation,
my dear lady, within decent bounds, is good for all of us. Even my own
girls are allowed to indulge at home in Terpsichore's gentle art, with
the dining-room chairs for partners. Rest assured that I will do what I
can with the committee."

By morning, Prout had reduced his conscience to a fitting docility.
Like most of his fellows, he suffered from the form of spiritual
indigestion that assimilates the succulent camel, whilst it rejects the
crapulous gnat.

Early in the forenoon Prout dropped in upon Corcoran. The little man
received his creditor with an uneasy smirk. A visit from Prout rarely
meant pleasure. The man to whom you owe a large principal, to say
nothing of a regular accumulation of interest, is not the companion the
genial soul yearns for.

"Well, Peter," Prout commenced, "and how is business?"

Mr. Corcoran responded that it was very bad, adding as a rider, it
could not possibly be worse. Prout looked gravely sympathetic.

"I'm sorry to hear it," he said, "and none the less so because I want
money myself. I shall have to call up the mortgage, Peter. Why don't
you sell the place, and start elsewhere on less expensive premises? I
could do with this house myself, for a little speculation I have in my
eye. Once for all, I'll give you £800 over, and close your mortgage and
arrears, and say no more about it."

"It doesn't seem a lot," Corcoran murmured.

"It isn't so bad, when I could call the place my own in three months,
and keep my eight hundred in my pocket," Prout said with unction.

"Well, perhaps not," Corcoran admitted; "still, many things happen in
three months, and I've had my bit of luck this week. You haven't been
a hard creditor to me, Mr. Prout, but business is business. I've been
offered £6000 for the place this morning."

Prout's jaw dropped. Was it possible that —— But, no.

"Is it for some immoral purpose, like singing, Peter?" Prout asked.

"Maybe it is," Corcoran said somewhat defiantly.

"But the Lord's people spoilt the Egyptians; and in any case they won't
get a license, so my conscience is easy. Still, I'd rather sell the
place to you, Mr. Prout."

"At £6000 do you mean, Peter?"

"No, at £8000, Mr. Prout. The sum you mention was the first offer, and
I believe they will go higher, as they seem very keen. I had the hint
from a graceless nephew of mine, who has gone on the stage, to the
great grief of his mother whose sole support he is; and yet that lad
might have got a pound a week in a Christian firm! Think it over, Mr.
Prout. I am, to a certain extent, in your hands; and you may benefit by
the transaction."

Further persuasion was useless; Corcoran fortified himself behind a
rampart of texts, and forthwith Prout gave up the contest. It seemed to
him that Providence was unkind. That Corcoran should have gleaned so
much, was a distinct misfortune. It meant practically the loss of £4000
at one fell swoop.

And yet Prout had to decide one way or another in the course of the
day. Unless he did so, the theatrical syndicate might slip in and offer
Corcoran an enhanced price. And £10,000 on the transaction was a fair
profit, even for these degenerate days.

Why had Corcoran preferred to sell to him? Probably, because a
license would be one of the conditions of sale, and without Prout's
support that would be out of the question. In this matter Corcoran
had displayed more than his usual acumen. Was there something else
concealed in the background? Mr. Prout gazed sadly at the motto, "Trust
one another," suspended over his desk, and sighed.

If he did make the plunge and buy the place, nobody must know anything
of the real reason till the last minute. There was Captain Hamley,
for instance, deputy chairman of the Licensing Committee, who took a
deliberate delight in thwarting him. He liked to take down one whom he
dubbed a sanctimonious hypocrite. If Hamley, and one or two others,
guessed his interest, they would reject the license out of pure
contrariness.

That evening Peter Corcoran enjoyed the rare distinction of supping
with his esteemed friend and neighbour. Before they parted, the
transaction was completed; Prout to buy the property at the stipulated
price, and Corcoran, like the astute Br'er Rabbit, to lie low for the
present, and say nothing.

"I'll get Barker to draw up the contract in the morning," Prout said in
conclusion. "There's no reason why the thing should be delayed longer."

The contract was duly drawn up and signed, the purchase to be completed
in a month.

For the next day or two a London architect, accompanied by Mrs.
Vereker's silent secretary, was extremely busy about Corcoran's
premises.

Mrs. Vereker professed herself to be delighted. She had paid £20,000
into a local bank, the deposit-note for which Prout incidentally saw.
He had an absent-minded way of turning over other people's papers, an
affliction chastened by occasional practical results.

"The only thing we have to do now," Mrs. Vereker remarked, "is to
assure the license. Hadn't we better make application to the committee,
and deposit our plans before going any further?"

Prout smiled. The application was as good as granted. It would be
carried by a majority of two — his own vote and Corcoran's. As yet
Mrs. Vereker had signed no contract to purchase from Prout. The latter
did not care to hurry this matter. When every difficulty was smoothed
away, he looked forward to squeezing a little more out of his client,
since he would be absolutely master of the situation.

All the same, the plans were prepared and deposited, and due notice
given that on a certain day an application for a music and dancing
license would be made, in connection with certain premises in High
Street, Maryborough.

The Nonconformist conscience was aroused. Maryborough business people,
proverbial for commercial acumen, thoroughly appreciated the value of
an advertisement; and here was one for the display of a hard-wearing
durable piety at serial rates. Every little bethel seethed and boiled,
each conventicle echoed with denunciation.

Mr. Prout was foremost in the fray. It was impossible for so hard a
spiritual rider to hang back from the first flight in this brilliant
run without attracting attention. Besides, he had a deal at stake. To
raise the capital necessary to carry out the scheme, he had had to
borrow money on certain shares, and also to obtain an advance from his
bank by means of a deposit of deeds.

He breathed a little easier when at length the purchase of Corcoran's
premises was completed. Only a fortnight more, and the license would be
granted. His vote would doubtless come as a surprise to Maryborough;
but nobody would know that he had made anything by the transaction. He
could easily account for his vote; he could suggest that the presence
of an architectural Hades in Maryborough was intended to act as an
example to the lewd who debauched on penny readings, and the like; he
could preach broad-mindedness, and last of all, he could vote against
the license, and save his soul alive next year.

It must be nice to have a mind like this.

Saturday before the fateful Monday, when the license was to be applied
for, came round. The publicans and sinners on the committee made no
mystery as to what they intended to do; noses had been counted, and the
license would be rejected by two.

Upon Prout's sanguine reflections there intruded a deputation from the
Evangelical Calvinists. They had a solemn request to make. In Prout's
discourse upon the following evening, would he denounce this infamous
attempt to corrupt the youth of Maryborough, led on by that depraved
play-actress.

Mr. Prout gave the desired assurance. It had always been his endeavour
to protect virtue, and to grasp the nettle vice boldly, though he did
sometimes mistake tares for grain. On Sunday night the chapel was
filled with an immense congregation, amongst which Prout was a little
disconcerted to see Mrs. Vereker in propriá personá.

His effort was unquestionably a fine one; indeed, it could not have
been otherwise, seeing that it was translated literally from the Scotch
of the Reverend Angus McGruder, who had consumed a whole bottle of
whisky over its composition. Some of the diatribes on the side-lights
of drink in connection with dancing were, apparently, inspired.

The audience was much moved; tears were freely shed, and Mrs. Vereker,
who was known to some of the audience by sight, buried her face in her
handkerchief for the most part. She seemed to fully realize the extent
of her own wickedness.

Most of the good people who went home that night regarded the new hall
as doomed. But a further surprise awaited them the following day. Very
little time was wasted by the committee in hearing the application made
by a solicitor (who was chairman of the Local Veto Union), and opposed
in a passionate speech by counsel from London (who had been mainly
instrumental in floating the phenomenally successful Anatomy Theatre),
then the committee retired to consider their verdict.

At the expiration of ten minutes they returned. The face of the
chairman was that of a thundercloud. He was one of the elect.

"The application is granted," he said, "by seven votes to five. What
motives my colleague, Mr. Corcoran, may have had in voting for the
license may be transparent, but the public are certain to demand some
explanation from Mr. Prout, in view of his very recent denunciation of
the entire scheme."

Prout rose amidst a dead silence. He had voted for the license. Why?
That was what the public was curious to hear

"I do oppose the whole scheme," he said, "and that is why I voted
in its favour. To appreciate the evils of this kind of thing, it is
necessary to see it rear its hydra head in our midst. Absence of danger
renders us callous. The hand relaxes, and the eye loses its vigilance.
My action to-day will strengthen our hands, we shall rally together as
against a common foe. Vice will be beaten back, and virtue will smile
triumphant. The waverers will rally to the flag, and fight like men.
And if anything is further wanted at my hands, I am prepared to justify
my action at another time, and in another place."

Prout sat down, and looked into his hat for a moment. Perhaps he was
praying for power to soften the hearts of his enemies.

Naturally, he had his following. Every good man has. And Prout felt he
had time on his hands now to strengthen his position. The community of
Evangelical Calvinists were rent in twain; so glorious an opportunity
for bitter internecine strife was by no means to be lost.

Within a week the split was complete; new premises were procured,
and an entirely novel sect founded, under the title of "Selected
Christians." Thus does the slang of the counter permeate the pulpit.
England was the richer for yet another religion, and forty quarrels to
the death waxed and grew fat.

Meanwhile Prout had seen nothing of the seductive Eve, who was
the cause of all this strife in the select and bourgeois Eden of
Maryborough. Not that it mattered very much, seeing that the deed was
done. Mrs. Vereker was popularly supposed to be in London selecting a
Star Company, and a wardrobe to match. Prout was in no great hurry;
the further preparations were pushed, the more money he was likely to
derive from the transfer of his new property.

But at the end of a fortnight Prout began to grow uneasy. The strife
had settled down, and the interest upon his loan was running up. It was
an easy matter to procure Mrs. Vereker's London address, and write her
to the effect that all things were now ready.

By return of post came a reply that caused Prout's heart to sink, and
his faith in the future to waver. The letter ran thus —


"DEAR MR. PROUT,

"I have changed my mind respecting the Maryborough Music-hall. I am
convinced now that the idea was a mistake from the beginning, and to
this view I have been converted by yourself.

"Within the narrow limits of a letter I cannot express my feelings.
Perhaps if you were to come and see me, I should be able to explain my
change of views. In future the stage will find in me a deadly foe.

"Yours sincerely,

"HILDA VEREKER."


Prout quoted something sulphurous from his newly established vitriolic
creed. He called for a Bradshaw, finding subsequently that a train
would land him in London about six o'clock. By that time he arrived in
Paddington, and proceeded at once to Marion Square, where Mrs. Vereker
resided. Whilst waiting for that lady he had plenty of time to prepare
his attack.

After a decent interval, Mrs. Vereker entered the drawing-room. Prout
was immediately conscious of some subtle change, a soberness of attire,
that warned him of the worst. The glittering jewels, the diaphanous
drapery, were no more. In their place reigned sombre black, set off
with white flowers. Mrs. Vereker conveyed the impression of one who is
in mourning for some remote relative. She had recently buried her own
frivolity, and as yet was barely accustomed to the bereavement suffered.

"So you have come, Mr. Prout," she said, in tones of gentle resignation.

"I could do little else," Prout replied. "What is the meaning of this
nonsense, Mrs. Vereker? At great expense and trouble I procured those
premises for you — the loss to myself is some thousands of pounds."

"Then why not sell them again, Mr. Prout?"

"Sell them? For mere business purposes they would not clear my
mortgage. Unless you carry out your promise I am practically ruined;
besides the money, I have dropped quite half my customers."

Mrs. Vereker sighed with deep sympathy. "I am quite helpless," she
murmured, "and you are entirely to blame."

"I to blame? Why, I did everything that a man could."

"You did; you made me see the error of my ways. I regard that powerful
sermon of yours as the turning-point of my career. I tried to shake off
its effects in vain; I grappled with the spirit upon me helplessly. I
could not continue my carnal career. In twenty-four hours my mind was
made up. I renounced the stage, and everything connected therewith; to
clinch the matter, I made a present of my ready money, £20,000 in all,
to further the movement for the suppression of stage plays. Beyond a
small annuity from my late husband, I have nothing, and yet I was never
so happy before."

Prout stared helplessly at the speaker. The Madonna-like purity of her
face, the rapt expression of her eyes, bewildered him. No brand plucked
from the burning had ever so singed saintly fingers before.

"You certainly mean all this?" he gasped. "You are not playing some
dodge?"

"Dodge, Mr. Prout?" Mrs. Vereker exclaimed. "How dare you insult me?"

"Insult be hanged!" yelled the victim. "You have deluded me with your
confounded caprices, and now I am to be ruined as well. I'll have the
law of you. I'll expose the whole transaction."

Mrs. Vereker laughed. Her gentle mirth brought Prout to his senses.

"You are not likely to gain much by that," the lady observed. "I am
under no obligation to you, and an exposure of the whole transaction,
as you call it, would scarcely redound to your credit. The sudden
conversion from Sunday to Monday —— Oh, Mr. Prout, let us be friends.
I cannot bear to quarrel with one who has been the instrument of my
conversion. It was your burning eloquence that first illuminated the
new life for me. Do not quarrel because I have been so apt a pupil.
Beware of the greed of gold, Mr. Prout; lay not up for yourself——"

"Are you going to carry out your contract, or not?"

Mrs. Vereker elevated her eyes with true Christian resignation.

"I cannot," she murmured; "I have placed it out of my power so to
do. Still, hope is not entirely lost. There are other theatrical
speculators——"

"To whom the license has not been granted. Do you suppose that, once
having shown my hand, they will play into it again? Why, those in
favour of such things would vote against me out of pure spite."

"Every good man has his enemies, Mr. Prout."

Over the rest of the scene it is well, perhaps, to draw a veil. It was
impossible to make any impression on the lady; the evangelist and the
worldling had changed places. Finally, Prout took his leave, after a
fearful exhibition of feeling, calculated to cause another rift among
the Selected Christians.

Scarcely had he departed with words culled from the Commination Service
on his lips, before Death entered the room. He listened, apparently
without interest or amusement, to a recital of what had transpired.

"An easy matter," he said. "There is a cheque for your fee, which you
have well earned. It will be something to relate in part to your fellow
Thespians in America on your return there. I am obliged to you."

"Don't mention it," Mrs. Vereker replied, with a vivacious change of
tone; "only too pleased to oblige again at the same price. What will he
do — eh?"

Death shrugged his shoulders. "Eventually, you mean? That is a class
of stuff the professional martyr is made of. A fair gift of gushing
sentiment, and a child-like personal confidence. Were I a speculator, I
should not mind giving him £10 per week, and running him as a martyr.
There is plenty of money in the business yet, and many fields besides
politics. Prout will never want; rest assured of that."

Mrs. Vereker smiled as she placed the cheque in her purse.




CHAPTER VI.—THE PURPLE FAN.


THE origin of the Purple Fan is unknown. In remote ages it is believed
to have monopolized the devotion of the greater portion of the
Celestial Empire, to the detriment of a first chop Joss of amazing
ugliness. The fan occupied an adjacent temple for many cycles, until,
one day, it was discovered in a slightly damaged state on the floor,
what time Joss was observed to smile benignly. Subsequently the fan
fell into disuse as a deity, although never quite shorn of its healing
virtues. It passed thence to the royal palace at Pekin, from whence
it was stolen at the time of the war with China, and after many
adventures, arrived in England.

By bequest the fan was subsequently left to the Honourable Herbert
Cressingham, who gave it as a wedding present to Lady Capulet on her
marriage. The two were over head and ears in love with one another,
but Cressingham's poverty barred the way. Capulet was fairly rich, and
verging upon seventy; his bride was beautiful, and eighteen. A roué
and libertine from his youth up, it is no great stretch of fancy to
imagine Capulet a jealous and exacting husband.

He cursed Cressingham in a gentlemanly way, and bade my lady return
the fan without delay. What did that pauper fool mean by passing on
so valuable a commodity, and thus setting people talking again? For
Lord Capulet was Under-Secretary for Asia; he had made a study of that
mysterious, but fascinating, continent, and he knew that Cressingham
could have disposed of the fan to the Son of the Moon and Stars for a
sum large enough to place him on a pecuniary level with a brewer, or
financial journalist. Li Sing, the Chinese minister, would have given
anything for the fan, or he would have stolen the same with equal
celerity.

It is hardly necessary to state that Lady Capulet did not return
the fan to Cressingham. In the first place, she shrunk from such an
act of self-abasement; and, in the second, she was a woman and a
lover of pretty things. As a work of artistic beauty, the fan was
unique; its gold sticks and wonderful purple-painted brocade had no
fellow. Therefore the fan was carefully placed away, after the lesson
inculcated by Poe, in an oak chest in the library at Verona Castle,
where nobody was ever likely to seek it. The fan might appear at Court
yet what time Providence gave Lady Capulet an opportunity of wearing
her weeds with pious resignation. For my lord was short of neck as
of temper, and there is always hope when these two go together. When
Isabel Montagu had sold herself into bondage, she had carefully taken
her ticket-of-leave into consideration.

These, however, were minor vices. Lady Capulet had seen them all before
at home, and, as everybody knows, the Montagu family was founded by
Squire Western. The great grievance was as to my lord's real position.
He posed as a rich man, whereas he was fearfully poor, and heavily
in debt into the bargain. Politics and the Ministry he still stuck
to, because the £2500 per annum derived from the Asiatic Office was a
perfect godsend.

The estates Capulet had no power to encumber; but the furniture, and
pictures, and plate, were all more or less in pawn, and there remained
little but the library now on which to raise money. Most of the
financial agencies knew something of Verona Castle.

For the present my lord was confined to the stately edifice in
question by an attack of the gout, a distressing malady from which he
periodically suffered — all the more unfortunately just now, since the
Asiatic Office was about completing an important commercial treaty,
which was quite at a standstill during Capulet's indisposition.

Dr. Herbert Lennox crossed the hall on his way to the morning-room,
where his distinguished patient reclined, his right foot swathed in
bandages. The elder Lennox, up to the time of his death, had been
the Capulet family physician, and consequently their practice was
an aristocratic one. Herbert Lennox was more or less a society man
himself, which meant that, though a bachelor, he lived up to and beyond
his income. The smart, well-groomed young doctor, with his easy manner
and distinguished appearance, did not by any means look the struggling
man he really was.

And yet, if possible, he was worse off than his noble patron. An
execution upon his household goods loomed in the near future; but that
was not the worst. The late senior in the firm had been greatly in
request as family, friend and executor, and many of these trusts had
devolved upon the younger man. And the application of trust-money to
foreign purposes is apt to be attended with disastrous results. It is
hardly necessary to say more. The time comes when the money has to be
repaid, and in Lennox's case the time was exactly ten days. There could
be but one possible ending.

Capulet greeted his medical adviser cordially enough, considering.

"I was bound to send for you, Lennox," he said. "You must patch me up
some way. I've got a most important piece of work to transact next week
in connection with the Asiatic Office; in fact, the ambassador, Li
Sing, is coming down here on purpose."

"I dare say we shall manage it," Lennox smiled. "Rather singular
that Li Sing is coming down here, isn't it? He'll be breaking open
everything to try and find the Purple Fan."

Capulet grunted. Everybody was familiar with Cressingham's wedding
present; but few knew that the same had presumedly been returned to
the donor. Lennox was amongst the elect, the little domestic trouble
over the gift being followed by a fit which had promised to carry Lord
Capulet off, after which the doctor naturally learnt the truth. But
that the fan was still in the castle nobody knew, with two exceptions.

"This worry does me a lot of harm," Capulet proceeded. "Unless you can
make something like a man of me, Li Sing is certain to come off best.
There's one of those money-lenders coming to-day as well. One must have
money, Lennox, though what the deuce security I'm to give him, Heaven
only knows. Perhaps Mr. Ralph Lawson is a financial philanthropist.
I've heard of 'em, in books."

Lennox started slightly. Ralph Lawson and Co were a money-lending firm
who had been doing a deal of advertising by circular. Their terms
were easy, their desire being to benefit humanity at any trouble to
themselves. The circulars had done their work. Lord Capulet had risen
to the bait, and so, sub rosa, had his lady — dressmakers, even,
require to be paid sometimes — and Lennox was in the net also. Mr.
Lawson had written personally to him, saying that he would be at Verona
Castle in a day or two, when he should have the pleasure of calling on
Dr. Lennox.

On the doctor's appearing next day he found the castle the richer by
two arrivals. The first was Li Sing, gorgeous in Oriental robes, and
resplendent as to pigtail. His manner was open and amusing, also he
displayed an amazing knowledge of English ways, and the tongue of
the Saxon. There was a cunning twinkle in the eyes, however, and the
smiling mouth betrayed lines of determination. He came now in the
spirit of conciliation; he was equally agreed with Capulet on the need
for the treaty, and on the whole, the visit promised to be an agreeable
one.

Interesting as Li Sing undoubtedly was, Lennox deemed Mr. Ralph Lawson
more so. The latter individual he found to be tall, immaculately,
if quietly dressed, and having urbane manners in the minor key. His
inscrutable face rarely smiled; his features seemed to be concealed
behind a waxen mask. The reader has met Mr. Ralph Lawson before, it is
hardly necessary to observe.

Lennox remained to luncheon, after which Capulet and Li Sing were
left over their cigarettes and claret, only Li Sing drank tea, brewed
by himself. As Lennox was about to take his departure, Ralph Lawson
requested his company in the library. He found that most of the
valuable books had been taken from the shelves, and were piled up in
assorted heaps upon the floor.

"We can talk business here," Ralph Lawson suggested. "You will not
mind my going on with my work whilst you make me au fait with your
affairs. I am pressed for time."

"You are purchasing this library, then?" Lennox asked.

"Practically. There is nothing else here available, and some of the
books are exceedingly valuable. There are no less than four Bibles
which —— But I am detaining you. Go on, please, whilst I separate the
wheat from the chaff."

Lennox placed the best possible face on his own affairs. Lawson
appeared to possess the faculty of listening and working at the same
time. He had a bunch of keys, which he proceeded to fit to various
chests and lockers, the contents of which he turned out upon the huge
table in the centre of the room.

"I am sorry that I cannot assist you," he said in a voice which Lennox
knew to be decisive, as he turned out a small oak desk. "But it would
be merely throwing good money after bad. Still, there may be others of
my profession."

Lennox was not listening. The sudden sickening sense of disappointment
had given place for the nonce to another feeling. His eyes were riveted
on the contents of the chest. There was a pile of photographs, a bundle
or two of letters, and a plain chagreen case, marked with Chinese
figures in gold. With trembling fingers, but with a fair assumption of
carelessness, Lennox gently opened the box.

As he quite expected, it contained the Purple Pan.

He glanced hurriedly at Lawson. At the same moment the latter
carelessly replaced the contents of the chest, without locking it, and
hastened from the room. A little later he returned and snapped the lock
to, but not before the Purple Pan, minus its case, had been transferred
to the tail-pocket of Lennox's frock-coat.

After a commonplace remark or two, Lennox left the room and the castle.
Lawson's first proceeding was to unlock the chest again and examine the
chagreen case. He gave a smile of satisfaction at finding it empty.

"My information was quite correct, then," he murmured. "I felt sure the
fellow would never be able to resist such a temptation as that, though
I must admit I was lucky in finding the fan yesterday. But then, luck
always does assist a man when engaged upon such devil's work as mine.
My next step will depend upon the action Lennox takes. He must have
money in a few days, and the inference is that he will try and sell
his treasure to Li Sing. I can precipitate matters by showing this
case and these letters to Lord Capulet, if necessity arises. Really,
the coil promises to be so pretty that I must allow it to wind off a
little further. There is nothing to lose by delay, and everything to be
gained."

With which Lawson abandoned his dirty work for the hour. So far as
was possible, he devoted his attention for the rest of the day to
Li Sing. On the second evening this espionage suddenly ceased, and
simultaneously Lawson announced to his host the completion of his
examination of the library, and his desire to settle the financial
question forthwith.

"I can see my way clear to find the sum your lordship requires,"
he said. "But there are one or two little things I should like you
to examine, as it would be just as well to keep some of those old
manuscripts in their original boxes. One of them contains what appear
to be private papers. Will you kindly see to this, my lord?"

Capulet growled something. His gout had improved that day in a ratio
adverse to his temper. And Li Sing, instead of remaining for his
diplomatic chess when his opponent for the first time was up to the
game, had rushed up to town for the day on business of a private
nature. Still, as Lawson paid the piper, he called the tune, and Lord
Capulet followed unwillingly to the library.

The fictitious money-lender cut no time to waste. In furtherance of his
plan he placed before his host the chest containing the fan-case and
the packet of letters and photos.

"I will return presently," he said. "Your lordship will probably be
some time, and I have other business in this locality. I shall be back
by dinner. To-morrow I can give you a cheque for the amount stipulated,
and trouble you no further."

A few minutes after Lawson had left the Castle, the library bell rang
violently. The Baron of Sheppey, bereft of his boots, was not more
beside himself with consuming passion than he of Capulet. The footman
was frightened.

"Send my lady here at once," Capulet cried hoarsely.

She came, white, statuesque, as usual. It was an oak rocking in a gale
of wind over a field of frozen snow. There was nothing new to Lady
Capulet in these unseemly exhibitions of passion. She was accustomed
to curses; there was a hidden blue mark under her dress that told of
something worse.

But she faltered now, and clutched at the back of a chair for support,
as she saw the chest on the table. Her secret had been found out.
Capulet had the fan, which he supposed had been returned to the donor,
and worse still, he had the passioned letters, written from time to
time by Cressingham to his lost love.

"I have found these," Capulet said in a hoarse whisper. "I have read
them. You wretched woman! What have you done with the fan?"

"It is there," Lady Capulet said calmly.

It was the placidity of despair. She expected no quarter; asked for
none. The letters were not those of guilt, despite their Sapphic glow.
But in the jaundiced eye of jealousy they were confirmation strong as
proof of Holy Writ. A jury would probably decide the worst; certainly
they would have the opportunity of doing so. Lady Capulet had nothing
left but her good name; it was hard to lose that.

She bent her head to the storm, listening. What had become of the fan?
Li Sing must have found it. Had he done so, there would have been no
hesitation on his part. He had stolen the long-lost treasure; by this
time it was on its way to Pekin.

Suddenly the storm broke, and died away. The overtaxed machinery
relaxed. Homeric wrath collapsed to senile gibbering as Lord Capulet
lay on his back in the centre of the Turkey carpet, babbling of strange
things. Plainly the Asiatic Secretary had had a fit of the worst
possible kind. He smiled at his wife as they carried him away; asked
her to go birds'-nesting with him on the morrow.

Lennox, summoned post-haste to the bedside of his distinguished
patient, shook his head. Whilst there was life there was hope, he said.
His lordship would require great care and attention, the relaxation of
which might be fatal.

Li Sing, on hearing this verdict, expressed his regret and his vexation
at the delay in a matter calculated to cover both his host and himself
with glory. They must hope for the best, he told Lady Capulet politely
after dinner, but for the present he was in the way, and would be far
better employed in London.

Lady Capulet glanced at the smug face of the speaker. His boyish air,
and the blandness of his almond eyes, did not deceive her.

"One thing before you go," she said. "What have you done with my Purple
Fan?"

Li Sing's face did not lose anything of its placid expression.

"Stolen, in the first place," he observed as he peeled another peach,
"from Pekin."

"And stolen in turn by you from Verona Castle, your excellency."

"Ah, there you are profoundly mistaken. You ask me where the fan is.
A day or two ago it was here; now it is on its way to China, under a
trusty escort. We view these things quite differently to what you do. I
obtain that sacred object as I can; in fact, I was actuated by a desire
to obtain it when I came here. We have known for a long time that
the same was not returned, contrary to your husband's wishes, to Mr.
Cressingham."

"But you have stolen it. Disgraceful!"

"Indeed, I did nothing of the kind," Li Sing said imperturbably. "I did
not have the opportunity. Not that I should have hesitated. The thing
was really ours; I may say it formed an integral part of the Celestial
Empire. I should not have hesitated to kill you to obtain it; as it is,
I can eat your peaches with an easy conscience."

"But your statement is tantamount to a confession of theft."

"My dear lady, in the Books of Confucius——"

Lady Capulet waved the easy philosophy aside impatiently.

"If you did not steal my fan, who was the thief?" she demanded.

"To obtain a thing surreptitiously, theft must be the first cause," Li
Sing remarked. "Pity your logic is so fragmentary. Your fan was stolen,
not by me, but by Dr. Lennox, who delivered the same into my hands for
the sum of £5000, English money. I had to buy it from him, and the
money has been paid."

Li Sing's air was one of truth. His expression was too refinedly
cynical for falsehood. He had the manner of a man who bears with the
wrong-headed ignorance of childhood, or angry illogical femininity.

A sequence of facts, known to Lady Capulet only, coloured the plain
statement. Lennox's father had known the whole history of the
ill-starred Cressingham's attachment and its sequel; and when Lady
Capulet had lain at the point of death, during the brief gamut of her
child's life, he had been her father confessor.

In case anything happened to her, it would have been the old family
physician's lot to see that the contents of the oaken case were
returned to Cressingham. But, with every desire to die, Lady Capulet
had, as a natural consequence, lived, and there was no necessity. The
elder Lennox must have made his son acquainted with this episode.

"I suppose it is a waste of time to be angry with you," she said.

Li Sing shrugged his shoulders, a gesture he had learnt in Paris.

"Quite," he replied. "We regard the matter from entirely different
standpoints. To obtain that fan at any cost is practically part of
my religion. Dulce et decorum est, etc. Only our patriotism does
not take the same form as yours, and it is far less remunerative. At
the risk of arousing your ridicule, let me tell you that the fan is
a sacred object, which it is death to handle, save by the bonzes. Of
necessity I had to handle it. And do you know what reward mine will
be when I return to the Flowery Land?"

"Something unique in the way of a button, I presume," Lady Capulet said
bitterly.

"Death," replied Li Sing, with a smile, "death, accompanied by horrible
torture. Strange, is it not? But, then, our ideas are different. I
merely tell you this to justify my conduct. Really, these are most
delicious peaches."

Lady Capulet retired, baffled and defeated, and on the following day
Li Sing departed also, with the hope that he might return in time,
and find Lord Capulet so far recovered as to complete the pressing
diplomatic business so rudely interrupted.

Her ladyship's parting with Li Sing was not unfriendly. After all, that
gaud had brought her nothing but misery, and the envoy was only obeying
his ingrained fatalism in obtaining possession of the same by any means
in his power.

The whole thing was as nothing side by side with the fact that Lord
Capulet possessed Cressingham's letters. Lady Capulet had searched for
them in vain. Should her liege be restored to health, the certainty
of divorce proceedings was absolute. And Lady Capulet shrunk from the
contemplation of such a thing with all the horror of her proud pure
nature.

Capulet must not recover! This conclusion forced itself upon her at
last. She made no attempt to battle with the temptation. Why should
he recover? Of what service was he? Nothing need be done; a negative
policy, a little cold neglect, and she was free!

Why did he not die? was her constant question. There was only one thing
for it. It was on the third day that she taxed Lennox with his fault.

"Do not deny it," she said. "Denial is useless. Acting upon secret
information, you found and sold my fan to Li Sing. I have his word for
it. I have seen the receipt for £5000 signed by you. 'Twas a mad thing
to do."

"Desperate people do desperate things," Lennox muttered. "It was a
matter of life and death to me, my lady. You are mistaken in one
particular, however; though I did know the history of the Purple
Fan, its hiding-place was betrayed to me by accident. There was my
temptation and my opportunity. Under the same circumstances——"

"Enough of that. The thing is done. Did you see anything else when you
took the fan?"

"Yes. A packet of letters, so far as I could judge."

"Mr. Cressingham's letters to me. Innocent as they were intended to be,
they are capable of a terrible interpretation. My husband has them.
Once my lord recovers his health, I am ruined. Need I speak any more
plainly?"

"I am deeply sorry," Lennox commenced.

Lady Capulet gripped his arm with convulsive force. "It is no time for
sorrow," she whispered; "it is a moment for action. I hold your future
in the hollow of my hand; a word from me, and your ruin is absolute,
complete. Listen to my terms — the price of my silence. My lord must
not recover."

"Great Heavens! Do you mean to say——"

"Hush! Remember, I can crush you if I choose. Lord Capulet lies at
death's door. Were he to die to-morrow there would be no surprise felt.
You told me that the slightest neglect — Capulet must not live."

Lennox wiped the moisture from his palms. Lady Capulet was cold as ice.

"Lord Capulet's recovery is dubious," Lennox said. He made no further
protest. Like a spent fish, he came quietly to the gaff. "The chances
are against it. Neglect is not criminal, neither can it be regarded as
manslaughter. You belong to the devoted order of wife who prefers to do
her own nursing. Medical science can avail but little."

Lady Capulet bowed as her eyes met those of Lennox for a moment. There
remained no more to be said; the understanding was perfect. When a man
is like to die, is it murder to allow nature the career of her humour,
or in humanity to refrain from medical experiment? In any case, the
ethical point is an exceedingly nice one.

*  *  *  *  *  *

For some days Capulet lingered on in the same comatose state. He got
neither better nor worse. The policy of Lennox was one of masterly
inactivity. Meanwhile, the heads of the Asiatic Office grew impatient.
If Capulet could be patched up so as to complete his negotiations with
Li Sing, he could subsequently die decently in his bed; at any rate,
it would be just as well for him to settle matters one way or another,
and, if the worst came to the worst, make room for some one who would
ensure finality of the Asiatic question.

So it came about on the eighth day that Lennox found himself in the
library, confronted by no less a person than Sir James Fitzmayer, the
eminent specialist. He had come down by desire of the Prime Minister,
he said.

"This is no ordinary case, Mr. Lennox," he remarked. "When imperial
interests are at stake, one's professional etiquette necessarily
becomes elastic. At Lady Capulet's desire, I have seen your patient.
May I ask what your treatment has been?"

"Nothing," Lennox stammered. "There is literally nothing to be done."

Sir James instantly launched into a learned dissertation upon
nerve-paralysis and its concomitant evils. Had Mr. Lennox, for
instance, thought of — or — ? He had not. Sir James's manner became
more hard and dry.

"It seems to me that you are disposed to allow Nature to anticipate
you," he said. "I presume you are aware that the domestic relations
existing between Lord and Lady Capulet are the theme of common gossip?
And our press to-day is uncommonly outspoken. Lady Capulet is an
extremely beautiful woman, Mr. Lennox."

Lennox replied nothing. This man seemed to see everything. The idea
that another doctor might interfere had never been dreamt of.

"Perhaps I have been wrong," Lennox faltered at length.

"Well, we are all liable to err. You will be perhaps glad to share
the responsibility with me for a few days. Will you kindly follow me
upstairs with that case? Mind the table, my dear fellow; no more noise
than is necessary, please."

Four days later, Lord Capulet was sitting up in bed, discussing certain
papers with Li Sing, who had travelled from town on purpose. There was
a wild glare in his eye, and a twitching of his fingers; otherwise he
was perfectly sane.

"Keep my wife and that fellow Lennox away from me," he mumbled to
Fitzmayer. "I haven't been so blind as they imagine. They were simply
allowing me to die, by George! But I shall be even with them yet."

Sir James said nothing, but privately urged Li Sing to further
despatch. By nightfall the business was absolutely completed. The
next morning found Lord Capulet sitting up in bed with a handful
of bed-feathers in his mouth, and in a mumbling childish treble,
proclaiming the fact that he was the pelican of the wilderness, and not
to be disturbed on any account, as he was about to lay an egg.

"Practically, the end has come," Sir James informed Lady Capulet, as he
drew on his gloves previous to departure. "His lordship may live for
some years yet, but he will never vary from his present condition. He
is absolutely harmless."

Lady Capulet breathed more freely. With a sense of oppression
lightened, she watched Sir James drive away in the direction of
Lennox's house.

But Lennox was not at home; he could not face that interview. In a
note he had left for the eminent specialist, he explained that he was
going abroad — to America — for the benefit of his health, and that
business in London, in connection with the sale of his practice, would
prevent his seeing Sir James again.

"The least said—" Sir James muttered; "but I should like to get to the
bottom of it."

*  *  *  *  *  *

There was another man equally curious — Lawson, otherwise Death. That
the temptation of the fan had been too much for Lennox's honesty, he
knew perfectly well. In all probability, Lady Capulet's threatened
exposure had driven him to new pastures. On the whole, the financial
guise had served Death well.

But, astute as he was, the truth never dawned upon him. That one crime
is certain to lead to another, he did not take into account. Lord
Capulet had his wife's lover's letters; but then the mad nobleman was
incapable of using them, so no light on the subject could be expected
from that quarter.

"A qualified success," Death summed up the affair finally, "and a
tremendous amount of energy wasted in the breaking of a butterfly."

Wherein Death was absolutely wrong. To the ramifications of a crime,
like the radiations from a stone dropped in a quiet pool, there are no
ends.




CHAPTER VII.—THE EXPERIMENT OF THE WHITE CHRYSANTHEMUM.


THE editor of the Seeker regarded his visitor with polite interest
bordering on admiration. Most men would have been conscious of a
tincture of fear in their dominant emotion. For the stranger who walks
coolly into one's sanctum and proceeds to reel off a detailed history
of one's outer — and inner — life generally wants something.

"You will correct me if I am in any way mistaken," the intruder
suggested.

Mr. Max Farre glanced at the stranger's card which lay on his table.

"You would make a good biographer, Mr. Death," he responded with a
bland smile. "Your memory is superb, and you display an attention
to minutiae which is remarkable. I am not prepared to deny a single
statement made by you. But permit me to ask, why this keen, if
flattering, interest in my welfare?"

"The usual reason. An equally keen interest in my own."

The editor and proprietor of the Seeker smiled. He looked more like
a soldier of the empire than a mere journalist. His air was distinctly
military; his white moustache bristled; his Vandyke beard disguised
slightly the lines of an obstinate chin. The son of a Frenchman of
family and distinction by an English mother, Max Farre favoured the
consanguinity of his sire — a stormy petrel of politics from the death
of the Corsican to the deposition of Louis Philippe. There had been
no arrière pensée in the politics of Felix Farre; hence his exile and
poverty.

By adoption and inclination his son was English. A scientist, a
chemist, and a scholar, he had preferred to devote his earlier years to
the furtherance of the cause. A strong poetic vein in his composition
had driven him back on the seamy side of Party; the mysterious
connection, the occult sign, the bowl and dagger business, had appealed
strongly to the sentimental side of his nature. For some years the
continental police had marked Max Farre as "dangerous" on the records.

Now, given education, and the calmer outlook of increasing years,
and your young Shelley of the Dark Conclave is apt to become your
mild Conservative, with strong views on the rotary crops question. In
Farre's case, marriage had lured him to the safe, if prosaic, side
of the Rubicon, and his first child and the Seeker were produced
simultaneously. Everybody knows the Seeker — that glorified arbiter
with a strong scientific bias, mildly liberal and duly didactic, as
such literature always is. There is not much money in scientific
research, but as a chemist the name of Farre enjoyed a continental
reputation.

Hitherto the profits of the Seeker had sufficed to keep Max Farre
and his family in comfort and luxury. It enabled him to reside in
Cromwell Road, to entertain an extremely select circle, and to place
his children before the world with liberal educations and many
influential friends. On Farre's record no speck rested; he was the
soul of honour, simple and unaffected, despite the vast range of his
attainments.

Latterly, however, the scope and influence of the Seeker had
somewhat diminished. That shining light of jackdaw journalism, the
proprietor of the Muckrake, profiting by the immoral condition of
the copyright laws, had produced Scientific Plums (twenty-four
pages, profusely illustrated, one penny), a series of bold piracy from
anywhere at the bare expense of the necessary cutlery, and success had
crowned honest endeavour. Not to be outdone, the editor of Sneakings
followed with another equally original journal, the Finder (also
twenty-four pages, profusely illustrated, one penny), and from that day
the Seeker gradually declined.

Farre found it hard work to keep before the world, and this at the very
moment when it was absolutely imperative to do so. Another three years,
and the necessity would not be so great. His children would be firmly
established in the world, and then Farre would be in a position to
accept an alluring lecturing offer in the States, and thus wipe off the
burden of debt under which he was staggering along.

Death he did not fear in the slightest. He was too brave a man, too
profound a philosopher, for that. And Death would have cleared away the
bankruptcy which Farre dreaded more than anything under the sun. His
life assurance policies would render that impossible, but the premiums
payable upon a sum of £20,000 haunted him like a nightmare. He paid
them as a man pays for heaven — with his heart's blood.

A wonderful man, an ideal man, Death thought as he sat there
discoursing calmly. Presently he concluded his recital.

"You would not be in the least flattered," Farre smiled, "by my
declaration that you are anything but an ordinary individual. There
is certainly nothing of the blackmailer about you; and even if there
were, I have little to fear. Will you kindly come to the point of this
remarkable interview?"

"I was about to do so," Death replied. "You see how thoroughly
conversant I am with your affairs. Now, you must have frequently
noticed how the lives of two men, often utter strangers, are bound up
together. Our lives are part of the same piece. Imprimis, you are a
member of 'The Decree of '55.'"

Farre started slightly. Then he smiled again. "I must ask you to give
me proof of that statement," he said.

"Naturally. Allow me to shake hands with you, thus. You note the grip?
The passwords remain identically the same. On your left fore-arm are
the figures ‘55.' On mine are the same. Like yourself, I am a member of
the Decree."

"But I no longer hold with violent unconstitutional methods, Mr. Death."

"Which brings us to the crux of the question. Neither do I, and that
is why I am here. It is many years now since you set the Decree at
defiance."

"I will conceal nothing from you, for obvious reasons. In the year '67
I withdrew from the Decree, and refused any longer to consider myself
under their instructions. There was a plot on foot to assassinate
Napoleon III. Bah! the adventurer was certain to meet his deserts ere
long. I was the chosen instrument. I preferred leaving matters to
Providence. I was right."

"There was another little matter which has escaped your memory," Death
remarked softly. "I know this, because I have recently refreshed my
memory with the Decree records."

"You must be in the confidence of the leaders, then."

"I am, or rather, I was. A great deal of new blood has been imported
lately, with the usual result. They are anxious to know why you should
have been allowed to escape so lightly. Your life is in considerable
danger, Mr. Farre."

"Is that really so?" Farre asked calmly.

"I am perfectly serious," Death replied. "We are comrades in
misfortune, for I, too, am a rebel. I am perfectly aware that you are
not afraid. But there is another matter. If you meet with a violent
death at the hands of the Decree, your life-policies are forfeited."

"An important consideration. Upon what grounds, pray?"

"Well, bluntly speaking, fraud. Not intentionally, of course, but
considering at the time you first insured you were actively connected
with a dangerous secret society, the fact should have been disclosed.
The legal point is a nice one."

For the first time Farre was visibly disturbed. Dishonour after death
seemed to him coequal with the loss of a good name whilst living.

"There are certain means," he said presently, "certain death-dealing
instruments capable of giving an appearance of decease by natural
causes."

"Again I have to thank you for an opening," Death replied. "My
information is to the effect that at one time you discovered a vehicle
for the destruction of life which could not be traced. This vehicle you
were commanded to surrender to the Decree. You refused to do anything
of the kind."

"True, because a relation was to be removed by such means. Thank God,
I realized the horror of my position in time. A wholesale murderer, a
walking pestilence! Horrible!"

"You are still in a position to put your theory into practice?"

"Certainly; I could destroy a nation without fear of detection. Why?"

"Why? Don't you see that, such being the case, you are in a position
to laugh at your foes? What this reinvigorated Decree makes up in
determination it lacks in numbers. With the means at your command, it
would be easy to discover the names of all the members. After that
you could destroy them at your leisure — not that there would be any
necessity after the first tragedy or two. Fear would render the rest
powerless."

"Absurd!" Farre smiled. "I am not an avenging angel. To the point, sir."

"Quite so. Now, my life is in the same danger as yours, whilst I am not
so nice in my means of defence. What my fault is matters nothing. If
your discovery is what you claim for it, I am prepared to purchase the
same from you."

"For the purpose of destroying the Decree? You offer me money to
betray my oath, to become the instrument for the destruction of those
misguided men?"

Death was silent for a moment. Such was exactly his intention. At a
vast deal of risk, trouble, and expense, he had joined the Decree for
that purpose. He had marked down Farre — a portion of whose past
history had come to him by accident — as not the least noble of his
quarries. Farre's financial position had been easily mastered. To bribe
this man for the sake of his family and his honour, to say nothing of
personal safety, was Death's main object of the moment.

Money had placed the Decree on its legs again; money had procured the
peculiar class of desperado necessary to the success of the plot. After
all these years Farre had been warned that Nemesis was upon him.

"What do you propose as to the extent of your bribe, Mr. Death? "Farre
asked.

"I am not prepared to admit that I am offering you a bribe at all,"
Death replied. "I am a very rich man, and value my life accordingly. If
your discovery is efficient, I am prepared to give you £20,000 for the
same."

"To destroy my whilom colleagues and pay me for breaking my oath?"

"And to preserve you from dishonour, remember. Do not forget my point,
re the insurance companies. I have had legal opinion on the matter.
If, however, you think that no attempt will be made on your life——"

"On the contrary, I am sure that one will be."

"And the result may be the dishonour you dread."

"Perhaps," Farre said dryly. "Like the fox in the fable, I have many
avenues."

There was a light lurid as of inspiration in the speaker's eyes.

"I am fain to confess that you puzzle me," Death murmured.

"Precisely my intention," said Farre, with a brilliant smile. "With the
queen apparently in check, it is not well to betray your combination
for saving your game. I have to thank you for an involuntary
suggestion. A good swordsman always learns something from his
opponent's rapier-play. I shall take time to consider your offer."

"And your invention? I should like to know something of its outline."

"You shall do more. I will explain the whole thing to you. Come this
way."

Farre conducted his visitor from the editorial sanctum to a large
room behind, fitted up as a laboratory and workshop, the key of which
he always carried. Then he produced from a safe a curious-looking
instrument, closely resembling the double ball and india-rubber tube
peculiar to scent-sprays, only in the present case covered with
something that seemed like fish-scales — in reality fine plates of
tempered steel.

"There is my instrument," he said. "The only one made; the only one
that ever will be made. This tube is calculated to resist a pressure
that would astonish you. The nozzle or barrel is, as you see,
exceedingly fine, the charge being inserted in this lower sphere by
means of this sliding valve. A sharp pressure of the hand forces the
projectile along to the second chamber, and thence along the nozzle."

"A tiny projectile, truly."

"On the contrary, as large as my clenched hand. Only, as the same is
wrapped in a plastic envelope or tissue, it expands to its full size
directly it is impelled from the nozzle. There is absolutely no noise
at all."

"A strange toy, surely!" Death exclaimed. "But the wound?"

"There is no external wound at all — nothing but a slight bruise,
which medical science would be powerless to trace, or even to account
for. My projectile is compressed air encased in an elastic envelope
no thicker than a soap-bubble. The impact would shatter this coating
to nothing, leaving no trace behind. As far as any suspicion of foul
means, why ————"

Farre shrugged his shoulders. Each instrument was only capable of one
shot at a time, he proceeded to explain, although the projectile might
lie dormant in its case for weeks without any sensible diminution in
power.

"And your means for compressing and enclosing the air?" Death asked.

"Is my secret," was the reply. "Turn that nozzle on to your victim
through a button-hole, press the globe sharply, and you can destroy him
in the street, in the theatre, anywhere, under scores of eyes. You are
perfectly safe. Death is caused by violent inward eruption — what-not?
A few days' talk, a medical correspondence, and silence."

Farre threw his instrument back into the safe again, and closed the
door sharply. Then he proceeded somewhat pointedly to examine his watch.

"I will call again in a day or two, and hear your decision," Death
remarked. "In the mean time, permit me to thank you for your kindness,
and bid you good morning."

On the following day Max Farre received another warning from the
Decree. Death was evidently losing no time in forcing the hand of his
antagonist. Farre smiled strangely as he read the mysterious missive,
which he proceeded to burn.

"The fools!" he muttered. "They little know they are playing into
my hands. All that remains now is to ascertain when and where the
meetings are held. I know the passwords, the sign and the knock I have
not forgotten. De Reska will tell me. If my destroyer is to be chosen
to-night, as they are kind enough to inform me, there is no reason why
I should not be present, and ascertain who it is to be."

A little while after dinner the same evening Farre left his house in
the most cheerful mood. Over his evening dress he wore a long overcoat;
he smoked a cigarette with jaunty air. After a while he turned into a
shabby side street, where he slackened his pace and proceeded to count
the houses carefully. Presently at one of them he knocked.

The door was immediately opened as if by secret means, and Farre found
himself in inky darkness. Out of the chaotic mist a voice addressed him.

"Will the light never come?" the voice said.

"Patience and candour will bring light as well as liberty," Farre
replied.

Immediately something fell at his feet. Apparently Farre knew what
to do, for he took up the object, which turned out to be a mask, and
placed it carefully over his features. After a short interval the gas
flared up, and the new-corner strolled along a passage until he came to
a large apartment filled with people masked like himself. Amongst them
were one or two women as well.

Presently they gathered round a long table and drew lots for a
chairman; the choice falling upon a thick-set individual, who spoke in
indifferent, guttural English. The routine business of the company was
quickly transacted; then Farre pricked up his ears as he heard his own
name mentioned.

He was not kept long in suspense; he was denounced as a traitor, who
too long had been allowed to remain in rebellion against the Decree.
The only business remaining was to draw lots as to who should remove
the miscreant.

As the business proceeded in solemn silence, Farre looked keenly around
him. The assassin would draw a marked card, all the rest being blanks,
so that he alone should know the secret as to who had been chosen for
the desirable deed. Presently Farre noticed a man on his left give a
quick start with a sudden indrawing of his breath, and then as rapidly
resume his self-control. Beneath the mask the square resolute chin lay
exposed, and Farre smiled; evidently the chosen one would carry out his
task to the letter.

Then the conspirators broke up into little groups, which dwindled away
one by one. Farre lingered until the individual he had marked out made
for the door; then followed him. It was a difficult and dangerous
business, but it was successfully accomplished at length, the quarry
being tracked down to a small house in Bloomsbury Crescent, into which
he proceeded to admit himself with a latch-key.

"Good!" Farre muttered. "I shall recognize that mouth and chin
anywhere, and I can easily find out who my friend is in the morning. It
seems to me that I can relieve him of a vast amount of responsibility.
No man likes to incur the risk of being hanged, however deluded a
patriot he may be. I can save him and myself at the same time."

Before the bloom of the following day had faded, Farre had succeeded
in his endeavour. The apparently lawless occupant of No. 7, Bloomsbury
Crescent, was a young German, Erenthal by name, who followed the
precarious occupation of teacher of languages. He was comparatively a
new-corner in England, and bore an excellent character, albeit his rent
was not paid with the regularity his landlady could wish. He had most
of his meals out, and avoided all contact with the other boarders.

All of which Farre learnt with a smile. The rest of the afternoon he
spent in his office, destroying a vast quantity of private papers. When
this had been accomplished to his satisfaction, he cleared the desk,
and drew paper and ink towards him. After putting down the date, he
wrote as a heading, "My Friend," and then paused in deep thought; at
the same moment a messenger came up with Death's card.

With a gesture of impatience, Farre directed that his visitor should be
shown up. He came quiet and imperturbable as ever.

"Need I state my errand?" he asked by way of greeting.

"Perhaps it is hardly necessary," Farre replied. "You want to know
whether I am prepared to betray my old comrades for a certain sum of
money? No."

"You have carefully considered your reply? You quite understand that
you would merely be acting in self-defence in so doing?"

"Certainly. But I will not violate my oath, least of all for money, Mr.
Death."

"Your scruples are honourable," Death replied. "Your destruction
otherwise is certain. And if the insurance people fight your claims——"

"They will do nothing of the kind," Farre interrupted with a quiet
smile. "In any case, it would be a vast injustice after receiving my
money all these years. But they will not refuse. You must get out of
the impasse as best you can, Mr. Death; it is certain you will have
no assistance at my hands."

Death retired, feeling baffled. Not that he owned to defeat yet. That
Farre contemplated some tour de force he felt certain. No scheme of
Death's had failed yet, but, on the other hand, he had not set himself
to cope with so brilliant an intellect before.

Meanwhile Farre finished the letter addressed to "My Friend" — a
somewhat lengthy communication, which he placed in a box together
with something of scientific appearance, and despatched the whole by
messenger to the address written on the same.

*  *  *  *  *  *

Two nights later a considerable number of people were supping at the
Oriental Restaurant. The place presented a brilliant spectacle, with
its men and women in the full panoply of evening dress under the glare
of the electric light. The tables were mostly filled, there being but
one empty seat at a certain corner nook occupied by two men, evidently
strangers to each other. One of them wore a white chrysanthemum in his
button-hole.

Presently another man strolled in, and, glancing carelessly around him,
made his way to the vacant seat opposite to that occupied by the wearer
of the chrysanthemum. He recognized one or two of the other guests
there with an easy smile. Most of the flâneurs knew Max Farre by sight and
reputation.

He ordered oysters and Chablis, chatting briskly to his fellow-feeders
the while. A mot trembled on his lips, when suddenly he fell forward
on the table without a groan. A moment later and the whole place was in
a ferment. A doctor hastily summoned from an adjoining table hurried
forward, only to pronounce that life was extinct.

"The poor fellow is quite dead," he said. "So far as one can judge, the
cause is the bursting of a small blood-vessel on the brain. There is
an indentation of the frontal bone that suggests a severe blow quite
recently. Do you gentlemen know him?"

"He is an absolute stranger to me," replied the man with the
chrysanthemum.

The papers were full of the strange affair next day.

The post mortem disclosed a rupture of a blood-vessel on the
brain, no doubt caused by a blow, though how and when the blow was
administered there was no evidence to show.

The inquest of the two chief witnesses was brief enough. Mr. Galby,
a stockbroker, could say nothing save that he supped at the same
table as deceased; and the same remark applied to the man with the
chrysanthemum, who gave his name as Carl Erenthal, of No. 7, Bloomsbury
Crescent, teacher of languages. A verdict of the usual kind was
returned. The leading papers devoted a column to the brilliant editor
of the Seeker, and the incident was forgotten in the passing of a
day.

One man remained unsatisfied, however, and that man was Death. How had
the thing been managed? Beyond question Farre had perished by means
of his own diabolical invention, which must have been supplied to one
of his fellow supper companions by himself. Mr. Galby, the florid and
prosperous stockbroker, was out of the question. Who, then, was Carl
Erenthal?

Death set himself to find out. With the means at his command, this
was no difficult matter. Erenthal was a member of the Decree; he was
present on the night when lots were drawn as to who should remove Max
Farre. The power of gold over the scruples of the patriot is in the
same ratio as its influence over more mundane subjects.

It was nearly a week later before Death called upon Erenthal at his
rooms. He was prepared to take for granted that the latter was Farre's
murderer. Personally he had no fear, and his declaration to Farre that
his life was in danger was a mere façon de parler. He was not so
sure even now that his plot had failed; after all, he may not have let
loose the bloodhounds and attacked Farre's honour in vain.

Erenthal received him sulkily, and with some suspicion of manner.

"What do you want with me?" he demanded.

"A trifle," Death replied. "If I mistake not, you are a member of the
Decree, and your number is 175. If you make another suspicious movement
like that, I shall be compelled to shoot you through my coat-pocket. I
am a member myself, if it will ease your mind to know it. How did you
murder Mr. Max Farre?"

"I had nothing to do with it," Erenthal said doggedly.

"Oh yes, you had. You carried in your pocket a pneumatic tube, charged
with compressed air and covered with metal scales. The nozzle of this
thing was trained through the flower you were wearing on that night,
and by its means Farre died. Are you going to confess to me, or shall I
call in the police?"

"He was a traitor, and he had to die," Erenthal said sullenly.

"Don't be a fool," Death retorted. "I have not the slightest intention
of doing you any harm if you will only tell me the truth; otherwise
the police will compel you to speak. And you would rather be a living
Anarchist than a dead hero, or you would not have been so eager to
avail yourself of absolutely safe methods. Tell me everything, and you
are safe."

Erenthal rose after a pause, and produced a letter from a desk.

"Read that," he muttered; "it will tell you everything. As to the
instrument, you will not be surprised to hear that I destroyed it days
ago."

Death proceeded to read as follows: —


"DEAR FRIEND,

"It becomes necessary that you should act as the instrument for my
destruction. This I have ascertained beyond the shadow of a doubt.

"I make no protest, I say nothing; I do not attempt to ward off the
inevitable. But since I must die, I ask to be allowed to perish in
my own way, having no fear in my mind that this letter will ever be
betrayed to any one. Am I not right, dear friend?

"For friend you are, did you but know the facts of the case. I am
content to die by your hand, but in my own way. Herewith I send you one
of those means of destroying life secretly, which the Decree has been
trying to coerce me to part with for years. Attached to the same, you
will find the most minute instructions for its use.

"On Friday night I propose to sup at the Oriental, the hour ten to the
moment. If possible, keep a seat opposite yourself for me. Wear in your
button-hole a white chrysanthemum. The flower will be useful for two
reasons — identification, and something more important; the latter you
will find set out in the instructions for using the machine. I shall
order oysters for supper. When I have taken the seventh, I shall lean
across to you, and then — well, if your nerve is steady, the rest
remains with you.


"Yours faithfully,


"MAX FARRE."


Death slowly tore the letter into minute fragments.

"The explanation is entirely satisfactory," he said, "as explanations
are when they run parallel with one's own theories. There is absolutely
nothing more to be said. Rest assured that we are never likely to see
one another again."

"Ja wohl," responded the German, phlegmatically.

Death retired, cogitating deeply. After all, he had not failed. Reduced
to its first proportions, the thing resolved itself into deliberate
suicide on Farre's part. He had not fallen into the trap that Death had
set for him; but, in avoiding that, he had quietly, and with his eyes
open, stepped into the gulf.

He had been a party to his own murder — a murder committed in such a
way that Farre had saved his reputation, and died in the possession
of a sum large enough to satisfy his creditors and leave a handsome
balance. Under the circumstances, the insurance companies would not
dream of disputing their indebtedness.

"And I shall say nothing," Death muttered to himself. "Peace to his
ashes! He was a brave man, and one after my own heart."




CHAPTER VIII.—THE EXPERIMENT OF THE DICTATED MANUSCRIPT.


DEATH listened quietly as his companion chatted on. They were seated
alone in a first-class smoking-carriage on the three o'clock express
from Paddington. Death's appearance was indicative of holiday mood; he
wore a suit of grey, with knickerbockers, and his hat was garlanded
with flies. Outside, 'twas sweet June weather.

His companion had the air of one who has travelled. His pleasant
features were bronzed, his frank speech was veined with strange
colloquies. He looked like a trusty companion, a fair friend. As a
matter-of-fact, Digby Collingwood was an unadulterated rascal, a fact
perfectly well known to his fellow-passenger.

"Strange that we should run together like this, you knowing something
of my friends," said Collingwood; "especially as you are going to stay
at Marlwood."

Death nodded gravely. So far as he was concerned, there was no occasion
for wonder, seeing that he had deliberately marked Collingwood down for
some time, and had spent both trouble and money learning his history.

"I shall be pleased to call upon the Miss Leytons," Death replied;
"I should much like to see the household of the ladies who write so
charmingly. My aunt, the late Sophia Risdon, was a school-fellow of
theirs, I understand."

"You mean the authoress of 'A Dual Life'? My dear fellow, my old
friends rave about her. It was she who directed their feet into the
paths of literature years ago; until Miss Risdon's larger talents
sought a wider field, in fact. As a relative of that distinguished
writer, you will find a hearty welcome at Rock Cottage."

"The sisters are no relation of yours, I understand?"

"Distantly — very distantly connected," Collingwood responded
carelessly. "I am always certain of a welcome there after my
wanderings. I have been home from Chili two months without seeing them,
and a pretty lecture I shall get."

Death smiled, and changed the subject. Collingwood had been less
easy in his mind had he known how much Death knew of his reasons for
visiting Marlwood. Presently the train reached Stroud, and here the two
passengers alighted. There was no conveyance to take Collingwood to
Marlwood, a distance of ten miles, therefore Death volunteered a seat
in his dogcart, waiting by appointment to carry him to Manor Farm, his
headquarters for a few days' trout-fishing.

"Well, good-bye for the present," Collingwood remarked. "We are only a
mile further along. Any one will show you the way. You'll call in a day
or two."

"I shall certainly do myself that pleasure," Death responded gravely.

For two days he fished with fair success. He took his meals in the
panelled farmhouse parlour. Ten o'clock found him between sheets of
homespun linen, lavender-scented. He had tracked the snake to the
paradise; his plans were matured.

For puppets, Death had two maiden ladies of good family, of high
attainments and spotless reputation; and, on the other hand, a
shameless scoundrel, who, in the guise of a friend, was trading upon a
family secret.

Death knew the record well enough. It had cost a good deal of money and
some time, but now the coils of the spring lay in the hollow of his
hand. And Sophia Risdon, the late talented authoress of "A Dual Life,"
was no myth, albeit she was no relative of Death's. It mattered little;
he could trade upon her reputation. He knew everything; he knew how the
estimable sisters lived upon the proceeds of their pen; he knew how
their little patrimony, hundred by hundred, had gone into Collingwood's
pocket; he knew how the latter would ruin them eventually.

And their earnings were little enough, in all conscience. They had the
entrée to more than one sixpenny magazine of repute, like the Sunday
Morning and the Golden Hour, published by a pious corporation
paying twenty per cent., and remunerating struggling authors at the
rate of two shillings a page, in the name of God and pure literature.
There were occasional novelettes, halfpenny erotics, written by one
sister or another, with shame in the secrecy of the closet; but life
lay that way. And most of this hard-earned money found its way into
Collingwood's pocket.

Three days passed before Death called at Rock Cottage. He passed up
the neatly gravelled path, between rows of standard roses, finding
himself at length in a sweet-scented drawing-room, furnished in a
bygone fashion. Yet there was no mistaking the place for anything
but the abode of ladies; a pleasant hush dwelt there; the place was
scrupulously clean. The Leytons kept no servant.

Presently they came in together; two gentle-faced old ladies, with
lace caps on their snowy little curls, and red bloom a-cheek, like
the blushing sunward side of their famous Ribstone apples, which they
marketed so carefully in due season.

They were dressed precisely alike, in thick silk cord, overhung
with black lace; they had large lace collars and mittens. A family
portrait or two hung on the walls, for the Leytons had been persons of
importance in bygone days. Despite their pretty timidity, it occurred
to Death that one of them, at least, could show the old wild blood
still, should occasion arise.

Miss Delia came forward first, and swept a stately curtsey. Then she
presented her younger sister Dorothy in due form.

"We are glad indeed to see you," said the elder in a thin, but not
unpleasant voice. "My sister and I have been anticipating this visit
with pleasure."

"Mr. Collingwood assured me of a welcome," Death smiled.

Looking swiftly up, he saw the shadow fall on the two faces opposite
at the mention of Collingwood's name. Miss Dorothy sighed; Miss Delia
clenched her hands. There was resolution in her eyes, and a desire; a
longing for opportunity.

The conversation naturally gravitated to the late Miss Risdon. The
belief of the two sisters in their late friend was something touching.

"She taught us all she knew," Miss Delia remarked. "She put us in the
way of supplementing our little inheritance by writing. But we never
had her fibre, her dramatic power. She was the pioneer of the present
strong school of fiction."

They plied Death with questions, some of which he turned adroitly. But
for all this he had been prepared; and concerning many things in the
history of Miss Risdon he could speak freely, having been coached for
the part.

He was somewhat relieved presently, by the announcement of tea. Miss
Dorothy had slipped away, on hospitable thoughts intent, and presently
returned with the information that the cheerful cup was ready.

"We keep no servant," Miss Delia explained. "They are so troublesome.
Mr. Death, you will be good enough to take a dish of tea with us?"

Death responded with alacrity. He found himself seated presently at
a round oak table, covered with a fair white cloth. There were cups
and saucers of old Chelsea; the teapot was silver, of an early George
pattern; the worn spoons were Apostles. There was thin bread-and-butter
and dainty cakes; honey fresh from the fragrant sweet-peas of the
cottage garden, and preserves of apricots culled from the same south
wall. Altogether, Death seemed to have gone back a generation.

The meal proceeded cheerfully till Collingwood entered. His presence
was like that of a cold wind blowing over a bed of flowers. He brought
in with him a drifting atmosphere of tobacco, which seemed foreign and
offensive there. In his hand he carried a huge Navy revolver, which he
deposited on the high mantel.

"Been keeping my eye in with the dickey birds," he explained breezily.
"Aunt, do you suppose Mr. Death would be offended if I asked for
something a little stronger than tea? Habit, you know, is second
nature."

Just for an instant a change crossed Miss Delia's face. Jeanne d'Arc
might have looked like that as she donned her armour. Another instant,
and the lurid light faded. There are volcanoes nearer than Etna or
Hecla, if we only knew it.

From an old-fashioned secrétaire Collingwood produced brandy in a
cut-glass vessel. The liquor was old, for it diffused a scent like
peaches. Then, as the wanderer's tongue was loosened, he began to speak
of many things and lands.

He was a wolf — a handsome one, mayhap — amongst the sheep. His air
was a trifle swaggering; his assumption that of a master there. Death's
insight enabled him to see the fascination and terror exercised by
Collingwood.

"How long are you going to stay in England this time?" he asked.

It was evident at once that neither of the ladies had dared to ask the
question. They hung upon the reply with a flattering interest.

"It all depends," Collingwood responded carelessly. "I'm a consistently
unfortunate beggar, and my speculations go awry with undeviating
regularity. My good friends, here, are always glad of my company, and
sometimes they are pleased to participate in my ventures. I try to
dissuade them, but they have always faith, and this time I hope——"

"Dorothy, you are bending your teaspoon," Miss Delia said sharply. "Mr.
Death, you were saying something just now respecting your distinguished
relative's unpublished manuscripts. Is there any chance of the world
seeing them? We lost sight of our kind friend for so many years before
her death, that we know nothing of her latter occupations."

"There was very little left," Death replied. "Miss Risdon was in the
habit of finishing one story at a time. There is something of hers
at my rooms in London, carefully sealed, which I have never seen.
Proof-sheets I understand them to be. But the magazine died a sudden
death, and the tale was never published."

"And you have never seen the story," Miss Dorothy said reproachfully.

"I plead guilty to the charge," Death smiled. "In fact, the matter had
entirely escaped my memory till this moment. Will you allow me to make
you a present of the packet? The contents may be useful to you; perhaps
you can construct a story out of them. I will send for them with
pleasure."

The two ladies professed to be delighted. Anything from the pen of
their dear friend and guide would be treasured by them. But as to
making use of the story, why, such a thing was out of the question.

"Delia shall see it first," said the younger lady. "Sophia was her
friend. And perhaps she will let me have a peep at the treasure
afterwards. That is the way we read our good books, you understand.
One of us peruses the volume carefully, without mentioning it till the
other has digested it also. Then we compare notes."

Death departed at length, with a promise to send for the precious
proof-sheets, Collingwood accompanying him part of the way. The latter
discoursed fluently in his very fascinating manner; his gaiety was
boisterous; with his revolver he took pot-shots at such birds and small
game as crossed his path during the journey.

Death shook him off presently, and continued his way alone. The people
at the Manor Farm were early in their habits, and by ten o'clock Death
had the house practically to himself. He heard his host go slowly to
bed, and a door bang sullenly behind him. Then Death lit a cigar from a
wax candle standing on the table beside him.

From a desk he produced some sheets of paper, printed in indifferent
ink upon poor material. Plenty of the same quality can be found
in magazines of fifty years ago. There were twelve quarto pages
altogether, fastened with wafers at the corner, and forming a rough
galley proof of a short story. The margins were marked with corrections
in a faint feminine hand. Under a strong glass Death examined every
page carefully.

"They seem to be perfect," he said, after a close scrutiny, "and are
certainly calculated to deceive an expert. But one never can be too
careful in such matters. Lenay has executed his forgery very carefully
indeed."

The proof pages purported to be the last story ever written by the late
Amelia Risdon. The story was a strange one, with an ingenious plot.
As a matter of fact, the whole thing had emanated from Death's busy
brain. The main idea had suggested itself to him after the issue of
the "White Chrysanthemum" experiment. The ground plan was somewhat the
same, its natural advantages obvious. Altogether, Death had hit upon
an extraordinary idea — a desperate way of clearing Collingwood from
the field. And by means of these proof-sheets, the suggestion, ergo
the temptation, would be placed in Miss Leyton's way. The inspiration
must come as a voice from the dead; of it the living must know nothing.
Afterwards the story could be destroyed, and then——"

A woman is capable of much in defence of her child or her home. That
there were latent possibilities in Delia Leyton, Death felt certain.
And ere long the beloved home would have to go, unless Collingwood's
power was scotched. For the present he traded upon her secret; he
extorted money by means of the same. What the secret was, Death could
only conjecture. Every house has its skeleton, and in any case it has
nothing to do with the story. The snake was eating the rabbit, and the
rabbit was powerless. Death's intention was to furnish the latter with
fangs necessary to strike for life and freedom.

Death took from his desk a faded sheet of paper, and folding it in the
shape of a rude envelope, enclosed his proof-sheets therein. Round this
he proceeded to fasten a length of blue rep, securing the whole with a
light-coloured wax, which he impressed with an unmounted seal. Then he
locked the whole carefully away and went to bed.

The afternoon of the second day he walked over to Rock Cottage, and
delivered his packet. As the house at first appeared to be deserted, he
entered the open door. Before the dining-room table stood Collingwood
in an attitude of easy defiance. Miss Leyton sat there, pale and
trembling, a pile of sovereigns clinking in her shaky hand.

"Take them," she said, "take them. It is all the same to you. They are
nearly the last. What that money means to us, Heaven only knows. Better
ruin ————"

Death allowed his stick to clatter on the floor. Collingwood came out
breezily, and clinking something in his pocket; Miss Leyton following
more slowly. She sought Death's face, but could glean nothing from its
mask-like expression.

"I merely looked in as I was passing," he said. "No, I cannot stay. I
have the story with me that I promised you. It is absolutely yours, to
be dealt with as you please. Apparently it was considered valuable,
seeing how carefully it is sealed. Perhaps that is why I never felt
inclined to lay sacrilegious hands upon it. Your sister is well, I
trust?"

Miss Leyton had quite recovered her self-possession by this time.

"I have to thank you," she said earnestly, "for what will be a great
treat. I shall have this evening all to myself to read the story in;
for my sister has gone into Stroud to see some friends, and I do not
expect her to return until the day after to-morrow."

"You will have a stalwart protector in Mr. Collingwood."

"Mr. Collingwood will stay with me, of course," Miss Leyton replied.

The individual alluded to laughed boisterously. Evidently his
equanimity was not in the least disturbed. After a little further
conversation Death passed on his way.

"She will do it," he murmured to himself, as he reached the solitude of
the fields. "She has the courage of race, and, what is better still,
the courage of despair. The opportunity presented is unique; she only
requires the suggestion contained in my story. Her imagination will be
fired, and ————"

*  *  *  *  *  *

Death strolled back from the river, his feet drenched with the early
morning dew, his basket heavy with speckled trout. His appetite was
keen for breakfast; he had forgotten his errand to Marlwood for the
nonce. It was two days later than his last visit to Rock Cottage, and
nothing had happened in the mean time.

An excited group were causing the kitchen rafters to ring as Death
entered the homestead. Despite the excitement, the farm servants
appeared to be pale and somewhat frightened. As Death came in, his host
entered by an opposite door.

"What has happened, Mr. Turner?" Death demanded.

"Matter enough for that, sir," Turner replied eagerly, and with a
natural desire to be first with tidings, good or ill. "I couldn't have
believed it, sir, and him so cheerful, sir."

"Well, what has he done?" Death asked impatiently.

"Blown his brains out, sir. Committed suicide, Mr. Death. I was passing
Miss Leyton's house an hour ago, and she called me in. A good job there
was somebody about, because the ladies don't keep a maid, and that
poor soul, who had just come down, was all alone with the corpse. He
just lay back in her chair, sir, like one asleep, with a hole in his
forehead, and that big revolver he was always popping about with on the
table by his side."

Death's eyes flashed just for an instant.

"You are alluding to Mr. Collingwood?" he asked.

"Nobody else, sir," Turner replied. "Poor dear gentleman! the last man
in the world you would have expected anything of the kind from. And
premeditated, too."

"Was there any evidence to show that?"

"A letter, sir, written just before the thing was done, scribbled on
a half-sheet of paper, and addressed to Miss Leyton. I saw it myself
lying on the table, with the pen and ink alongside. A failure in some
enterprise, so the letter said. There was an allusion to some £20
besides, but I was too dazed to take any note of that."

"You left some one with Miss Leyton, of course?"

"Just as if I should think of coming away without!" Turner
remonstrated. "I left Mrs. Lane there, and the policeman, and I sent
into Stroud for the chief. I expect there will be an inquest this
afternoon, and then we shall know more."

It was two hours later before Death presented himself at Rock Cottage.
He found Miss Leyton calm, but ghastly pale, and quite ready to
converse with him.

"My sister has returned," she said, "but does not feel equal to coming
down. The inquest is at five. I shall be glad when it is over."

"Mr. Collingwood was related to you, I believe?" Death asked.

"Very distantly; in fact, he had no relatives besides ourselves. I left
him up last night when I went to bed. He had been drinking lately more
than was good for any man."

"He was not particularly well off for money?"

"On the contrary; only two days ago he borrowed £20 from me."

Evidently there was very little to be gained from Miss Leyton. There
was a new hardness and reserve about her, quite foreign to her usual
manner. During the inquest she gave her answers clearly enough, and was
complimented by the coroner.

"This letter to you is in the handwriting of the deceased?" the
official asked.

"It is," the witness replied. "It would be as well to read it, perhaps."

Amidst a breathless silence, the coroner read as follows —


"MY DEAR AUNT,

"This is the last time I shall ever address you; by the time you
read these lines I shall have solved the great mystery. What may
appear to you to be a rash step has been taken after long and painful
deliberation.

"I am going to destroy myself; my life is a burden to myself, and to
my only friends — yourselves. Why should I accept your money and the
cheery hospitality you can so ill afford, when all my schemes for
repaying you twenty-fold result in miserable failure?

"Two days ago I encroached again on your scanty store. Before I could
part with my ill-gotten gains, I heard of another disaster. I am
accursed.

"Enough of this. It must be ended. Farewell from —



"Your grateful and devoted

D. C."


There was little more to be said or done — nothing beyond the medical
evidence. Without the letter, even, the conclusions pointing to suicide
were absolute.

The local practitioner came forward, a cheery man, with a good word and
a fund of sympathy for every one.

"It is hardly necessary to state that death is due to the wound in the
forehead," he said, in answer to the coroner. "From the position of the
body, the deceased must have leant back in his chair and deliberately
placed the revolver against his temple — the right temple, as the
table was close to his right elbow. Before muscular action ceased,
the revolver must have been laid on the table again. I find that
one chamber alone has been discharged. Oh yes, death must have been
practically instantaneous."

The coroner summed up rapidly and clearly. He spoke in words of kindly
sympathy towards the two estimable ladies who had suffered so cruel a
shock. The jury had a simple duty to perform, and he left it in their
hands.

After a whispered consultation of a few minutes, the jury returned
their verdict. They found that deceased committed suicide when
suffering from temporary insanity, and expressed their condolence with
the relatives on their sad loss. A few hours later the Rock Cottage
tragedy was relegated to the category of village chronicle.

Death lingered there a few days longer. It seemed to him that Miss
Leyton was disposed to avoid his society, but he was not the man to be
deterred by any scruples of that kind. The evening before his departure
he dropped in at Rock Cottage and begged a cup of tea.

"I am leaving here to-morrow," he explained, "and with a wandering bird
of passage like myself, there is no knowing when we may meet again."

"Your visit has been anything but a pleasant one, I fear," Miss Dorothy
sighed. "For the sake of our dear old friend, we could have wished to
give you a heartier welcome."

And yet, despite the gloom, it seemed to Death that something, a
blight, had lifted from the place. He mentioned Collingwood in a minor
regretful key.

Miss Leyton's chest expanded, her eyes blazed. "Let me tell you the
truth," she cried; "I must. Digby Collingwood was a man utterly without
principle or feeling. For years he traded upon a family secret; he
reduced us to the verge of ruin. His going away was life; his return,
a lingering death. He had our savings; he took nearly all our small
income. We struggled night and day to keep pace with his rapacious
demands. And now we are free. To have killed that man would have been
no sin; to slay him as he lay insensible with drink there——"

The speaker paused suddenly, for Death's eyes were fixed intently upon
her. She broke into a kind of quavering laugh, like a harp the strings
of which are loosened.

"Pray do not pursue the painful subject," Death murmured. "In any case,
what I have heard is not likely to pass my lips. You have not told me
yet what you thought of the story I sent you, Miss Delia."

"And I declare that I have never seen it," Miss Dorothy cried. "I
suppose it entirely escaped my memory during the dreadful days last
week. Delia, I really must read that story before I go to bed."

"Is it worth reading?" Death asked.

Miss Leyton shook her head. She appeared to have some trouble with her
breathing.

"Frankly, it was not," she said presently. "I was disappointed."

"Was not! Do you mean to say, Delia——"

"That I destroyed the story, Dorothy. Yes, I did. The thing was
strained and artificial, so very unlike our dear Sophia's style. I
could not bear to look at it again; the more so because I was reading
it the night before — you understand."

Miss Dorothy looked disappointed. "Perhaps you were right," she
admitted. "But Mr. Death may be pained by the frankness of your
criticism. His own relative, you know."

Death disdained any personal feeling in the matter. A close observer
would have declared that the man was secretly gratified about
something. For he had known all along that Miss Delia would never
show that story to her sister, and her confession of the fact was
evidence that the plot had been successful. The temptation hidden
under the sacred seal of the envelope had appealed irresistibly to her
imagination — the thing was done.

Death rose and took his leave, his farewell, of the gentle ladies whose
lives had hitherto been wholly blameless. He passed through the neat
hall and into the garden, where the old-world flowers were blooming in
the sunshine.

At the top of the hill he turned and waved his hat.

He saw the two figures side by side, in the black silk and lace of
early Victorian respectability. Trouble and crime seemed as far away
from them as the prussic acid lurking in the kernel of the peach is
from the blushing fruit. Death smiled as the umbrageous shade hid them
from view.

"Who would guess it?" he cogitated. "What would people say if I were
to disclose that that sweet, gentle lady murdered Digby Collingwood
as deliberately as Eleanor murdered Fair Rosamond? Who would dream of
regarding her in the light of a feminine Lefroy? And yet she took the
idea from my forged story, deeming that no living eye had ever seen the
plot before. She lured Collingwood on to act as her amanuensis; she
concocted a story in which a would-be suicide writes such a letter as
the one to 'My dear Aunt;' she even gave the desperate puppet of her
story the same initials as the one she meant to destroy. Thus she had
evidence of his intended suicide in his own handwriting. And was not
that the very crux of the story I gave her — the story purporting to
be written by Sophia Risdon? Is it possible that crime and dishonesty
would come natural to every man and every woman on God's earth,
provided that they could be absolutely assured of safety?"

There were thousands of exceptions, though Death's experience was
unfortunate. And yet — well, let Divine philosophy settle so awful a
question, so dangerous a problem.

"Armed with this letter, ostensibly a part of the story dictated,"
Death proceeded, "that brave woman approached Collingwood in his
drunken slumbers, and slew him with his own weapon. Then she laid
the evidence of suicide on the table, and left him. There was home,
happiness, and freedom on the one hand; exposure, disgrace, the
poorhouse, on the other. Which is the worse hell, I wonder — the one
we eat of and suffer when poverty comes, or the liquid damnation of
the future? That woman has risked the latter. Why not? The rotten pear
on the wall looks as fair as its sounder neighbours? Was it a crime at
all? The law would say yes; but the law was made by men for men, and
therefore is an imperfect and a mundane thing. Was not Justice Shallow
a lawyer, too?"




CHAPTER IX.—THE EXPERIMENT OF THE LEGAL DIARIES.


THREE men were seated in the inner office which Mr. Herbert Oakeley
devoted to his business, or profession of a barrister. They were the
occupant himself, a certain solicitor, one Wellcome by name, and George
Death.

Imprimis, Mr. Herbert Oakeley, clean-shaven, rather a wide
mouth, with hardish deflective corners a mixture of sourness and
self-satisfaction. His softened vivacity suggested the Oxford school;
under the environment of a less favoured training he would pass
perilously for a middle-weight jock, or a trainer of horses.

Time was when the man of light and leading rejoiced in the possession
of the Wellington or Napoleonic nose. Lord Randolph seemed to have set
the fashion for large pugs, depressed on the bridge and displaying a
pleasing width of wide nostril. Thus Oakeley. There are scores of such
noses in the Commons, mostly attached to the legal profession.

Herbert Oakeley was the coming man. Everybody said so. In politics a
philosophic Radical, a man of programmes, a cold sentimentalist, withal
a struggling man, who found it difficult to keep ahead of the stream.

He had come down from Oxford with a reputation. Higgins of Corpus
had predicted great things for him. There had been five of them at
Balliol, Higgins of Corpus being admitted to the charmed circle. Most
of the rest now had drawn journalism towards them, waxing fat on
"leaders." Where would our superior journals be, but for the Oxford
men of a school? They boomed Oakeley genteelly, they spoke of him
without prefix, which is the first sign of greatness. Everything was
in the man's favour. The son of a prominent north-country political
Nonconformist, he naturally had the ear of the elect in the House.
That he himself was a pronounced Ritualist mattered little; his robust
Radicalism covered that. Higgins of Corpus, who apparently preferred
leader-writing on the Daily Press to a Lord Chief Justiceship, or a
seat in the Cabinet, boomed Oakeley steadily. As a debater, Chamberlain
was not to compare with him. When they crossed swords, there was never
any doubt of the issue; both sides of the House freely admitted the
fact — pace the Daily Press. And Higgins possessed the rare gift
of leader-writing — there are not more than seven or eight hundred
journalists in London who do.

All the same, Oakeley had not "come" yet. His practice at the bar was
a small one, he had no money behind him, and he was loaded down with
debt. Had he been an actor this might have been of service to him,
no stage favourite ever being quite worthy of his profession, minus
an assignment, or better still, a brilliant bankruptcy. A chancery
barrister is nothing, if not respectable. At thirty-eight Oakeley
still found himself struggling on, a childless widower without office,
despite the fact that he was fairly popular in society, and despite
Higgins and the Daily Press.

At the same time, the man was certain to succeed; he had tenacity of
grip, he could put temptation from him if the hour were not expedient.
His respectability was intense. There was but one way to touch such
drops of emotion as were still floating in his granite soul — to
appeal to his ambition.

Death studied his intended victim whilst Mr. Wellcome talked. The two
men were not quite strangers to one another. Death had come over from
America, he stated, to prosecute a dormant lawsuit in which he was
interested. He had taken it up on behalf of a young friend who lacked
the necessary means. Meanwhile he was staying with a brilliant American
author and diplomat, who was accredited to the Court of St. James's.
Later on, this Mr. Joseph Nock was entertaining a large party at his
country house, and Oakeley was one of the invited guests.

There was to be another distinguished visitor in the person of Miss
Gertrude Vanstone. Every one knows the beautiful and talented singer of
that name; her romantic story is familiar to all. At the age of twenty
she had quarrelled with her own patrician relatives, and gone on the
stage. Her success had been stupendous. Her birth, and the marvellous
fascination of her manner, opened up every avenue. Apparently, the
parental Vanstone must have repented his harshness to his child, for a
few years later he died without a will, and his only daughter inherited
a large fortune. Subsequently, she retired from the stage, and devoted
her attention to society. At thirty-five she was still lovely, more
fascinating than ever. With a wife blessed with such beauty and means,
a man of ambition might attain any position short of being Pope, or
Henry Irving.

Apparently Oakeley was of the same opinion. He pursued Miss Vanstone
with a dogged patience that sometimes frightened her. His resolute
manner kept other suitors away. That these two would marry, the
quidnuncs felt certain. Miss Vanstone's manner towards her admirer was
one of rooted dislike; she professed hatred of him. But this mattered
little where a woman was concerned.

Towards solving this problem, George Death had turned his attention.
Here was the magnet to lure Oakeley from his uncompromising honesty,
the honesty of one who thoroughly believes it to be the best policy,
the cautiously honourable man. It is harder to undermine this class
than a natural, and, consequently, emotional saint.

Death, however, had arranged his plans. His boundless resources
procured him a ready opening everywhere. For the present, he was a mere
listener.

"This interview is somewhat irregular," Mr. Wellcome said; "but my
client, Mr. Death, wished it. As you are aware, Mr. Oakeley, having had
our case in hand from the beginning, we are quite powerless to strike
until we had the information respecting the late Mr. Secretan. I need
not explain further to you. Had Secretan been alive, we could have put
him in the box, and there would have been an end to the matter. But
Secretan died just at the critical time, before Mr. Death took the
matter up, and now his solicitor is dead also. It is very perplexing."

"It is absolutely fatal to our case," Oakeley replied. "Candidly, I
should not advise you to go any further. I am the only one who would
really benefit."

"An unusual confession for a lawyer," Death replied.

"Candour is one of my vices," said Oakeley. "I had known this case for
some years before your young friend went to America — sick of the
whole thing. It is very good of you to——"

"Candour for candour," Death replied. "There is no philanthropy about
the matter. I bought young Mason's claim as a speculation, and he
gives me a power of attorney. I have been going into the matter very
carefully lately, and I have come to the conclusion that Mr. Secretan's
late solicitor, Mr. Malwood, could have told us everything."

"He would not have done anything of the kind. With the exception of a
certain famous firm in Ely Place, Malwood had more patrician secrets
locked in his breast than any man living. His business was an entirely
personal one."

"Which I have purchased from the executors for a friend who shall be
nameless. More philanthropy, you may say. Not in the least. I purchased
the business so that I could obtain possession of Malwood's diaries. I
have them all at my hotel."

Oakeley favoured Death with a glance of admiration. "You are certainly
thorough in all that you undertake," he said. "Have you found anything
of particular interest therein?"

"Plenty," Death said dryly. "Enough to set up as a flourishing
blackmailer for the rest of my life. Already I have destroyed some of
the volumes. But there are two which bear upon our case, and these I
will ask you to peruse carefully. Afterwards, you will give me your
promise to burn them."

Oakeley nodded. From his pockets Death produced two bulky volumes
bound in buckram, which he laid on the barrister's table. Then he and
Wellcome took their leave. Oakeley opened one of the volumes, and
commenced to read idly.

Oakeley's rest was badly disturbed that night, a most unusual thing,
since insomnia and gastric vagary generally are rare amongst the
possessors of broad noses and deflective mouths. No novelist worthy of
the name ever had a good digestion, and no chancery barrister ever had
a bad one. It is all a matter of more or less imagination.

For the first time in his life, Oakeley gave his fancy play. He saw
himself the husband of Gertrude Vanstone; he saw his position enhanced
by her wealth; many fresh avenues opened up to him by her beauty and
fascination. Not that he loved the woman with the poet's passion;
Oakeley was conscious of no such distressing emotion.

But he admired her; he longed to possess her, as the poor scribbler
longs for a paradise by the margin of the waters. Gertrude Vanstone
was something to be proud of. The husband of Miss Vanstone might
become premier. She was something to hang his honours upon, as Mrs.
Murdstone's bosom advertised the Murdstone jewels.

And it seemed to Oakeley he had found the lever necessary to remove the
mountain of indifference, the strata of dislike that barred his path.
In the pages of the buckram-bound volumes, which Death had left in his
charge, he had discovered many things besides certain facts bearing
upon the case in hand.

Should he attempt it? Should he keep the secret, or boldly grasp the
opportunity which fortune had placed in his hands? No such chance would
ever occur again. Oakeley tossed and turned till morning came, and then
it seemed to him that he had come to no decision. Should he struggle on
as at present, or——

He put the thing entirely out of his mind after breakfast. It was
characteristic of the man that he could sink everything for the matter
of the moment. He had an open mind on the subject, he told himself. As
an axiom, he had nothing of the kind. When a man adjourns temptation
for a more fitting debate with the devil, there is but one issue.

Nevertheless, Oakeley thought no more of it for the present. Thanks to
the diary, he had a good case for Death now, and it occupied most of
his attention. A day or two later the case came on for hearing, and a
verdict for the plaintiff followed. Higgins of Corpus congratulated
Oakeley in a brilliant article, in which he was favourably contrasted
with the judge who tried the case; indeed, Higgins of Corpus and
Oakeley seemed to share the distinction between them.

"I should be obliged to you," Death remarked, subsequent to the verdict.

Oakeley disclaimed any credit in the matter. "Thanks to you," he said,
"the diary did the business. It placed me on the track of the desired
information, and a private inquiry agent did the rest. But there
are not many of us who are in a position to buy our opportunities
wholesale, as you do."

"That was the way I was taught to do business," Death replied. "Still,
the death of Mr. Malwood and the subsequent somewhat reckless sale of
his private papers was pure fortune."

"And the successor, for whom you purchased the practice?"

"A myth, a kind of legal Mrs. Harris. The thing is forgotten by this
time. I presume I shall see you next week at Nock's little place. Good
day."

Death said nothing anent the diary. Neither did he care to inform
Oakeley what a fancy price he had paid for the papers to Malwood's next
of kin. The close old solicitor had died without a will, leaving a
surprisingly small fortune behind, for, sub rosa, Malwood had been
a free liver. Death had bought the papers with an eye to eliciting
private information respecting what might prove to be victims. The
reversion of a small lawsuit he had purchased merely to get at Oakeley,
for Death liked his victims as an angler likes his salmon — clean and
vigorous.

To touch Oakeley closely, it was necessary to discover, if possible,
the cause of the misunderstanding between Miss Vanstone and her late
father. Malwood had been Vanstone's solicitor. Perhaps the diaries
would shed some light on the matter They did. A patient perusal told
Death everything. He carefully lifted the information, i.e. the small
lawsuit, into this particular volume, and passed it over to Oakeley
in the ordinary course of business. It would have been a moral
impossibility for any one who once took up that volume not to finish
it. No novel ever written was half so thrilling and fascinating. Death
felt quite easy on that score.

He knew that by this time Oakeley was in possession of a secret which
Gertrude Vanstone would have cheerfully sacrificed her whole fortune to
preserve. Oakeley was in love with the woman who had refused him more
than once; he coveted her beauty, her wealth, and her influence; he was
approaching forty years of age, and he had his name still to harden
into permanent fame.

Would he be able to resist the temptation? Would his policy of
honourable honesty stand the strain? The thing had been done very
cleverly; nobody was aware how the secret had passed into his power.
True, Death must have read it; but would he bear in mind any solitary
instance out of such a mass of painful sordid facts, bearing upon the
lives of so many people known to society?

Death was perfectly satisfied. He had flung his match into the powder,
and he would be present to see what form the explosion would take. At
Nock's country residence Miss Vanstone and Herbert Oakeley would meet,
and then——

After that the deluge, so far as Death cared. If only Oakeley would use
his secret to obtain a mean, dishonourable advantage, Death would be
satisfied, and the theory once more triumphantly vindicated. In this
frame of mind he departed for Nock's place, The Glen.

The house-party gathered there was small but brilliant. There was
Lucas, the poet, whose verses were so bad, and political opinions so
strong, that his claim to the laureateship was seriously discussed;
and the scientific author, who had covered himself with distinction
by the publication of sixteen complete novels in two years. There was
a noted M.P. of strong agnostic views, who sat for a Nonconformist
constituency; likewise a Tory lord — a shining light on political
economy, who had thrice compounded with his creditors. One or two rich
nonentities, without which no society gathering seems to be complete,
leavened the lump with a saffron flavour of respectability. Oakeley and
Miss Vanstone completed the party.

It may be asked what brought Death in so exclusive a coterie. In
a word, philately. His fine collection of stamps was the envy of
Mr. Joseph Nock's soul. The latter had money, influence, an assured
literary position; but he lacked a maroon surcharge of the Riddlemaree
Islands of 1874, and his heart was as lead in his bosom. Death had two.
It is perhaps superfluous to speak further on this vital question.

For the first few days nothing of importance transpired. It seemed to
Death that Oakeley rather avoided Miss Vanstone, and abandoned her more
or less to the fascinations of an American comedian, who had attained
the giddy height of fame by an exquisite whistling of topical songs
with a cigarette in his mouth simultaneously. Such an intellectually
histrionic grip as this is certain to dazzle, and Oakeley seemed to be
superseded. But he displayed no signs of disappointment.

On the contrary, his manner was grave and assured. He treated Miss
Vanstone with marked deference, which at the same time only half
disguised a conscious power. Death fully appreciated the man with whom
he had to deal.

A week elapsed before Oakeley made any sign. The whole party had been
on a visit to some ruins for the day, during which Oakeley had drawn
Gertrude Vanstone away in a manner which utterly puzzled the actor.
When they joined the rest subsequently, Gertrude was filled with gentle
gaiety, Oakeley more quiet than ever. But the deflected lines of his
mouth were hard and stern.

"To-morrow;" Death said to himself; "he has merely unmasked his battery
as yet. I would give something to be present at the real engagement.
And the man will win; I would stake my life upon the issue."

Everything comes to he who can afford to wait, and certainly Death was
in that enviable position.

A local race-meeting formed the following day's programme, which Miss
Vanstone declined.

"I hate races," she said with a brilliant smile. "I have a particular
reason for so doing which is my own secret. On the whole, I will stay
at home and have a long day with my correspondence. Conscience is
beginning to be troublesome."

The host murmured his regrets politely. Being gifted with a real sense
of humour, he did not smile when Oakeley begged to be excused also.

"It really wouldn't do," the latter said regretfully. "My constituency
is notoriously one of the most wicked in the kingdom; consequently the
Nonconformist conscience is extremely restless there. Besides, the
chairman of my election committee in his hot youth suffered martyrdom
in the cause of sport, in connection with an austere employer and a
convenient till. On the whole, I think I will refrain from accompanying
the party."

It is perhaps hardly necessary to say that Death also was an absentee.
The party drove away soon after lunch, leaving the house solitary and
still. It was nearly the hour for afternoon tea before Death made his
way towards the library.

He looked in; at the same moment Oakeley entered the apartment from the
conservatory. At a table Miss Vanstone sat, a pile of letters before
her. She rose as if about to leave, when Oakeley detained her with a
gesture. Death waited. No servants were likely to pass at that hour of
the day, and the light in the hall was a dim religious one.

"Do not go," said Oakeley; "I have a word or two to say to you."

His voice was slightly rasping; there was a menacing ring in it.
Gertrude drew herself a little closer together. There was a red spot on
either cheek.

"Again?" she said. "Surely you have not so soon forgotten yesterday?"

"Yesterday was — yesterday. We are all creatures of circumstances.
Nobody cares for cold mutton until there is nothing else to eat.
Yesterday I asked you to marry me."

"And I refused — with slight variations on the old formula. You will
not repeat the question?"

"That is precisely what I am going to do. To be cold and practical, it
is necessary that you should become my wife, Gertrude. I lack capital
which you possess. I have no settled home, which in itself is a great
drawback. Every Cabinet Minister should have a drawing-room with a wife
in it. With you for mine, I could do anything."

"I believe you could. But the thing is impossible."

"So the unexpected generally appears. But the thing is not impossible.
On the contrary, this marriage will take place before Christmas.
Mallory is going to resign at the opening of next session. I intend to
have the offer of his office."

"Have you and Sir Charles Mallory settled this little matter between
you?"

"Sit down again," said Oakeley, pointing to a seat.

Miss Vanstone, a little to his surprise, complied. Her astonishment
was far greater. Why had she complied so readily? she asked herself in
vexed wonder.

"With a house of my own, with a wife like you, the thing would be
certain," Oakeley continued, in the same crisp tone. "In time the
advantages would be mutual."

"But I don't like you sufficiently. To be candid — I hate you!"

"What on earth has that got to do with it?" Oakeley asked calmly.

Gertrude Vanstone laughed. There was a tonic flavour in cynicism like
this.

"Nothing at all," Oakeley pursued. "Come to that, I don't know that
I like you. It is merely a matter of business. Mind, I should be
proud enough to see you at the head of my table, and there must be
satisfaction in owning the handsomest woman in London."

"But in that case I should own you. You would be Mrs. Oakeley's
husband."

"Precisely what I intend to be; but the accent in this particular
instance would be on the 'Oakeley,' and not on the 'husband.' You will
have absolute freedom; you will be——"

"Gertrude Vanstone to the end of my days. There are reasons——"

"There are reasons. And I know them perfectly well."

The silence lasted so long that Death crept nearer the door and looked
in. He was perfectly safe from observation, with the sombre background
behind him. Gertrude Vanstone had risen from her chair, backing towards
the wall, as if the tiger-skin upon which she had been standing had
suddenly reclothed its one-time feline cruelty.

"You — you know my story," she said slowly.

Oakeley made no reply for a minute or two. He was drawing skeletons
on the blotting-pad with Miss Vanstone's gold pen, a present from the
American comedian. He waited for the full force of his statement to
strike home.

"I know why you did not go to the races to-day," he said presently.

Gertrude Vanstone shivered. Her face was pale, save for her cheekbones,
upon which the humid pink seemed to be frozen. The iris of her eyes
were purple-black.

"You are trying to frighten me," she said. "What can there be to know?
My life lies before people so that those who run may read."

"They cannot read the pages which are doubled down. And some of them
are missing. By accident, I am in a position to supply them. Come, you
have not forgotten how you spent your nineteenth birthday. The count is
dead, but the evils that men do live after them. Shall I say any more?"

"Since you have commenced so well, you shall finish the story."

"Your attention flatters. As a girl, you were headstrong, romantic,
impulsive. You formed what your father deemed to be an undesirable
attachment. This attachment culminated in your running away with your
lover, under the plea that you were going to stay with a relative in
Normandy. Your count turned out to be a racecourse blackleg, who had a
wife alive at the time. Your father kept your secret, but he would not
have you in the house again; he left you to your own devices after the
death of your child. But, though you hear this for the first time, the
count cost your father infinite trouble and much money before he died.
Is there any occasion to say further?"

"You are in a position to prove your facts?"

"Absolutely. A diary of your father's late solicitor, Mr. Malwood, came
into my hands the other day, and I read it there. At the present moment
the secret is ours alone. Whether it is to go further or not, rests
with you."

Miss Vanstone stepped back on to the tiger-skin again. The dead and the
bankrupt have nothing to fear. She seemed like one frozen.

"The story is not quite finished, it seems to me," she whispered.

"Place aux dames," Oakeley responded. "Should I be so ungallant
as to write the postscript, which is ever a woman's work? Besides, I
offer you a fascinating choice. You may finish the tale in any way
you please. You can float at the floodgates of society, a glorified
Magdalene, but a Magdalene all the same; you can fall back upon
charity, and never taste a crumb of it yourself; you can——"

"Enough; I see your drift. You offer me an alternative."

"I do nothing of the kind; I implore you to take it. Retain your
position by all means; remain your proud, popular, fascinating self.
'What's in a name? the thing we call a rose ———' And Oakeley is as
good as Vanstone; under the circumstances, better."

"You are asking me to marry you still?"

"Yes. The fact seems to surprise you. Why not? It will make no
difference to me, I assure you. Your crime is in being found out. There
will be many couples more miserable who carry it off under a smiling
exterior; and as to you and I being happy in the curds-and-whey form of
bliss, that is out of the question. I offer you safety; and, in return,
you become the rudder of my ambitious bark."

"And if I refuse this offer?"

"My dear Gertrude, you will not refuse. The sacrifice is too great.
Already you are debating the colour-scheme of a wedding-gown in your
eye!"

"I am the most miserable woman on God's earth."

The passionate plaint touched Oakeley, as the thistledown does the
forehead of a granite cliff.

"Perhaps; but that will not prevent your going-away dress being of the
smartest," he replied. "I want nothing of you but your fortune, your
fascinations. Love there is none. You shall be my wife in name only, an
you list. Come, I am waiting."

"Ah, if you only knew how I hate and despise you!"

"I can imagine it. Cui bono? You will marry me."

"I will stand by the altar and blaspheme, because I dare not do
anything else."

Oakeley drew from his pocket a case, and from thence a flashing
ruby-and-sapphire ring. With a masterly grasp he slipped it upon
Gertrude's engaged finger. Then, without another word, he silently
withdrew by the same way that he had entered the library. Death crept
away also. There were limits even to his curiosity.

Dinner that evening was unusually lively and vivacious. Most of the
party had won. Presently they fell to bantering those who had stayed
at home. Across the wax lights, the glittering glass and purple fruit,
Gertrude's face was flushed, sweet, riante.

"You must have found congenial occupation," Nock said.

"She did," Oakeley remarked slowly. "We were bored to death after
you went. So, out of sheer self-defence, Miss Vanstone and I amused
ourselves by getting engaged to be married. You have no idea what a
fascinating pastime it is."

"Is he really to be the fortunate man?" the host asked.

Gertrude held up her slender left hand. On it the sapphires and rubies
blazed. There was a smile on her face, a luminous mist in her eyes.

"Behold my badge of servitude," she said in liquid tones. "I told him
that I hated him, that he was bent upon rendering me the most miserable
woman in England, but his heart was hard; there is no escape for me
now."

The others laughed. Gertrude crushed a grape, and ate it slowly. Her
mien might have been that of an empress who had found a new kingdom.

"Is it a true bill, Oakeley?" asked the future laureate.

"True as — as your poetry," Oakeley responded. "Let us change the
painful subject. We must not monopolize all the attention."

Death said nothing; he was lost in admiration. Success had crowned his
efforts; but he scarcely expected to see rascality flaunting in the
purple — placid, victorious.

"That man will die a premier of England," he said to himself; "and as
to her, what she might attain, Heaven only knows. Splendid!"




CHAPTER X.—THE EXPERIMENT OF THE LOBELGUNA CONCESSION.


PERHAPS the easiest way of creating surprise amongst people in this nil
admirari age, is to tell them certain truths about themselves. As an
example, had you told Lomas, père, that his son was a contemptible
snob, he would have regarded you with reproachful astonishment; and had
you conveyed the same patent fact to the junior——

But really there was no necessity. The thing was too apparent to
others. In the eyes of the Reverend James Lomas, his son was the pink
and ideal of a gentleman. The father had found his way into the Church
by tortuous secret means, with the aid of a friendly bishop; otherwise
the thing had been impossible, since he had no degree. His start in
life had been extremely humble; and Peter naturally excludes from
heaven such priests of the establishment as are not University men. In
the eyes of certain people it must be a hideous blot upon the record of
the Apostles, that they never went to Oxford.

It is hardly necessary to say that James Lomas, once in the black
garb that elevates man above his fellows, longed to give his son the
advantages which had been denied himself. Heaven knows how he managed
it out of his miserable stipend; but to the good all things are
possible, and with the aid of a school scholarship Arthur Lomas managed
to scramble through Oxford, and take a passable degree.

He was a gentleman now. James Lomas beamed with pride upon his son,
his simple soul rejoiced in the fact. Arthur's supercilious manner was
the grand air; his smartly made clothes, with the absurd suggestion
of caricature about them, bespoke the well-dressed man. It was almost
pitiable to see the single-minded, simple gentleman, worshipping the
Dutch-metal idol, which was so like the genuine golden calf in his eyes.

In sooth, the fellow was a contemptible snob, shallow and vain, and
quick to take offence. He despised his father's friends; he was
secretly ashamed of his progenitor's plainness; they were rarely seen
together, if Arthur could help it. Had any one told Arthur that his
father was as far above him as Lord Belton, the great local magnate,
was above his footman, he would have scoffed. And yet there were people
in Markham who secretly wondered whence the inferiority of the son came.

The school of Oxford is a good one for those who can rise to it. If a
man has the right stuff in him, there is no better training-ground in
the world. If not, then as a finishing seminary for the smug prig and
the unutterable snob, the place is without a rival. To know people —
to be in a good set — had been Arthur Lomas's ambition. To keep others
from knowing him had been another constant endeavour.

Most people know the finished article. It is to be found in towns
where a Grammar School, with scholarships attached, flourishes. It is
here that the ambitious tradesman aspires to make his lad as great a
gentleman as the parson or proctor whom he has to sue for his money
periodically, and eventually half beggar himself to find professions
for the lads who despise the shop, and blush when it is mentioned.
If drink is the great evil in this favoured land of ours, cheap
ostentation makes a good second.

People sneered at the Reverend James Lomas behind his back. Biggs, the
chemist, whose own cub was ruining him by instalments at Cambridge,
wondered what the parson was going to do with the youngster he had
made such a fool of. Meanwhile, Lomas swaggered about the place in his
own seedy, smart clothes, rendered all the more glaring by reason of
a pair of white spats over shabby boots, and the bit of handkerchief
hanging out of his breast-pocket. A profession was out of the question,
there was no money for that, and a trade was not to be thought of for a
moment.

Lomas was not without brains, which rendered his offence all the more
rank. There was only one profession open under the circumstances,
and that was journalism. Did the uninitiated but know it, there is a
fair living, as things go, in wild-cat literature. Belles-lettres
of "the-villain-still-pursued-her" type is by no means played out.
The piracies of Drake and Frobisher, et hoc, led to affluence and
honour; modern piracy with the lethal scissors generally finds its
outcome in a baronetcy nowadays. And penny novelette writing, like
burglary, is an occupation capable of strict privacy.

Accordingly, Lomas drifted into journalism. After two years of
indifferent success, Markham lost sight of him for a time. The place
had become too small, and the people knew him too well there. The
fringe on the erstwhile fashionable trousers had called forth scoffing
on one occasion, and this way the loss of self-esteem lies.

For three years Lomas laboured in London. During that time he did
fairly well, especially in the personal line, reviewing, and the like.
His superiority made the elegant sneer possible; he had a fine memory
for phrases culled from books he condemned. He was a spurious critic,
and with all a tyro's ingratitude. What would these Lazaruses at the
feet of the literary Dives do for ideas, but for the crumbs of thought
cast contemptuously from the rich man's intellectual feast? But there
are critics and critics. Lomas belonged to the latter category.

Fortune was not unkind to him, on the whole. For one entire
twelve-month he found himself acting as assistant and sub-editor on
the Daily Magnet, a paper of established fame and wide influence.
The man whose place he occupied had gone away for the benefit of his
health, which had temporarily broken down. Parker was a prince amongst
sub-editors, and to pay his expenses for a trip round the world had
been more policy than generosity on the part of his employers. Editors
can be obtained by the cartload, but a good sub is a thing of beauty
and a sub for ever!

On the whole, Lomas did his work well. But on Parker's return he found
himself out of harness again. He had looked for a position on the
literary staff of the Magnet, but subs are not allowed to rise that
way. The thing isn't fair to other papers.

For a year after that Lomas remained at home, devoting himself mainly
to the halfpenny sub-religious novelette, twenty-five thousand words
for three guineas. Still, a man of strong physique and vigorous
muscular action can easily earn ten pounds a week this way. With cold
baths and dumb-bell exercise it is possible to do more.

It is a very circuitous way to fame, however. Lomas chafed and fretted;
he pined for the class of society which London and his connection
with the Magnet had opened unto him. People of position found it
convenient to be civil to the chief sub on an important daily paper,
though they ignored him quickly enough when the connection ceased. The
dinners and afternoon teas at certain houses filled him with bliss
unalloyed. To hold the cup of a countess, or stand chatting on the
stairs with my lord, satiated his shrivelled soul. Most of these people
wanted something, but that did not matter in the least; the majority
of the gilded ones were more or less connected with the City, and it
was possible on occasions for Lomas to give prominence to paragraphs
capable of influencing the market. There was the Earl of Beverley,
for instance, who had introduced Lomas to his brilliant niece, the
Honourable Adela Balmayne, and invited him to dinner. Most people
regarded Beverley as a bit of a leg, but to Lomas this was Society.

He longed for it; craved for it again. He boasted of his aristocratic
connections, as only a snob can; he kept in touch with the Magnet,
hoping for better things. Some day, perhaps, the gates of the promised
land would open again.

It was early in the season, two years later, before the opportunity
came. Occasionally, congenial souls were encountered in Markham,
and Lomas found one in the person of a passing stranger, to whom he
was introduced casually, and who incidentally mentioned that he was
financially connected with the Morning Mirror. The Mirror was
equally good as the Magnet. Death heard the story, and went upon his
way, promising to bear the matter in mind. Months passed, and the whole
incident faded from Lomas's memory.

A telegram was carried up to his den about this time. The message was
brief, but pregnant, and its entirety was as follows —


"Can you see me to-day — five — at Mirror office? Re paper.
Reply paid."


The blushing maiden, who for the present was defying the chartered
libertine, whatever he might be, was forgotten. It was only a matter
of two hours from Markham to London, and at the time appointed Lomas
found himself in the manager's room at the Mirror office. With
that functionary, Death, and Mr. Egerton, the editor, the company was
complete.

"You had better state the reason why we have sent for Mr. Lomas,"
Egerton suggested. "The affair is quite as much yours as it is mine."

"A client of mine," said Death, without notice of the growl, "is one of
the principal proprietors of the Mirror. Probably you have heard of
Mr. Greenstrand?"

Lomas replied respectfully. It was impossible to think of that name
without awe.

"Usually we do not interfere with Mr. Egerton in any way," Death
proceeded. "On this occasion, however, I have taken the liberty
of bringing you here. I presume you are willing to undertake the
editorship of the paper for a week or two?"

"Of course he will," Egerton grumbled. "Did you ever know a man yet
who couldn't edit a daily paper on sight? That's the worst of these
proprietary concerns——"

"Mr. Lomas has had two years on the Magnet," Death proceeded.
"Mr. Egerton's wife has been taken seriously ill at Cairo, and he is
compelled to proceed there at once. Mr. Delfosse, the assistant, is in
America on business, and our chief sub has resigned in a huff. You will
take Mr. Egerton's place whilst he is away!"

Lomas professed himself delighted. The head — actually the head of
a great London paper! Visions of a permanent occupation of the chair
danced before his eyes.

"I dare say it will be all right," Egerton said hopefully. "You leave
my leader-writers to themselves, and keep the sporting news up to the
mark. As we cater for a concrete class of politician, you can take it
out of your conscience by abusing the financial coterie. We seldom
touch company advertisements, and the showing up of bogus concerns is
our strong card. Keep to that line, and you can't do much harm." With
which Egerton looked at his watch, and hurriedly departed.

Lomas's occupation was anything but an arduous one. The machinery of
the office worked like an express engine; he had only to sit and give
directions, and enjoy his solitary glory. At the Writers' Club he found
a new meed of reverence awaiting him. Men who had scoffed in days gone
by remained to worship. Under such conditions, the lot of Lomas was a
happy one. He assumed the mysterious air of the literary Jupiter. In
such matters the air is everything. And there were better things to
happen.

Lomas strolled into the park on the Saturday afternoon, with a
feeling that fame had been accomplished. The exercise of the muscular
novelette had found him the sinews of war; his frock-coat, glossy hat,
and lavender continuations left nothing to be desired. People seemed
to recognize him again; apparently the dimness of vision had been
transient.

He came presently to a yellow barouche, in which a brilliant brunette
was seated. By the wheel stood two men in languid conversation. Lomas's
heart beat faster. Apparently the brunette did not see him. The taller
man of the two did, for his grey, hawk-like features wrinkled into a
smile, his gloved hand was extended.

"Is it really you, Lomas?" he asked. "Where have you been lately? I
heard you had gone out to Japan as special correspondent; but one
could get nothing definite. Adela will be delighted. You were always a
favourite of the child's."

"I had a heavy commission which took me from London," Lomas replied—"a
great bore for a society man; but needs must, you know. Just for the
present I am taking Egerton's place on the Mirror. My plans are
uncertain after that."

The Earl of Beverley was delighted to hear that the Mirror people
had secured an editor worthy of the name, even if only for a time.
He professed a boyish surprise, which was prettily assumed, inasmuch
as he had known the fact from the first from Death, with whom he was
acquainted slightly. He had cut Lomas dead enough on the day of the
latter's arrival in London; but we are all liable to mistakes of that
kind.

"I saw you last Thursday," Lomas could not help saying.

"And I saw you, my boy," Beverley replied. "Last person I expected to
meet. Fact is, I was talking business with Sir Cyril Bridges. Know
Bridges?"

"Only by reputation," Lomas replied. He would only have been too
pleased to speak of the great North African explorer in this way.
Bridges was the founder of a dozen kingdoms. He added millions of
acres to British territory on his own responsibility. He was supposed
to indicate the African policy of the Colonial Office. He bullied
ministers royally; they were all terribly afraid of this shock-headed
north-country boor, who got his own way by sheer force of character.

To know Bridges was esteemed a privilege. He had made many fortunes
besides his own. In the savage region, over which he reigned supreme,
millions of English gold had foundered. And yet nobody lost confidence
in the man. Sometimes one of the papers knocked the bottom out of some
company, but for the most part they floated. Beverley was a close
follower of Bridges' fortunes; judicious investments and quick sales
were floating the aristocratic derelict into the haven of prosperity.

"Wonderful man," quoth his lordship. "Follow his tips, and fortune
is yours. If you've got any money to invest, put it in the Lobelguna
Concession."

"But what about this morning's news?" Lomas asked. "Lobelguna has
turned against Bridges' force, and the whole lot are supposed to be cut
to pieces. Our City editor says that Lobelgunas won't be worth five
shillings per share on Monday."

"Pooh — a mere scare. Nothing confirmed yet. Bridges says the place is
a veritable gold-mine. Splendid climate, plenty of water, and all that
kind of thing. Come and speak to Adela."

Miss Balmayne was delighted to see Lomas again. From a penny chair
Death watched the little group with a faint smile on his face. He had
laid his train carefully, and subsequent events were moulded to his
will. The figures there were his puppets. He had dictated everything;
he had only to stand by and watch the performance.

Lomas went away treading upon air. He was to dine in Lowndes Square
that same evening, and meet Sir Cyril Bridges. He dressed himself with
more than usual care, for was not the fascinating Adela to be present?
Editors of distinguished journals have married into the ranks of the
aristocracy before now, and Adela was all for mind.

Sir Cyril Bridges was the only other guest present in Lowndes Square
the same evening. He had nothing to speak of besides the Lobelguna
Concessions. His whole atmosphere was one of money; he seemed to
diffuse a magnetic influence. He should like to see Lobelguna try any
of his slippery tricks upon him. The public was an ass; he has no
confidence. And if any of them wanted to dispose of their shares, why,
he was ready to take them. His big raucous voice boomed until the
dining-room echoed.

"Well, I hope you are right," the earl laughed. "I'm loaded down with
Lobelguna Concessions. I bought forty thousand yesterday at five
shillings."

"Buy the sanguinary lot," roared Bridges — Adela had gracefully
vanished—"and stick to 'em. They'll be up again next week like a
rocket. By Jove! I must be off, Beverley. I promised to meet Ayrton at
Sundrey's house at ten, to discuss the proposed line to Missolonghi.
I'll put a flea in his ear before the night's over. So long."

"A rough diamond," Beverley said sententiously; "but the kernel's
there."

Lomas agreed. Over the walnuts and the wine the twain waxed
confidential. The earl confessed himself not quite so easy in his mind
over Lobelgunas as he seemed.

"In fact, my dear Lomas," he said in a burst of candour, "if the thing
goes wrong, I shall be posted. I want you to do me a little favour. I
am going to transfer half my shares into your name, and pass the scrip
over to you for the present. If things go right, why, there is an end
of it; if not, why——"

Lomas accepted the responsibility, not without secret misgivings. If
things went wrong, he would be utterly swamped. But to please his noble
patron, he would have stood on his head in the centre of Lowndes Square
with pleasure.

"You may send me the scrip, if you like," he murmured.

Beverley professed his warm thanks; it was so pleasant to do business
with a gentleman. Lomas left the house at length with an easy
consciousness that society awaited him. He was to go down to Beverley
Hall to shoot later on; the earl would take no refusal. How pretty a
paragraph in the Markham local paper would read to that effect!

For the next day or two Lomas saw nothing of his exalted friend. He had
received the Lobelguna scrip, and a transfer note from a city firm, but
beyond that no sign. Therefore, he was surprised and delighted the next
evening when Beverley's card was sent up to his room, and that pillar
of the constitution followed in a condition of patrician agitation.

"My dear fellow," he exclaimed, "I have a lot of exclusive information
for you. Lobelguna has been surprised by Bridges' followers, and has
capitulated utterly. The German fellows, who are playing the very bear
there, have fled up country. Here's our telegram."

With trembling hands Beverley produced the cable form. There was
material enough, when properly expanded and sub-edited, to make a
column of attractive matter. The information was minus its heading
and address, which had been torn off. Though it had assuredly come by
marine wire, Lomas's trained eyes scented a trick.

"I am very sorry," he said, "but I cannot publish this."

Beverley was grieved; he was shocked at the want of confidence in his
honour. Under the circumstances, any further intercourse, etc. Before
the clock struck again, Beverley's wounded feelings were restored, and
the African telegram was in the foundry. But Lomas felt restless and
ill at ease. He had betrayed his trust; he had published that which he
felt to be false, in order to curry favour with one whose reputation
was, to say the least of it, shady. What the news lacked in veracity,
it certainly made up in sensation. For the first few hours nobody
dreamt of questioning its truth. The Mirror had a reputation for
sterling information, its editor was beyond reproach. There was a boom
in Lobelgunas that day on the Exchange such as had not been seen for
years. People rushed to buy. Before closing-time the five-shilling
shares were at a pound premium.

Drawn there by a fascination he could not resist, Lomas drove down
to the scene of madness. One of the first persons he met there was
Beverley.

"I've been searching for you everywhere," he said. "Put your shares on
the market. Go over to Conway's office and instruct them at once. I
will see you later."

Mechanically Lomas obeyed these instructions. For the first time
the full force of the plot burst upon him with lightning force. The
spotless reputation of the Mirror had been besmirched to bring
about this extraordinary outburst of public confidence — and greed.
The acting editor had been tricked and fooled by a blackleg peer, who,
after using him, would cast him aside carelessly as the stump of a
cigar. Had Beverley not done the same thing before? And the whole thing
would be certain to come out.

In fear and trembling Lomas waited for two days. Then the deluge. The
Berlin correspondent of the Times was first in the field, with a
long extract from the Tagblatt. Lobelguna had utterly defeated
Bridges' expeditionary force; there were only two survivors, and they
had drifted into Marra Leone with a frightful story. Lobelguna had
appealed to Germany for protection; he had placed himself under their
flag. The whole story carried veracity on the face of it. Before Lomas
had time to recover his scattered senses, Egerton returned from Egypt
as fast as steam could carry him.

Lomas cowered before the majesty of his wrath. He had been deceived, he
was sorry. More he could not say or do.

"The copy did not come through one of the press agencies?" Egerton
asked.

"The Earl of Beverley supplied the information," Lomas stammered. "It
was a bonâ fide cablegram, Mr. Egerton, for I had it in my hands."

"The biggest rascal in London," Egerton groaned. "We have been
deliberately swindled for business purposes. It will take years to
restore popular confidence in the paper. Never again do I accept office
under a board of directors. Don't you say a word; you are as big a
scoundrel as Beverley. It's a criminal matter, sir."

"You are not choice in your expressions," Lomas said, stung into
retort. "I might be the victim of misfortune; but, at the same time, I
don't allow——"

"A pretty victim, indeed; and you will allow me to say anything I
please. I anticipated what had happened directly I saw the Times at
Southampton, and I suspected you. A man doesn't do these kind of things
for nothing."

"You mean that I was paid for allowing——"

"Oh, don't split straws with me. I examined the Lobelguna Concession
transfer-books this morning, and what do I find? Twenty thousand
shares purchased by yourself from Beverley, and sold two days ago at
a handsome premium. Sixteen thousand pounds was your price. However,
the thing will be out of my hands presently, and the less you say the
better. And let me remind you that this is my room, Mr. Lomas. Silence
is your best policy."

Outside the Mirror's palatial Fleet Street abode Lomas encountered
Death. The incident was robbed of singularity, for the simple reason
that the latter was there to await his victim. Death led the way to the
Writers' Club, where the sad story was unfolded.

"These things will happen," he said consolingly, "and, in any case,
we have no remedy, so far as you are concerned. Your great misfortune
is that nobody will believe your story. The transfer of the Lobelguna
Concessions is terribly against you."

"But," Lomas protested, "I tell you that Lord Beverley——"

"I suppose you haven't told any one else the particulars?"

"Certainly not. There is no reason why——"

"You should say anything to any one," Death said dryly. "We shall be
dumb; we have been hoaxed, and are not likely to give ourselves away
by a history of the facts. By so doing we should shake confidence more
than ever. To all practical purposes you are £20,000 odd better off
than you were a week ago. Nice sherry, this. Will you have another?"

Lomas said no more. His share in the affair was going to be a dead
secret — he had left the Mirror because Egerton had returned.
There was a large sum of money waiting for him to draw at the office
of Conway and Company. Before the day was out, the scrip had been
transferred, and the cheque duly passed into his once meagre account.

So far as Lomas was concerned the incident was closed. Sooner or later
he would have to meet the Earl of Beverley — an interview which he
looked forward to with anything but pleasure. Bridges had departed
hurriedly for North Africa, and his bold front on leaving had somewhat
restored public confidence.

Beverley turned up eventually. His manner was subdued, but his smile
was pleasant, slightly tinged with melancholy. He was terribly vexed,
he said, with the turn affairs had taken. Would Lomas come round that
evening and partake of a family chop? Lomas consented. He dressed
at his rooms, and, after fortifying himself with two glasses of the
Writers' Club's famous brown brandy, departed on his way.

The dinner was excellent; the wine of the best. During the meal,
business was rigidly excluded. With the cigars, Beverley's manner
changed.

"I am leaving town early next week," he said. "We shall see you in
October, of course. We'll get that little affair of the Lobelgunas
settled first, however."

Lomas took a pull at his nerves. He found them perfectly sound. The
brown brandy had not failed him in the hour of need.

"I am rather unsettled about October," he said. "By the way, my lord,
did you ever discover who sent you that bogus telegram?"

Beverley shook his head sadly. The subject was too painful.

"It has ruined my career," Lomas proceeded. "It has but one redeeming
feature."

"I am delighted to hear it, my dear fellow. What is it, may I ask?"

"I have made over £20,000 out of the transaction."

Beverley's face changed; there was no mistaking Lomas's meaning.

"You infernal scoundrel!" he whispered. "You impudent thief, you——"

"Arcades ambo," Lomas said. "The titled blackleg who tempted me
made twice as much. And now he wants it all. I am to be the miserable
tool — the orange to be sucked dry and then cast into the gutter. You
thought to flatter me, and to a certain extent you succeeded. To clinch
the thing, you partly took me into your confidence. My share was to be
nothing; but I've got my share, and possession is nine parts of the
law. Not a penny-piece of that money do I part with, so help me, God!"

Lomas crashed his fist upon the table; his eyes glittered fiercely.
Beverley's face was white with passion; he looked more hawk-like than
usual.

"So you are going to swindle me?" he demanded hoarsely. "The law——"

"A fig for the law! You dare not appeal to it. Come, you had my
assistance in your infernal swindle, and you must pay the price. I am
as good a man as you to-night, and I know you better than most people."

"You are a rascal," Beverley said sullenly.

"Would it be a figure of speech to call you another? But there is
nothing to be gained by our sitting here calling one another hard
names. And, as my company does not appear to be congenial, I will wish
you good night."

"Go to the devil!" grunted the hereditary legislator.

* * * * * * * * *

Death chuckled to hear the result of the interview. Like a sportsman,
he rejoiced because he had dropped two birds, right and left barrel.
The dual acts of rascality on the part of the Earl of Beverley and
Lomas had been both inspired by him. It was a fitting termination for
what he intended to be nearly the end of his labours.

"Keep your own counsel," he said to Lomas. "Remember that silence is
golden, and there is a career before you yet. With your money you might
do anything. You may be sure that I shall say nothing regarding the
transaction."




CHAPTER XI.—THE EXPERIMENT OF KING RAMESES' SCARAB.


"A VISITOR TO see Dr. Andrew Morrison, please. Shall I show him up?"

Morrison rubbed his red eyes. The ashes of his spent pipe trailed down
the front of a grey flannel dressing-gown, and lay neglected there.
He nodded his shock head grimly. But the visitor had not waited to be
announced; he walked right in.

The two presented a curious contrast. Morrison, unshaven and unkempt;
his leonine face dark like filaments of tar in the thoughtful creases;
the wide mouth, tremulous yet defiant. His high broad forehead knitted;
his hands shook. A pair of trousers strapped at the waist, loose baggy
slippers, and the filthy flannel dressing-gown, completed his attire.

The other man was black and neat; he had a face in quiet contrast to
the other's.

"My name is Death," he said. "Yours is Morrison. I require your
services."

"I suppose you know that I'm drunk?" Morrison inquired. "I always am,
more or less, miserable devil that I am. I'm the cleverest doctor in
Edinburgh; people used to prophesy great things of me. Look at me now.
I'm drinking myself into my grave. Brandy and tobacco make a poor
substitute for food. God, what a fool I've been!"

"Incidentally, so have I," Death replied without the least emotion. "I
am here to give you a chance. You don't look a man who drinks for the
love of it."

"I don't. I drown care; I suffocate my moribund self-respect. Your
business?"

Death coolly rang the bell, and ordered a cup of coffee. Morrison
smiled grimly. Here was a man after his own heart. He drank the
coffee. At Death's command he went to his bedroom and sluiced himself
thoroughly in cold water. Then he dressed himself suitably enough, and
professed to be ready for anything. Death produced cigars.

"Now we are ready for business," he said. "Can you keep sober for any
length of time?"

"Certainly, if I have anything to interest me. Make it worth my while,
and see."

"That is precisely what I am going to do," Death replied. "Now, I have
here a volume of short stories by a certain Angus Hume. His writings
are a little too powerful and gloomy to become popular, yet they are
really wonderful stories. Poe, at his best, never did anything finer.
There is one fragment here which has produced a great impression on me
— story proper, it is not. It treats of the life of an imaginative
sensitive man of letters, who is married to a wife out of sympathy with
him. She is fair, she has money, and she loves him; but there is a
relation of the wife's, living in the same house, who is the author's
ego, his inspiration. He has affection and esteem for the one woman,
but he loves the other. Is he justified in ridding himself of the wife,
to whom he owes so much, for the woman to whom he owes his career?
His literary work hardly pays him, and his wife has a fortune. The
study is so vivid, so powerful, and so subtly analysed, that it must
be a personal experience. That is all. Do me the favour of reading the
sketch; it will take barely an hour."

"It is a question," said the doctor, "to whom he owes most. Could he
have written that stuff in adversity? Give me the book."

Death smoked a whole Trichinopoly cigar before Morrison had finished.

"Well," he asked, "and what do you make of it?"

"My opinion entirely coincides with yours," Morrison replied
thoughtfully. "The writer has taken himself for a model; he has
described his own feelings. Psychological studies and brain troubles
were my pet subjects before hell got hold of me. There is no doubt in
my mind, that the author has contemplated removing his wife."

"Do you think he will make the attempt?"

"No; decidedly not. Naturally, Angus Hume's moral standard is a high
one. I happen to know something about him, because he was a student at
the university here in my young days. I know him by sight, as he had
been pointed out to me as a married student. His wife was affected with
suicidal mania; she afterwards died, I heard."

"That must have been the first wife, then. Your inference is that Hume
has simply gone one better for the sake of strengthening his narrative.
Morally, your judgment is correct. Our author bears a high name. As a
young man he beggared himself to pay his father's debts, devoting his
mother's property to that purpose. From all I hear, I entertain a high
opinion of him. You think he would brood over this trouble without
dreaming of an attempt to rid himself of his incubus?"

"Certainly. Did you never commit a crime in imagination? The stronger
the magnetism, the more vivid the mental picture, the more complete
the details would be. Besides the wrong, the danger of discovery is a
wonderfully powerful deterrent."

"Would Hume fall if an absolutely safe opportunity were placed in his
way?"

"I think he would — most of us would, for that matter. The idea has
evidently taken a strong hold on him. What would be the chances if an
honest starving man picked up a purse? But there must be no risk in
the opportunity."

"That you will be the judge of," Death said quietly. "You will find the
safe means."

"I am to show Hume how to destroy his wife without risk of discovery?"

"Certainly. You have guessed my meaning exactly."

"Do you want me to throw you down those stairs?"

"No; on the contrary, I want you to earn a large sum of money easily
and pleasantly. I am prepared to pay you no less a sum than £10,000."

"In return for which I am practically to commit a murder?" Morrison
said hoarsely.

"Nothing of the kind. You are to provide the opportunity only. If it is
not accepted, there is an end of the whole business; if it is accepted,
it will be your part to prevent crime at the critical moment. I am
interested in the study of temptations, and I am rich enough to pay for
my object-lessons. Are you going to assist me?"

"Under those circumstances, certainly," Morrison replied. "Such a sum
of money as you mention would be my salvation. I could set up a fine
laboratory, and carry out series of experiments, which I have been
working out for years. Give me the shilling."

"There is your bounty money," Death replied. "The rest follows
subsequently."

He took from a pocket-book as he spoke ten Bank of England notes, each
for £1000. Folding them once dexterously across, he tore the crisp
sheets in twain. Half he handed to Morrison, the rest he replaced in
his case.

"I take it that your line will be a professional one," he said. "I give
you a week wherein to mature your plans. For the present I am residing
at Braeside, on Loch Lomond, within a bowshot of Angus Hume's house. I
need not tell you why I am there. Drop a line to say at what time you
are coming, and I will meet you at Ardlui."

A few days later, one afternoon a neat cart stopped off the pierhead at
Ardlui, and awaited the coming of the Empress. Morrison was the only
passenger. He presented a very different appearance to the individual
Death had discovered a week before. Very little passed between the
twain until Braeside was reached.

"That large white house yonder is Hume's," Death explained, as the
twain smoked their cigars on the lawn after dinner. "Hume is coming
here presently."

"You have become fairly friendly, then?" Morrison asked.

"We have become very friendly indeed," Death explained. "This house
belongs to his wife, and is practically within the grounds. The late
owner was an Anglo-Indian, and preferred to live in this cosy bungalow
in the summer months. The high fence all round gives me a feeling of
protection, and enables me to leave my windows open at nights — a
thing impossible in bungalow models, as a rule."

"And what of the ladies?" Morrison asked.

"There you must judge for yourself. To my mind, Hume has hit off the
womenkind admirably in the story which brings us here. His wife is a
pretty, nervous, enemic little woman, who is fond of her husband almost
in an animal way, and jealous withal; but she is utterly without any
kind of sympathy in his work. Miss Alma Ogilvy, on the other hand, is
all sympathy. It is wonderful how those two are drawn together. She is
Hume's inspiration. She thoroughly understands him. Once she comes into
the room, he is a different man. You can understand how exasperating a
silly wife is to such a being. Mrs. Hume is emotional and imaginative
in a way — one of those women who have every ailment they happen to
hear of. Persuade her that she has heart-disease, and she would die of
fright in a month."

Morrison followed every word carefully. He had a vivid recollection
of Hume's story, and all that Death said seemed to tally with that
remarkable narrative.

"And has Mrs. Hume any feeling for her relative, Miss Ogilvy?" he asked.

"She is very jealous of her. I can see that this causes Hume much
suffering to a certain extent, and as regards his feelings for Miss
Ogilvy there can be no doubt. The man's love for her is a perfect
passion, and it burns none the less fiercely for being suppressed. As
to his attitude towards his wife, I can say nothing. But things are in
a critical state. There are times when the wife's silliness drives Hume
almost to the verge of madness. Would he be tempted to remove his wife
if a safe means presented itself? Personally I am baffled."

"The story shows that he has dwelt upon the point to the verge of
monomania."

"Precisely," Death replied. "More than once — treating the question
from the moralist view — he has discussed with me the theory of
finding some way of taking life without danger of discovery."

"With a view to Miss Ogilvy taking her place eventually, of course."

"Quite so. So much I have deduced. But such a scheme is even beyond the
range of an imaginative writer."

"Because the imaginative writer is not a medical man," Morrison said
thoughtfully. "I could show him a dozen ways. There were scores of them
known to the ancients. I have stumbled across more than one in the
East. Of course, you know that at one time I made a bid for fame as an
Egyptologist?"

"So I have heard, which suggests mystery. The fact you mention had much
to do with my consulting you. But if you are going to put temptation
in Hume's way, it must not be a vulgar one. A refined, imaginative man
such as he would shrink from any brutal deed of blood. Something weird,
a mixture of science, fiction, and the supernatural, would be the idea.
But already Hume is interested in you; directly I told him about you,
he became quite excited."

Morrison rose from his seat, and left the room. He returned presently,
carrying in his hand a small brass box covered with quaint designs.
A peculiar odour, a strange mixture of musk and earth, was given out
by the metal casket. Inside was what looked like a beetle, cunningly
formed of copper; down the back were black spots, reflective, like tiny
pools of wine. The eyes of the insect were an angry sullen red, fixed
and malevolent.

"A pretty toy," Death remarked, "and cleverly made. It looks like old
workmanship."

"It is probably some thousands of years old," Morrison replied. "That
scarab was taken out of the tomb of one of the Rameses by myself. The
scarab was a sacred thing with the old priests, you understand. Hold it
in your hand for a moment."

Death took the dull heavy thing, and acting upon Morrison's
instructions, pressed it in his palm. Presently he laid it upon the
table hastily.

"There is some cunning mechanism hidden there," he cried. "The thing
has pierced my hand."

"Because it is alive," Morrison replied. "There are only two of these
beetles known, the other being in the collection of an Indian prince.
Probably it will live as long as the world lasts."

"But what does it live on?" Death asked.

"Putrefaction, mainly; dust, anything. A little human blood will keep
vitality in it for weeks; but give the scarab full license; and its
capacity for blood is enormous."

"Would it take long to kill a human being that way? Excuse me, but I
was so interested that I quite forgot to make my presence known."

The speaker had come quietly in through the long windows leading to the
balcony, his footsteps noiseless on the thick Persian carpet covering
the floor. He was a slight pale man, with a face vital with nervous
force, and eyes dark, brilliant, and restless.

"No matter," Death said cordially. "You have arrived at a most
opportune time. Here is something that should be of the greatest
interest to a novelist. This is my friend Dr. Morrison — Mr. Angus
Hume, the author. Last, but not least, the Scarab."

Hume's interest in the insect knew no bounds. He poured out question
after question concerning its life and habits; his curiosity was
insatiable.

"Is it absolutely dangerous to life?" he asked.

"Under certain circumstances, undoubtedly," Morrison replied. "For
instance, you attach it to my foot when I am asleep; I feel nothing at
the time, but by morning I have lost over an ounce of blood. Repeat
this operation for a time, and I pine away and die."

Death crossed to the window for a moment. When he returned his face
was calm and bland. He saw that Hume's gaze was fixed intently upon
Morrison's features.

"But discovery would certainly follow," he exclaimed.

"Medical suspicion would certainly be aroused," Morrison admitted
gravely. "Here is a plot for you, sir, ready to your hand. How to avert
this suspicion is the key of the story. Solve that, and you have a
perfect tale."

Hume's interest deepened. He paced the room excitedly, his imagination
aflame. Morrison had cunningly touched the mainspring of his enthusiasm.

"You positively thrill me," he cried, "and at the same time you fill me
with despair. Professional zeal amounts to a positive disease with me.
One of the great regrets of my life is that I never studied medicine.
What would I not give for Conan Doyle's wasted opportunity! Dr.
Morrison, I implore you to suggest a way out of the impasse."

"You want to make your assassin absolutely safe, I presume," Morrison
replied, "and to pile up the horror at the same time. Well, for the
sake of argument, you have reduced your victim to the necessary stage
of physical weakness. Mental debility follows as a matter of course.
Play upon his nerves — drive him to suicide——"

A sudden cry broke from Hume. He was fearfully agitated. In imagination
he was acting the part of the assassin — the poison was at work. A
plentiful moisture stood upon his forehead.

"I have it!" he exclaimed; "but, no — the thing is too horrible to
contemplate. Put your beetle away, Dr. Morrison, and let us discuss
more gentle topics."

Death dexterously turned the conversation. Morrison carelessly snapped
the lid of the casket, and deposited his treasure in a drawer in an
old-fashioned escritoire standing in one corner. Hume followed his
movements with fascinated eyes. After a little desultory talk, mostly
upon questions of medical jurisprudence, Hume rose to go, having first
extracted from his companions a promise to dine with him the following
night.

"Well, what do you think?" Death asked, almost eagerly for him.

"I think the design you foreshadowed is there," Morrison murmured,
"and our early conversation this evening gave Hume the necessary
inspiration. Why did he stop so suddenly after the plan flashed into
his mind? Because our knowledge of his secret would have rendered it
futile."

"Have you any notion what the scheme is?"

"I have my suspicions. In any case it is certain to be a complex one —
all that man's writing turns upon intricate problems. Did you notice
one question he asked me just before leaving? The conversation rested
upon transfusion of blood. He wanted to know whether, if we transfused
blood, say, from the veins of a dipsomaniac to the body of a normal
patient, any effects would follow, or if any craving for stimulants
would manifest itself."

"Well, would they?" Death asked. "I was not following the discourse
carefully."

"They certainly might for a time, and provided that the patient was
low enough. The virus in the corpuscles might show to that extent. But
directly the patient tended towards recovery, the ill effects would
assuredly pass away."

"Then you think the idea is being nourished in Hume's mind."

"Not precisely. He is certainly in the throes of temptation, and
eventually his moral nature will succumb. But, you see, we are a force
to be reckoned with. Hume alluded to the drink corpuscle theory so
carelessly that I feel sure he has another idea — an idea on the same
lines, mind you, but not precisely similar. He does not think for a
moment that we have any suspicions at all of his inner feelings, any
more than Eugene Aram anticipated trouble from his telling his dream
to the schoolboy. Like that criminal, he must tell some one, and he
tells it to the world — as a story. You are one of the few who reads
between the lines."

"You think the temptation will be too much for him?"

"I am absolutely sure of it," Morrison cried, "and I wish I was well
out of the business."

"But apart from deus ex machinâ, the attempt would have been made
some time."

"I don't agree with you for a moment. Why can't you leave this
naturally honest man alone? Still, if my vigilance will prevent actual
crime, it shall not be spared. All the same, I shall have well earned
my money before the tragi-comedy is finished. Good night."

Personal contact with Hume's household only served to confirm Death's
suspicions. His keen eyes discerned the latent misery hidden there.
Pretty, fragile Mrs. Hume evidently meant well, but she had an awkward,
irritating way of expressing herself occasionally. Her unskilled
fingers played upon Hume's nerve-strings until they quivered with pain;
her jealousy of Alma Ogilvy's superior fascination for, and sympathy
with, her husband, was patent to the meanest understanding. Hume's
occasional gusts of passion showed the torture which he endured. And
yet Janet Hume tried her best, the knowledge of which added to her
husband's torture.

For the last day or two Mrs. Hume had been anything but well. During
the first three weeks of Death's visit to the locality, she had gone
about her duty more or less languidly, with displays of temper peculiar
to those in indifferent health; but of late a languor and lassitude had
set in, which Morrison noticed uneasily. He noted Hume's occasional
bursts of high spirits, followed by intervals of deepest gloom.

Nothing was said, however, and no startling incident presented
itself until one evening, when Mrs. Hume suddenly collapsed in the
drawing-room. In crossing the floor she suddenly swayed and fell,
striking her head violently against a marble table. Fortunately,
Morrison was present, and the fainting fit passed off without further
evil results.

"Your wife wants tone," he said to Hume at parting. "I will send her a
tonic."

Morrison was grave and silent on the way back to the bungalow. Once
arrived there, he took a tiny phial of dark fluid from his pocket.

"A little blood let by Mrs. Hume in her fall," he explained. "I have
been racking my brains for a way to procure this for some days. When I
have made an experiment or two, I shall be more sure of my ground. I am
going to show you something presently, calculated to startle even your
iron nerves."

A room at the back of the bungalow had been fitted up as a temporary
laboratory for the doctor. At the end of an hour he returned, grave and
somewhat agitated. He had in his hand a sheet of paper, on which were
traced a series of characters resembling a medical prescription. There
were two formulæ, the other written on the second half of the paper.

"I have been making a careful analysis of the blood," Morrison
explained. "Will you kindly cast your eye over this formula, and then
compare it with the first?"

"So far as I can see," Death observed, after a critical examination,
"they are identically the same."

"They are the same," Morrison replied. "I have tested them in every
known way. But I see you are puzzled. For the last fortnight I have
not fed my beetle, and yet a daily examination of the scarab finds him
apparently well-nourished, if I may be allowed the expression. Now,
whence has he derived the blood which is his natural food? There are
evidences of it in the casket which I have analysed. And what do I
find? That these two bloods come from the same body — both from Mrs.
Hume!"

"Cannot you possibly be mistaken?" Death asked.

"Certainly not," Morrison replied emphatically. "Mind you, I am not in
the least surprised. I knew that the scarab, with its weird history
and mystery of ages, would fascinate our friend Hume; that is why I
placed it in such a position that he could put his hand upon it when
he pleased. Again, he never mentions it. Why? Because he is desirous
of averting anything like suspicion. My theory is that the scarab is
borrowed regularly by Hume, and returned to its place again. We are
in his grounds, the window-catches are easily pushed back by a knife,
we are neither of us early risers. Hume is a literary man, and, as
such, is permitted eccentricities of habit which call for no comment.
Frequently, when he cannot sleep, he goes for long night walks. For the
last two nights I have sat up till dawn to test my theory, but hitherto
nothing has happened. Will you share my watch this evening?"

Death assented readily. By eleven the bungalow was in darkness, the two
interested occupants taking up their places in the hall, where they
could see into the dining-room. The clock struck one before anything
happened.

Then one of the windows was pushed cautiously open, and a figure
crept in. He listened for a moment before drawing a match silently
along his thigh. The vesta gave a dim light enough, but it sufficed
to display Hume's features. Without hesitation he crossed to the old
secrétaire, and removed from it to his pocket the casket containing
the scarab. Another moment, and he had as silently departed.

Hume returned again just before dawn, and reversed the programme.
Morrison hastened to examine his scarab. It was swollen to nearly twice
its natural size.

After breakfast Hume entered the bungalow as if nothing had happened.
He seemed a little more grave and preoccupied than usual.

"I have come on a professional errand this morning," he said. "The fact
is, my wife is much worse. She has had several of those fainting fits,
and she appears to be deplorably weak. Your tonic appears to have but
little effect, doctor. May I suggest another remedy, which we have more
than once discussed — the transfusion of blood?"

"The idea has occurred to me more than once, as you say," Morrison
replied gravely; "and I confess that I should like to try the
experiment. We want a subject, though."

Hume extended his arm, at the same time smiling frankly.

"Why not myself?" he suggested. "Bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh,
you know. Let me literally shed my blood for my loved one. At any rate,
in my case there will be no danger of diseased or acquired corpuscles
contaminating the system. What do you say?"

"I have nothing to say at all," Morrison replied; "it rests entirely
with Mrs. Hume. If you will explain your proposal to her, I will come
over presently and further discuss the matter. You may rely upon me to
do my best for all parties."

Hume protested his thanks, and withdrew. With a cloud of tobacco smoke
drifting behind him, Morrison paced the room in a state of great mental
excitement.

"Now, what is that man's scheme?" he cried. "Something diabolically
clever — something that could only creep into the brain of a novelist.
Death, if that fellow baffles me, and succeeds in his diabolical plan,
I shall kill you."

"Better kill him first," Death replied coolly. "Anyway, you can
confront him with the scarab if things grow desperate. Hume is
absolutely under your thumb. I must confess to being deeply interested
myself. Hadn't you better go across?"

At the end of three hours Morrison returned. The operation had
been successfully performed, he said, and the patient was sleeping
peacefully. There would be no further occasion for the scarab, Morrison
thought, and the events of the subsequent week proved that he was
right. The beetle required to be regularly fed.

But Morrison's patient made no rapid strides towards recovery. She
was stronger, certainly, but she had apparently become the prey of
some secret terror; she seemed to be keeping a constant watch upon her
own actions. By some means not explained, Hume had sustained an ugly
plastered wound upon his throat, a spot that Mrs. Hume regarded with
awed, fearsome fascination. Morrison was apparently driven to his wits'
ends.

"The woman is going mad," he said. "I can see self-destruction in her
eyes. But how it is all managed passes my comprehension."

"Hadn't we better call in another novelist to solve the problem for
us?" Death suggested.

But Morrison was in no jesting mood. He was anxious and unnerved. Any
slight catastrophe now might precipitate the accident he was most
desirous of avoiding. He was for disclosing the affair of the scarab to
Hume, and ending the suspense then and there.

"Get Hume out of the way for a day," he suggested, "and allow me to be
alone with my patient. Go off fishing, and stay away till nightfall. I
am going to try a desperate remedy. If it comes to nothing, I must play
the only card I have left."

Death was pleased to fall in with this suggestion. As a matter of fact,
he was quite as much piqued and curious as Morrison, little as he
showed it. The following day he and Hume were away from early morning
till nightfall, returning to the bungalow to dinner. Morrison did not
appear at the friendly meal, deferring his presence till later.

It was about nine when he entered. His face was dark, his eyes gleaming
with uneasy triumph. Without returning Hume's salutation, he crossed
the room and caught the novelist by the throat. With a nervous, sinewy
grip, he tore the disfiguring patch of plaster from Hume's carotid.
There was no wound there, nothing but the white strip against the brown
skin.

"The man is mad," Hume said. "He will do me a mischief."

"There is much method in my madness, then," Morrison replied, as he
dropped into a chair. "At any rate there is no homicidal mania in my
family."

The effect of the apparently simple words upon Hume were electrical.
He started; his lips grew ashy and dry. Words seemed to fail him. In a
dazed, fascinated way he watched Morrison as the latter took a packet
of papers from his pocket — old letters, seemingly, tied up with a
piece of faded blue ribbon.

"Look at that man's throat!" Morrison cried. "He led us to understand
that there was a wound there, but the flesh is sound as mine. Look at
these letters! They purport to come out of an old oak chest — dormant
evidence of a terrible family curse. They show how for four generations
the tribe of Hume suffered from homicidal mania. They are wonderful
literary productions, but they are all forgeries."

"It is false!" Hume cried hoarsely. "They are my father's writing. I
discovered them only a week or two ago, and learnt my family's awful
blight for the first time."

"They are forgeries," Morrison repeated. His anger had died away like
a passing wind. "They were executed to order, artificially faded, and
smoked to their present brown stain. And every sheet of paper contains
the watermark of 1891 — nearly fifty years later than the supposed
writer passed away. But they served their purpose. You would have been
far wiser to have destroyed the evidence of a hellish crime."

No reply came from Hume. Like a criminal he stood waiting for the judge
to pronounce sentence. His hands, knotted over the back of a chair,
completed the semblance to the dock.

"The fiendish simplicity of the plan is amazing," Morrison proceeded.
"In the first place, he invokes the aid of my Rameses' scarab."

"Ah!" shot from Hume's lips. "But I am interrupting you. Pray proceed."

"With the assistance of my beetle, you reduce your wife's vitality
to the lowest ebb. You dare not proceed any further, for fear of
arousing suspicion. Then a great idea comes to you — it came to you
in this room, remember. You allay all suspicion, and even arouse our
admiration, by your willingness to shed your blood for your wife's sake
— having previously drained her of the same vital fluid. That was
grand. There was a touch of mediæval romance about it. The experiment
is performed by me successfully."

"You are very slow," came from Hume's white lips. "Pray come to the
point."

"Here is the point," Morrison said, slapping the letters. "You make up
your mind to play upon your wife's nervous fears. To do so, you forge
these letters, proving that homicidal mania is hereditary in your
family. You tell your wife this with dramatic fervour; you tell her how
you have struggled with the frequent longing to murder; you tell her
that your blood flows in her veins, that she will inevitably suffer the
same malady. You go further, and invent a story of her having attempted
your life in her sleep; you have the plastered wound to prove it. Does
not the whole thing sound strange, and far-fetched to a degree? But not
in the case of a hysterical woman. She accepts every word for gospel
truth. Your idea was to let this horror play upon her mind till you
drove her to suicide. You were very nearly successful, for I dragged
your wife from the lake this afternoon, and forced this wretched story
from her. The letters we obtained by wrenching open your desk. As to
the use of the scarab, Death and I saw you take it from here, and
replace it later. But your wife is not going to die now."

Nobody spoke for a moment. Hume raised his eyes slowly.

"What do you propose to do?" he asked hoarsely.

"I propose to do nothing," Morrison replied. "Your wife may take what
action she deems necessary. For the present she has gone to London.
I am desired to inform you that you are at liberty to go where you
like, so long as you make no attempt to see your wife again. There is
absolutely nothing more to be said."

"Miss Ogilvy is with my wife?" Hume asked.

"No; your wife refused to see her, and of Miss Ogilvy I can say
nothing."

Hume shivered as if with cold. The information contained in the last
few words seemed to affect him profoundly.

"I am going to make a clean breast of it," he said. "Do either of you
happen to have read a story of mine entitled, 'Alter Ego'? It was
published in a volume."

"We have both read it," Death replied, "and I was particularly taken
with the sketch."

"In that case, I need not analyze my feelings," Hume proceeded. "The
curse of my life is there set out. To my wife I owed everything
material, yet I could not feel the gratitude I should. She would have
killed my creative soul, killed it unintentionally, but destroyed it
all the same. Alma Ogilvy it was who kept me mentally alive. I loved
her. I could see that my wife designed to part us. She might as well
have cut my heart out at once. But, knowing my passion for Miss Ogilvy,
I presume you allowed no hint to drop concerning my real motive?"

"I hope that I have the feelings of a man," Morrison said gravely.

"I am obliged to you. I know that my days are numbered, and that my
hours of remorse will of necessity be few. With my wife out of the way,
the autumn of my days were worth the sin. The scarab gave me the first
inspiration, my imagination lent the rest. I thought I had managed it
to perfection, but since I was seen to take the scarab, your subsequent
deductions followed as a matter of course. I have finished."

Hume turned to leave the room. Death detained him by a gesture.

"Would you mind telling me where you are going?" he asked.

"Home, for the present," Hume replied; "to-morrow to Liverpool. America
is my destination. I have sufficient money for my present needs; my pen
will keep me till the end comes. You have saved my soul between you,
and I thank you."

The door closed behind him with a sullen bang, his footsteps died away
in the distance. Morrison took his sacred scarab from his box, and
threw it far out into the lake, where it dropped like a golden plummet
in the crystal water.

"A pity," Death said musingly; "a great pity."

"Not so," Morrison replied. "Let that spawn of Satan lie there out of
harm's way. My friend, you came very near your death to-day. Had I been
too late to save that woman, your life would have paid the forfeit.
Give me my money."

Death counted out the second halves of the ten thousand-pound notes.
Morrison took them, and walked sternly from the room.

"That was a good man," he said, "and we nearly condemned him to eternal
punishment between us. May I never look upon your accursed face again."

Death finished the cigar he was smoking, not in the slightest moved.

"All the same," he mused, "I have proved how poor a creature your good
man is, when exposed to the right phase of temptation."

* * * * *

They were seated on the cliffs as Greenstrand read the story. They were
bathed in the serene beauty of a summer silence. Below them a white
fringe lapped the sand; overhead blue, blue below, vividly contrasted
with the flame of the gorse on the hillside. From somewhere in the
hollow there came a trilling song; one of the village girls working the
spun cobwebs of her lace in the amber afternoon. Strife and the fret of
life seemed to have found decent burial there.

"What do you think of it?" Greenstrand asked.

Margaret made no reply. Her face was turned as if scanning the horizon
for the sails of hope there. Hitherto it had been all despair. The
girl's face might have been carved as a cameo of melancholy.

Greenstrand glanced at her furtively. Perhaps his heart was heavy as
her own. The many months spent there, the regular life, and the pure
air, had not been urged against his cynicism in vain. The lusty breezes
had gradually peeled off the outer shale of doubt, as the Atlantic
swell did the rocks along the foreshore, until the soul was pregnable
to assault.

It had come to this, the tattered doubts still remained, yet
Greenstrand wanted to believe. Could his faith but be restored to him,
Margaret would be his. But he dared not claim her until the blest
consummation.

No man can rise superior to environment, even though he be ten times a
millionaire, who carries the same in the guise of portable luggage. And
Greenstrand had been no exception to the rule; he had not tried to be.
He had not risen superior to his environment; rather, he had aspired to
it.

For no man could possibly lead his present life without being the
better for it. He was constantly in communication with two people in
whom he could not but believe, save as noble clauses in the catalogue
of humanity. And the faith he longed for would bring the diadem of love
in its train.

Therefore he had come to long with a restless eager craving for Death's
failure. Given, say, three examples of contempt for temptation, and
Greenstrand was prepared to capitulate and evacuate the castle of
doubt. It was all he asked for, all he prayed for; it had come to
that. He prayed for his lost faith, but with the iconoclasm of modern
teaching he could not bring himself to believe in that which was
incapable of practical demonstration.

Failure on Death's part would be as living water in a thirsty land; he
wanted the stream poured on his parched soul, so that it might grow
green again, like the dry wheat after February rains. But the failures
came not; the drought seemed as if it was eternal.

"What do you think of it?" Greenstrand demanded again.

"My opinion you have known from the first," Margaret said. "The
whole conception is horrible; it must culminate in some overwhelming
catastrophe. And yet I know that the light will come first; I am
certain of it."

"Meanwhile success treads on the heels of success," Greenstrand
remarked gloomily.

Margaret rose from the grass where she had been seated. The sweet smell
of crushed wild thyme filled the air as she walked away. Her heart was
too full for words, and the others, respecting her trouble, suffered
her to depart in silence.

"And what do you think about it?" Greenstrand inquired combatively.
"You have not said a single word as yet, Julien."

The poet roused himself from the reverie into which he had fallen.

"It is unwise," he said, "to criticize an unfinished picture."

"What do you mean by that?"

"The picture — the story, if you like the expression better — is
not complete. The dramatic sequence is untold still. As a poet and
passim an author, I cannot commend Death's workmanship as yet."

"Won't you enlighten the ignorance of one who is nor poet nor author?"

"You are the author of many tragedies, at any rate," Ray responded.
"The picture is by no means complete. It will not be complete until we
know what becomes of Miss Ogilvy. Have you considered her?"

"As a human document, certainly. She is merely an ingredient. She is
like cucumber in a claret-cup; without her, the beverage lacks subtlety
of flavour."

"Therein, my friend, you are certainly wrong," Ray replied. "Alma
Ogilvy is not merely a human document; she is the envelope enclosing
the whole. The finest character in the story, Arthur, though merely a
sketch. I have conceived the highest regard for her."

"Had not you better follow it up?" Greenstrand suggested coldly.

"Precisely what I am going to do," Ray responded. "I am fascinated,
caught upon a whirlwind of emotion. On Friday I am going to London, as
you know. Through Death, I can easily find Dr. Morrison."

"To discover finally that Angus Hume and Miss Ogilvy have thrown in
their lot together?"

Ray laughed serenely. There was something in his boyish faith, always,
which moved Greenstrand more than the subtlety of a logician could have
done.

"I shall find nothing of the kind," said the poet. "Miss Ogilvy will
make an attempt to save Hume, so far as this world is concerned, and
she will be successful."

"You mean that she will contemplate some heroic self-sacrifice?"

"She will accomplish it," Ray cried. "She will succeed. I feel as
certain of it as I feel certain of the all-seeing God."

"Would that I could feel reasonably doubtful, even, of either,"
Greenstrand smiled. "But, if you are right, then Death fails,
comparatively."

Ray smiled in return. "How your eyes shine at the thought of it," he
said. "Yes, you have hit upon my idea."

"Death's triumph shall have a rider — an epilogue which shall be a
dismal failure from his point of view. Miss Ogilvy shall play Gabriel
to his Lucifer."

"And in that case, the result we long for will be accomplished."

"Precisely," Ray cried. "Look at the fair things in nature which rise
from corruption and decay. And decay again, you may urge. But not of
their own volition. Arthur, I have thee on the hip, lad. Behold the
proof of my theory in nature. But then, as you are not a poet, you are
purblind. If I can prove Miss Ogilvy to be the thing of light I take
her for, will it not go far to convince you?"

"Ay," Greenstrand said hoarsely, "it would indeed. Give me but three
or four such cases, and there would be new life for me. My anxiety
to be convinced consumes me. And yet it is hopeless. Look at Death's
successful career."

Greenstrand's voice died away in moody cadence. The darkness of
spiritual night seemed to have crossed the day again.

"I challenge," Ray said eagerly. "I am at issue with you entirely as
regards Death's notions. I do not accuse him of unfairness, but I do
say that his desire to win has coloured his selections. Most of his
puppets have been in worldly case——"

"Is it possible to find marionettes made of anything but clay?"

"I have seen some exquisite Dresden-china figures," Ray said dryly.
"No; Death has not looked high enough."

"Did not you regard Wallingford Hope as a high life? — or the bishop?"

"Certainly not. Few of us know, until we are tempted, how honest we
are. And yet there are thousands of men absolutely beyond the reach
of temptation. And in the case of Farre, for instance, I doubt if the
recording angel would not drop a tear on the record of his so-called
crime. But Death will fail yet. Signs are not wanting that he is
getting tête montée. Then he will aim far higher, and come tumbling
ignominiously to the ground."

"May the God whom you worship grant it," Greenstrand said fervently.
"And yet I never met with any unit of those thousands whom you prate of
so glibly."

"They are all around you, Arthur — our missionaries."

"Who never come near me for a moment without asking me for money."

"There you go with your money again," Ray said petulantly, yet
good-humouredly. "What a millstone about your neck it is! How can a man
hope to float with such a weight attached to him? Personally, I think
nothing of Death's successes. Up to now he has been merely successful
enough to prove the rule. He has been lucky in exploiting so many
exceptions. His hour is coming."

"Well, I will try to think so. And Miss Ogilvy?"

"I will let you know further in a day or two. I shall leave no stone
unturned to find out the facts. Say no more at present."

Before Ray went away on his errand, which was primarily one of charity,
he confided to Margaret what he intended to do. It is needless,
perhaps, to say that the girl applauded his decision. And so Ray
departed, filled with enthusiasm, and leaving behind him a sunshine
which was intoxicating.

It was not till the sixth day that Greenstrand heard from his friend.
He had seen both Death and Morrison, he said, and furthermore, he had
himself, in the enclosed narrative, completed the story of the Scarab.

With the packet still unopened, Greenstrand went in search of Margaret.
He explained to her the gist of Ray's letter.

"Come upon the cliffs, and let us read the chronicle together,"
Greenstrand said.

Nothing loth, Margaret complied. She placed her hand under
Greenstrand's arm with the confidence of a child, for she loved him.
Seated on the purple heather, Greenstrand lay at her feet. And in the
sunshine and the silence, Greenstrand read the story that Ray had to
tell.




CHAPTER XII.—THE PASTEL TO THE EXPERIMENT OF THE RAMESES' SCARAB.


IN the richest fabrics there is not infrequently a warp of stronger
tissue that preserves the whole from premature destruction. The same
thing applies to moral nature also; and as the strands of a hempen
cord are rendered terse by storm, so is poor human nature braced by
adversity.

Perhaps this faculty is more highly developed in woman than in man. And
it came to Janet Hume at the time when she most needed it.

Picture the condition of the woman for a moment. She was one to whom
environment was as the air she breathed. She had a husband whom she
loved; otherwise she had not been so jealous of him, all armchair
philosophers notwithstanding.

And everything had been torn away with one single wrench. She had
not merely lost her husband — it was far worse than that. Hume's
death would have been a minor grief by comparison. And the woman was
absolutely friendless. Allied to a genius of erratic temperament, he
had gradually forced the wedge of coldness between his wife and her
relations. There had been coolness, and then absolute enmity.

And under any circumstances, Janet Hume's pride would have prevented
her from parading her wounds before her flesh and blood. The secret
of Hume's attempt upon her life would be kept; there was no scandal.
She decided upon her course of action rapidly. In the first place, she
must get away; she had her money under her personal control; and the
association of home surroundings was impossible.

In that hour she rose superior to physical weakness. Long before
Morrison's revelations had ceased to ring in her ears, she was on
her way to London. Where she went to mattered nothing. She made no
concealment of her proposed address, so far as the servants were
concerned. That her husband would dare to follow her after what had
happened, she did not for a moment believe.

Janet Hume would have been less than human had she refrained from all
communication with Alma Ogilvy. In her eyes the girl was the more
guilty party of the two. But for Alma, would Angus have acted as he
did? Her heart told her not.

Therefore, ere the outraged woman fled South, she left a letter for
Alma Ogilvy, detailing the history of the plot against her life, and
more than hinting that the girl was responsible for the diabolical
scheme.

It was, perhaps, three hours subsequent to Janet Hume's departure
that Alma received the letter. Anger and the coldness of despair had
whispered the winged words in the writer's ear as she scored them down
at white heat on the paper. The narrative was succinct, and complete in
every detail.

Alma read the letter slowly, and with a mind as clear as glass. Her
first inquiry was for Hume; but he had also left some time before, the
housekeeper being under the impression that he had accompanied her
mistress to London. All that functionary knew was that her mistress had
been hurriedly called away, and that the latter had promised to write
to her in a few days.

Alma drew a deep breath. There was no scandal, then, nor was there
likely to be honey of Hybla for slanderous tongues in the future.

For herself, the girl was not troubled at all; her only thought
was for the man she loved, and who was lost to her for ever. Under
no circumstances could she take his hand again; he had sinned too
grievously for that. And out of her wide charity, she felt the deepest
pity for Janet Hume. The quivering edge of insult, as couched in the
letter, turned passive as a razor on fine steel. In the moment of her
despair Janet had said mad things.

"The pity of it," Alma groaned— "the pity of it all! And what will
become of Angus? He is no more fitted to fight the battle of life alone
than a child. His kind of work is hardly sufficient to keep him from
starvation."

Alma was a very woman. The codes of love were no algebraic signs to
her. That Hume's passion for her was the keynote of his life she knew
well. And yet no word had ever passed between them possessed by a
shade of vivid colour. They had been fain to hide Cupid's shaft behind
a panoply of flowers of speech. The train was there leading to the
magazine; they skipped lightly over it a score of times a day, yet
neither had ever held the match to the powder.

The girl's thoughts were for Angus alone. If there ever had been
anything animal in her love, the brighter flame had burnt it out long
since.

For her own future she cared nothing. But Angus! Alma's eyes were
clear of the rose tint so far as her lover's failings were concerned.
She discerned lucidly enough his unfitness to cope with the world;
he was not the man to suffer and be strong; the staff of life was
nothing to him unless the butter thereof was the purest. Old port and a
temperature below sixty do not assimilate together.

Plainly, Hume was a sybarite. Not only must the wind be tempered to
this literary lamb, but it must be precisely west-south-west besides.
Like peaches, he required protection from frost to bring out his
exquisite flavour to perfection.

Alma was cognizant enough of this fact. But the connoisseur in pines
loves them none the less because their flavour is more costly than the
twin savour of the hardier strawberry; and thus the girl, so far as her
lover was concerned.

His weaknesses were as virtues in her eyes. Something must be done for
him. Janet Hume knew the whole wretched story by heart now; but was
there not still a lingering possibility of bringing husband and wife
together again? Was there no sacrifice on her part equal to the desired
consummation? The pine must have its hothouse heat again, the peach
bloom under its crystal shelter. The world needed Hume; he had yet to
write his masterpiece. The thing should be done; it must. But how to
bring the thing to a head?

Alma sat herself down to think out the matter deliberately. Her
happiness had gone by the board; she was prepared to throw reputation
over as well. No light of inspiration came to her; she worked out
Hume's worldly salvation with the critical care of a Gunsberg or
Steinitz over a chess problem.

There was nothing else to do; no train leaving for the south till the
morning. Alma ascertained Janet Hume's address in London, after which
she dined quietly. A broken heart does not of necessity vitiate a
delicate palate.

Morning broke cold and stormy. A leaden hail thundered on the
hillsides, and ran down in turbulent, yet impotent, yellow tears. As
the express from Edinburgh sped towards the Southern Cross, the gale
intensified in fury. London came at length, glistening under a curtain
of drifting mist; the lamps twinkled fitfully. Alma rather liked it;
the tempest suited her tossing soul.

She had some distance to go, into Regent's Park, where Janet Hume had
taken up her quarters with an old servant, who studied human nature
adown an avenue of past lodgers. A little way from the house Alma
dismissed her cab. She was absolutely cool, so cool and collected that
she felt a nervous dread of the reaction which was certain to follow.

The rain danced upon her cloak, and sparkled like diamonds in her hair.
Opposite her destination she paused for a little time. At the same
moment a man loomed in her sight. He was without a greatcoat, devoid of
umbrella. In a white face his eyes gleamed like stars; his long hair
made derisive sport for the wind.

"Angus," Alma cried, "Angus, you here like this!"

Hume laughed recklessly. What were the elements to him?

"Yes," he said, "I am here. If you ask me why, I reply, God knows!"

"Have you been to see her yet, or are you waiting?"

"To screw up my courage? No, I have no intention of trying to see my
wife. Why am I here? Because my conscience drags me here with warps of
steel. Did ever a man treat woman who loved him so diabolically as I
have treated her?"

"Your remorse is a two-edged weapon, Angus."

"Yes, I understand what you mean. I did it for love of you. I can speak
freely now the scalding truth has seethed in our hearts for years."

Alma bowed her head before Hume's passioned words.

"Say no more on that," she murmured. "If God can forgive you, I can."

"You forgive me! In your eyes I am still a man who walks upright?"

"Why not?" Alma asked, with the first touch of recklessness she had
shown. "I should be more — or less — than human did I hate the man
who had perilled his life in this world and the next because be loved
me. I am no hypocrite, Angus."

"Which means that you know everything, Alma?"

"Yes; your wife took care of that."

"Ah! She dipped her steel into the gall, Alma. I can see it in your
face."

"Why not? What would my logic be under the same circumstances? The
woman who loves does not tarry to reason. Without cause there cannot be
effect. In your wife's eyes I am far worse than you."

"Alma, you are as innocent as newly created Eve by Adam's side."

"I know it," Alma replied calmly. "The knowledge keeps me from despair.
But we are wasting time here. Angus, are all three of our lives to be
wrecked?"

"A pretty question to ask the wrecker," Hume said bitterly.

"Because there is good under chaos. And it is not too late. You owe
Janet much."

"Don't!" Hume groaned. "Don't pour oil on the furnace."

Alma crushed down the pity that came to her lips like water at the
flood.

"I must," she said. "And it is not yet too late. Remember your promise
at the altar. And you have taken everything, and given so little in
return. Angus, you must go back to your wife, and render her Indian
Summer happy. There will be more deceit, but it will be for the best.
You are bound to make some sacrifice."

"You will find me a penitent sinner," Hume replied; "but how is it to
be done?"

"Through me," Alma responded. "If I succeed, you must follow. And I
shall succeed. How? By deceit — by lying as never one woman lied to
another before. I am going to take all the blame on myself. Where are
those letters?" —

Hume produced them; they had been handed to him by Morrison the day
before. He regarded Alma with a sense of stupefaction.

"Listen," the girl went on rapidly. "Those two men are not likely to
divulge the secret they have learnt. I forged these letters."

Alma tapped the documents with her knuckles as she spoke.

"The plot was mine," she proceeded, in the same even monotone. "From
your wife's letter, I gather she does not know everything; in fact,
there is something concealed from me."

"And always will be," Hume said hoarsely. "Go on!"

The story of the scarab was not known to Janet Hume. Morrison had made
his revelations as light as possible; only the more subtle part had
been revealed.

"I forged those letters," Alma repeated. "I placed them where you were
certain to find them; it was I who laid that terrible temptation in
your path. You honestly believed that the awful taint really existed
in your family. My artfully concealed documents gave you the main
suggestion. To your wife I am going to admit all this; I am going
to——"

Hume burst into a peal of hoarse laughter. "To try and cobble a tragic
failure into a farce," he cried. "Was ever such a mad project conceived
out of Bedlam before?"

Alma felt the words not at all. She had expected something of the kind.
It only served to harden the crust of her resolution.

"Your wife will believe every word of it," she said quietly.

"Believe that you are the most depraved of your sex? Impossible."

"Why impossible? She never thought very highly of me. And, so far as
she is concerned, the bottom has fallen out of the universe. If you
could be guilty of crime, how much the more could I? And do not forget
that Janet loves you. And love is a cancerous growth; the more you cut
it away, the further the roots spread. But we are merely arguing in a
circle. Angus, this thing must be done."

Hume protested with the feebleness of the physically exhausted. He
fought against the sleep that overpowered him like wine. What use was
the sacrifice? he asked.

But Alma was not to be turned from her purpose. She fought Hume down;
she gradually wore away his strength, till he was in her hands as a
sick child. He covered his face with his hands, a long shuddering sigh
escaped him — he consented.

"As you like," he said. "What would you have me do?"

"Stay here," Alma replied. "I shall not be long."

She crossed rapidly over to the house where she knew Janet Hume to
be. She rang the bell, and demanded to see the object of her quest. A
moment later she was standing in the presence of the injured wife.

*  *  *  *  *  *

It was an hour later when she emerged. Hume was still there, in the
semblance of one who walks in his sleep. But he noted the pallor of
Alma's face; the quivering of her nerves caused her to respire with
long quick breaths.

"You have failed," he said. "I knew you would; I am glad."

"On the contrary, I have been successful. Ask me nothing. There are
some tortures which one cannot put into words. Go to your wife this
evening, later on, and say that you have heard from me. I told you that
she would welcome any excuse for you, and I was right. Good-bye."

"Alma, you are not going to leave me like this!"

"I am. You and I must never meet again. There is a friend of mine who
is Mother Superior of a certain Sisterhood. I am going to join them.
Good-bye."

Hume stepped forward a pace, and paused. Then he held out his hand. To
kiss the girl now would be sacrilege. For a moment he conquered himself.

"Heaven bless and keep you!" he murmured. "Say good-bye, and go. I will
do my best to live up to your noble sacrifice, to atone for the past.
Good-bye."

Alma flitted out of sight, lost in the misty rain. For nearly two hours
Hume paced round Regent's Park. Then he steeled himself for the coming
interview.

He found his wife seated before the fire. As he entered she rose to her
feet.

"I have heard from Alma that you wanted me," Hume said.

Janet Hume replied nothing. She groped her way with outstretched arms,
her eyes so blind with tears that she could see nothing.

"Am I to stay?" Hume asked gently.

"Yes," came the reply. "I forgive you. After all, the fault was not
yours. I tried to pluck the love from my heart, but —— Kiss me,
Angus; I am so tired — so very tired."

Hume stooped and kissed his wife. What the effort cost him, God knows.
But the thought of the lonely figure, with her face to the rain, gave
him strength. If she could rise so high, and yet a woman, surely he ——

He laid his wife back in the armchair. Her eyes closed, the lips smiled.

"Janet," he said—"Janet, if you and I——"

Then he paused. He spoke to the air. She had fallen into a peaceful
sleep.

*  *  *  *  *  *

There Ray's manuscript ended abruptly. In silence Greenstrand tore the
sheets into fragments, and cast them over the cliff.

"No other eyes but ours must see that," he said.

"Does Julien say whence his information came?" Margaret asked.

"Yes; principally from Morrison. It appears that Hume told him. And
Hume is the kind of man who must confide in some one. He could not put
that story in cold print. Julien was right in his deductions, you see."

There were tears in Margaret's eyes, but the smile behind them turned
salt water into diamonds.

"A noble woman," she said; "though the world might sneer at the
sacrifice. Arthur, do you not rejoice with me? Is not the story
perfect?"

"It has almost persuaded me to be a Christian," Greenstrand said
lightly.

And yet there was no levity in his heart; he only spoke thus to
disguise his feelings. The story of Alma's sacrifice had profoundly
moved him. It seemed to him that he had been carried far towards his
goal.

"You think I cannot see into your heart!" said Margaret. "But it is
easy so to do."

"Then there is no reason for words on my part, Margaret. Another such
as this, one more, and afterwards—— But I dare not think of that."

"There are good people in the world, Arthur."

"Press your advantage. I admit it; I was wrong. And yet, on the other
hand—— Ah, my faith was very close to me then; I could nearly grasp
it. It eluded me like a sunbeam."

"But you think that it is coming, Arthur?"

"I am certain of it, Margaret. Let Death fail once more. Mind, I only
asked for three, and this one gives strength and encouragement——"

Greenstrand broke off, incapable of saying more. High overhead a white
gull shot upwards. A feather fluttered from his wing, and dropped in
Margaret's lap. She brushed the glossy bloom upon it gently.

"The gull still flies," she said, "despite the loss of this."

"Because it has faith, and is not afraid, I suppose?"

"Yes."




CHAPTER XIII.—THE EXPERIMENT OF THE MAMMON'S PLAGUE-SHIP.


"YOU desire to see me on a matter of business."

Death bowed in reply to the speaker. At the same time his eye took
in the poverty of the room in which he had been ushered pending Dr.
Seaforth's arrival. The apartment was scrupulously clean, but the fact
only served to heighten the suggestion of bareness. The poverty was
evidently of the grimmest genteel kind, the life beside which penal
servitude pales into insignificance.

The doctor's attire was correct enough; his features were cast in
one of nature's choicest moulds, yet want gave him a lean and hungry
alertness. There were dull patches on the shoulders of his frock
coat, suggestive of the abuse of ink as a restorative. A poor doctor,
struggling hard to live in a poor quarter down the river, was Seaforth.
The tyro in humanity would have guessed as much.

Death saw his card flutter and tremble in Seaforth's long lean fingers.
The thin transparency of the hands told their own story.

"You wish to consult me professionally?" Seaforth proceeded.

He caught his breath as he spoke. On the answer a day's food, perhaps,
depended. But Seaforth might have spared the agony of his heroics.
Death was perfectly well aware that there was no money in the house.

"Yes," the latter replied, "if you have an hour or two to spare."

Seaforth signified a chair. A bitter smile crept under his fair
moustache.

"I hear you well spoken of," Death went on, "as one devoted to your
profession."

"I should be; it has cost me sacrifice enough."

Death bowed again. He knew that story also. Seaforth had quarrelled
with his family, and given up a bright future because he preferred the
lancet to the mitre — the latter, in his case, represented by a juicy
family living. The breach had been absolute; from that day forward
he had never seen any of his own kin again. For a time fortune had
favoured Seaforth; she found him the weapons necessary to fight his way
into the profession, she provided him with a wife and child. And then
the jade tripped smilingly to the making of a brassy millionaire, and
left him to his fate.

"The errand I am here upon is a somewhat unusual one," Death explained;
"but, as it is in the nature of your business, I apprehend that you
will not see your way to refuse it. Your presence is required on board
a hooker down the river, to attend a man who is suffering from delirium
tremens."

"I am ready to accompany you at once," Seaforth replied.

"Good. In that case we had better start. There is a flavour of romance
in the case which I will explain as we go along. Very likely I shall
be compelled to leave you on board for a time, and, as I am a total
stranger to you, I should prefer to pay you a fee for this consultation
in advance."

Death laid a sovereign and a shilling on the table. Seaforth's eyes
gleamed as he dropped it in his pocket. There was material there to
keep the grey wolf away for a time. And within a week, if money for the
rent of the house was not forthcoming, Seaforth would be driven out
into the world again. But that the evil for the day sufficeth Seaforth
had learnt from bitter experience.

A minute or two later Seaforth and Death had left the house behind
them, but not until the doctor had left the sovereign behind.

"Let me explain the peculiarities of this case to you," Death said. "I
need not ask if you are acquainted with the name of Sir Grant Laycock?"

"The greatest living authority on brain and nervous diseases? Of
course."

"Sir Grant is at present in Italy on a holiday. That is what the world
thinks. As a matter of fact, he is secluded in a village not far from
Florence, in charge of a keeper. Laycock, my dear sir, is as mad as the
proverbial hatter."

"You astound me!" Seaforth murmured.

"Nevertheless, I am speaking the truth. I need not say that this
disclosure is in the strictest confidence. Sir Grant has been insane
for years. You can quite understand how the deep and intricate study of
the brain has affected his own. For a long time these attacks have been
getting worse, but hitherto nobody has suspected anything wrong. You
know how wonderfully cunning the insane are in hiding infirmity of the
kind."

"Many instances have come under my notice," Seaforth replied.

"Precisely. At times Sir Grant is clear and brilliant, as usual;
latterly the attacks are so severe that he has to hide himself
away. Now, it is perfectly natural that, with a mind so troubled, a
man should have a pet mania. We all have them. And in Sir Grant's
particular case this mania takes the form of desire to recover lost
treasure. Since he first read "Treasure Island" — which brilliant
romance he practically has by heart — Sir Grant has devoted the whole
of his spare time to the subject. As you know, he is a rich man, and a
bachelor, therefore he can afford to gratify his hobby. He has a huge
pile of books and records devoted to the history of rich galleons lost
at sea. Without making public the matter, he has more than once fitted
out a vessel with all the appliances for the recovery of heavily laden
wrecks. The last was an attempt to raise The Holy Rose, a Spanish
vessel, in specie, which foundered in the Gulf of Mexico some sixteen
years ago, latitude uncertain. To effect this purpose, the hooker
Stornaway was fitted out two years ago. The captain, Rooke, was
furnished with some wonderful plans which had fallen into Laycock's
hands, and he had every confidence in the success of the expedition.
The Stornaway is now in the Thames."

"And were they successful?" Seaforth asked, interested despite himself.

"Personally, I should be prepared to wager a handsome sum against
it," Death said dryly. "As to the rest, I can say nothing, for the
simple reason that Rooke is at present down with an attack of delirium
tremens, as I told you. There was a large safe built into his cabin
for the safe custody of the treasure, but I can find the key nowhere."

"But, surely, the crew would be in a position to tell you!"

"There are only three Lascars on board; no one of the original crew
remains. From what I could gather, Rooke is a ruffian and bully of
the worst possible type. All the Englishmen on board deserted at
Pernambuco, and, with only five Lascars, the hooker was navigated home.
However, I can get the duplicate key in a day or two — in fact, it is
on the way from Italy now — and then we will see. But here we are."

They were far down the river by this time. Death led the way along
a rotten and deserted wharf, strongly reminding Seaforth of that of
Lethe, at the end of which the hooker was lying. As they stepped on
board, Seaforth noticed the air of disaster, and signs of dirt and
slovenliness everywhere. Everything was out of place, the decks were
slimy with filth and discoloured by expectoration. Plugs of exhausted
tobacco, masticated to fibre, oozed clammily underfoot. A foul smell
rose from the hatchway.

"Faugh!" Seaforth said with a shudder. "The place is a perfect
fever-trap."

Down below they found the captain, Rooke. The inert, indifferent
Lascars had stripped his cabin and locked him in, where he was raging
like a newly-caged tiger. Death obtained the key, and threw open the
door.

A dark man, with red-rimmed staring eyes, advanced towards them. His
black hair was matted on his forehead, and limp with perspiration. Over
the temples, the veins stood out like purple cordage.

"Take them away," he cried, "all of them! There's no treasure, here, I
tell you. We never found any. I knew that when we started. If I could
only find the key, I'd prove it, and then they would go away. Send them
off, I tell you!"

He burst into a torrent of lurid oaths, the cosmopolitan fruit of many
ports. He beat upon the cabin table with senseless passion.

"A bad case," Seaforth whispered, "and all the worse, because this is
by no means the first attack of the kind. He wants sleep badly."

"Do you think he is going to die?" Death asked.

"I should say, certainly," Seaforth responded. "In any case, he must
sleep. I came prepared for a violent paroxysm, and I have a sedative in
my pocket. Could you find me a tin cup anywhere? — not a glass, if you
can help it."

A tin measure was produced by one of the somnolent Lascars. Seaforth
poured into it a little water, and then the sleeping potion. At the
sound of liquid tinkling in the cup, Rooke turned round wolfishly.

"Drink!" he cried hoarsely. "Give it me, quick. They took all my rum
away."

He tossed the liquid down as if it had been sherry. Then he demanded
more. Seaforth gave him a little water. He staggered to a chair, and
collapsed therein. A few minutes later his ravings lapsed into sleepy
murmurs, then silence. He slept.

"He will do now for some hours," Seaforth said. "Here, you men, carry
him away and lay him in his bunk. I'll come back again at nightfall. He
won't wake till then."

There was no longer anything to remain for. At the bottom of Thames
Street, Death parted from his companion.

"I will call on you again to-morrow, or the next day," he said. "By
that time I am sure to have the key of the safe. You will visit the
hooker again before night? On second thoughts, perhaps, I will come
down to the hooker myself this evening, if you will name a time."

"Then say half-past ten. I will meet you here, if you like."

"Don't wait for me, as I may be late. If I am not on the hooker by
twelve, I shall not come at all," Death remarked. "As a matter of fact,
I am sick of the whole business, and I'm sorry I ever undertook it."

Death's forecast proved correct, for he was not at the appointed place
in time. With the aid of a friendly policeman, Seaforth picked his way
to the dreary wharf. A bright moonlight aided his adventurous efforts.
One of the Lascars showed a lantern, and thus assisted, Seaforth
scrambled on board.

Only two of the dusky crew were visible, Seaforth gathering from his
guide that the other was sick in the forecastle. Seaforth smiled
grimly. It would be his duty to visit the ailing Lascar in his bunk
presently; and if the forecastle was as fragrant by comparison as the
cabin, the interview would be anything but a pleasant one.

He found his chief patient just as he had been laid in his hammock,
suspended across the cabin. All the same, Rooke must have moved, for
on the cabin table lay what looked like the missing key of the safe.
Seaforth laid his hand upon the sleeper's forehead, then he started
slightly.

The man was cold — dead. Familiar as he was with death and disaster,
Seaforth was conscious of a creepy feeling. The dirty ship, the vile
smell, and the silence, all added to the grim realism of the thing. But
the man was dead. There was nothing for it, now, but to wait until the
arrival of Sir Grant Laycock's emissary.

Seaforth examined his surroundings curiously. The place seemed to teem
with vivid fascinations in tune with Seaforth's sombre mood. The whole
story was a salty romance — a little decayed. And perhaps the safe
contained the epilogue of this sea mystery. Rooke, doubtless, had found
the key; perhaps had it all the time of his drunken maunderings.

Seaforth took the warded steel in his hands. Something seemed to draw
his fingers to the safe.

"Why not?" he said aloud. "There can be no harm in it, anyway."

He moved the ship's lantern so that the light would fall upon the safe.
The key fitted the lock, the heavy door swung back easily.

Inside there were some score or more of leathern bags. Seaforth took
one of them in his hand. It was so heavy that he could hardly get it
on the table. He untied the green leather thong, and plunged in his
crooked, trembling fingers. The fitful light of the lantern shone upon
a glittering heap of gold dollars.

All the bags contained coin. There must have been thousands upon
thousands there. And this man, who alone held the secret, had but one
shining yellow disc between himself and those he loved and starvation.
No other living soul knew of this, and the putative owner of it all was
a madman. It lay in Seaforth's hands to become master of wealth, to
save his home, to raise himself in the scale of humanity.

He trembled so that he could hardly replace the bag. A plentiful
moisture ran down his face. There were tears of self-contempt in his
eyes. In those few moments Seaforth passed through the agony of a
lifetime. As he attempted to drag the key from the relocked safe, it
seemed to hold his fingers in a vice.

Then resolution conquered. With his clenched fist, cut and bleeding,
he smashed one of the porthole glasses, and cast the key far into the
river.

"They can manage without it," he said aloud. "I have sunk pretty low,
but I am not going to lose everything that makes life tolerable. I am
no thief yet, thank God!"

A sudden spasm seemed to check his breathing. He tumbled blindly up the
companion-way, longing for air. At the head of the steps he encountered
Death. He was not aware that the latter had watched the whole scene
from the ladder. How was Seaforth to know that Death had placed the key
furtively for him to find?

"You got here before me," Death said. "I am sorry I was late. The
patient?"

"Is a patient no longer, being merely a corpse. I was bound to stay
here for you. I presume you will see to the funeral."

"To everything. There is nothing to detain us here longer to-night."

Death evinced no surprise at Seaforth's disclosure. He had felt
perfectly assured from the first that Rooke's decease was only a matter
of time. He had carefully laid his plans for Seaforth's successful
temptation, and he had failed. So far as he was concerned, there was an
end of the matter. He had found at last a man who was above the lure of
the devil. The modern Æsop had been successful in his search.

"One moment," Seaforth remarked. "I might as well earn my fee whilst
I am here. One of the Lascars is down ill in the forecastle; I should
like to see him first."

"Very well. In that case, I think I will accompany you."

Death crammed some sheets of paper into his pocket, and followed. In
the forecastle they found the dusky sailor on his bunk, in great agony.
His lips looked purple in the sickly light; the limbs were almost rigid.

Seaforth drew back with a cry of horror. He grasped Death by the arm,
and hurried him up on deck.

"What frightened you in that way?" the latter asked.

"Cholera," Seaforth said hoarsely. "That poor fellow is in extremis,
and another one is sickening for the same disease. Say nothing at
present. It is our duty to get away, and warn the authorities without
delay. Come quickly."

Death needed no second bidding. This was a dramatic termination to
his experiment, which had been totally unlooked for. Despite his
iron nerve, he felt somewhat sick and cold, as a man does who is not
accustomed to disease. And he had been on that cursed death-ship three
times that day already.

"What are we to do?" he asked helplessly.

"Return to my house at once," Seaforth replied. "Fortunately, it is
late, and therefore we shall not meet many people. We must avoid those
we meet as much as possible. My wife will be sitting up for me. Without
going anywhere near her, I shall inform her what has happened, and send
her and my daughter across to Dr. Gretton's. He will take them in for
a day or two, and also see that the authorities are warned. Of course,
you understand that for days you and I will be as prisoners in my
house. We shall be shunned like the plague, and fed like lepers."

"I suppose you are not mistaken?"

"My good sir, I was an assistant-surgeon at Aden for two years. That
unhappy man has virulent cholera, as sure as you are alive."

Death accepted the inevitable with outward equanimity. At the outset
he had contemplated the possibility of finding a knot in the board
sometimes, but a coffin-board, and that his own, had not come within
the focus of the kaleidoscope.

No word was spoken on the homeward way. Seaforth rattled his key in the
latch at length; then there were sounds of footsteps coming down the
stairs. From the ring they made, it was evident that the upper part of
the house was but scantily furnished.

High up the well of the stairs a solitary candle shone. Death could see
a red transparent hand before it, a figure like a silhouette in the
gloom, playing round the yellow light. Seaforth explained the situation
clearly.

His wife made no demur. She was practically cutting herself off from
her husband, with the chance of never seeing him again; but her reply
had a strong and cheerful ring. The husband had decided, and what he
said was right. Seaforth motioned Death into the scantily furnished
dining-room, and offered him a chair. Presently, there were footsteps
in the passage, and the sullen banging of the hall door.

"Thank God," Seaforth said fervently, "that they are out of danger!"

"Meaning that our case is a great deal more serious?" Death suggested.

"Well, yours may be," the doctor remarked coolly. "Asiatic cholera is
not a toy in the hands of prattling children. For my part, I always
take proper precautions."

Death made no reply for a moment. Warm as the evening was, he shivered.
A sudden feeling of giddiness and sickness came over him. An instant
later he doubled up with a terrible inward pain. The physical torture
rendered him rigid.

"In the name of Heaven, brandy!" he gasped. Seaforth produced a little
from a cupboard, and literally forced it between Death's teeth.

"Relax your muscles," he commanded sternly.

"I cannot. I seem to be drawn up like a bow. Have I — is it —— ?"

Seaforth examined the speaker's face intently. "Yes," he said quietly.
"One of the worst features of this awful disease is the swiftness with
which it strikes down its victim. You are in God's hands now. I will do
my best for you."

The last words conveyed nothing to Death. He was unconscious. The
horrible pain had got him down and mastered him.

* * * * * *

It was four days later before he came to his senses again. Seaforth sat
opposite to him. All that the invalid could require had been brought
there; the authorities had seen to that. When the quarantine was
raised, everything in the house would have to be destroyed. Ninety-six
hours of suffering had reduced Death to a skeleton. But his skin was
cool and moist, and the flood of fever had ebbed away.

"You are out of danger now," Seaforth explained. "All you want is good
diet, and what I have not here can be easily obtained. You must not
talk too much."

"It must have been awfully dreary work for you."

"Yes; but it was my duty. And I had no time to think — a luxury in
itself. But you are not to say any more at present. Be silent."

A week passed by, and at the end of that time Death practically was
himself again. A few more days, and the embargo was removed. No
precaution had been neglected; the inside of the house was practically
gutted. Everything was destroyed.

"I owe my life to you," Death said at parting. He held out his hand.

Seaforth ignored it sternly. "As you remark," he said, "you owe me your
life. And yet I should have been justified in allowing you to die, like
the hound that you are."

"I do not understand your meaning."

"No? Then let me explain. It became necessary to know who you were, so
that people outside could communicate with your friends. There was a
great mass of papers in your pocket, and it became my duty to examine
them."

"Go on," Death said quietly, "go on."

"I examined those papers and a diary singly, and from thence I got a
fair idea of what appears to be your mission in life. Concerning its
cynical depravity I say nothing; words of mine would be wasted upon
so callous a wretch as yourself. And you could not leave alone a man
so poor in fortune's suits as I am; you must even try to rob me of my
honesty. I have read it all for myself. You scoundrel!"

"Have you any more to say?"

"Very little. It is useless to reproach you. All this I read in the
earlier stages of your illness. I was tempted, then, to let you die. I
ought to have let you die, and rid humanity of such a pest; but I did
not do so. I conquered my feelings; I nursed you as tenderly as if I
had been of your own flesh and blood. Under Providence you were saved
by me. Dwell upon the fact; dwell upon it, and go."

"One moment," Death replied. "If there is any way that I can——"

"There is none. A situation has been offered me by letter since I have
been here, and the same I have accepted. Receive help from you? I would
rot first. Now go!"

They parted thus. Failure there might have been on Death's side, but
one man, at least, had triumphed as it is given to few men to triumph
in this world of ours.

*  *  *  *  *  *

It was night as Greenstrand sat and finished the manuscript. On the
table lay a note enclosed with the chronicle, which Greenstrand had
not opened yet. He perused every word again with a wild triumph at his
heart, and a mistiness before his eyes. Ray was not there to share his
gratification, for he was in London still; he was due on the morrow.

"Thank Heaven!" Greenstrand murmured. "There is a God, as there are
good men who follow His teaching. My lost faith has come back to me."

It seemed to rush into his arms, and beat its unseen wings against
him. He and Belief stood smiling at each other across the solitary
hearthstone. The joy was not without a sense of shamed guilt, which was
the first thought of awakening understanding. And Margaret must know of
this before she slept. He crossed over to the cottage, bareheaded, in
the moonlight. He tapped the glowing casement, which the girl opened.

There was a faint flush on her face as she saw who her visitor was.

"I am not going to detain you now," Greenstrand said hurriedly. "I
found this waiting for me when I got back this evening. Will you read
it to-night?"

"Arthur, your news is good. Yes, I see it in your face. In your eyes
there is the love of God."

"And now," Greenstrand cried, "read, read, and we will meet again in
the morning!"

He turned away quickly. His feet brushed the heather, but his head
seemed as if pillowed on the clouds of Olympus. He quivered in every
limb, his face was wet with tears, like those of a little child whose
fear is changed to happiness.

For an hour he sat contemplating his glowing future in the fire. Alma
Ogilvy had gone far to restore his faith, and Seaforth had crowned the
awakened statue. Margaret would know that he spoke from his heart;
he could claim those tender scarlet lips now, and Death should be
commanded to sin no more.

Here Greenstrand's fingers touched the letter, which he had not read.
He idly broke the seal, and scanned the contents.

"I send you the history of a failure," it ran. "Between the lines of
your letters I read the desire for one, and can guess at the reason.
If my hand for fiction has not lost its cunning, the enclosed should
suffice. You understand? If more of the same kind be required, I can
supply them."

The paper fluttered from Greenstrand's fingers. Then the story was a
lie — a piece of hyperbole, written for the purpose of deceit? Should
he let it pass, and allow Margaret to believe that the story was as
true as his own newborn faith? She would have no doubts; she would
take his word, and all would be well. Greenstrand swayed before the
temptation as a reed bent by the winter gale.

He reeled before it. To stand upright against such a hurricane of
tempestuous temptations would have been possible only to Olympians. And
Greenstrand fought against the stream as a strong swimmer caught by the
tide. He fought it sitting there; he fought it out in the night, with
the stars above him; he fought it till the grey of dawn.

When Margaret came, smiling and rosy as the newborn day itself, her
eyes met a face filled with despair. And yet her lover had never looked
so strong and resolute.

"What has happened?" she demanded instantly.

By way of reply, Greenstrand handed her Death's letter. She read it
carefully three times, then tore it into fragments.

"The thing was a lie," Greenstrand said. "You read the story?"

"Yes; and there seemed to be truth in every line. Why should it trouble
you like this?"

"Why? Another fatal success comes at the moment when our hands are on
the point of meeting for good and all. It gave me back my faith, and
now——"

He turned away, unable to proceed for a moment. When he faced Margaret
again, he saw that her eyes were luminous with happiness.

"Why do you smile?" Greenstrand demanded, almost fiercely.

"I will tell you in a moment. Did not that story complete your cure?"

"Last night it did, but now——"

"I saw it in your eyes; I could hear it in the timbre of your voice.
And this letter of Death's is impudence unparalleled. Arthur, how blind
you are!"

"You are speaking in riddles, Margaret."

"No, no; plain fact," Margaret cried. "Do you not see? Death's story is
true. His letter is to tempt you to say nothing, and so deceive me.
He knows, he guesses; the letter displays that. How skilfully he has
laid his plot to tempt his master to a base act!"

"It is a scheme to tempt me?"

"Yes; and it has failed. I feel certain that I am right. Oh, it is
glorious, glorious! We have had two fine examples of superiority over
circumstances, and you are the third. Arthur, in yourself you have
proved the fallacy of your argument. Have you not fought a great
temptation, and conquered?"

The full force of the words came to Greenstrand in a blinding flash. He
seemed suddenly to be uplifted. Fool that he had been not to grasp this
before, and save himself a night of misery. Margaret's woman's wit had
penetrated where his duller comprehension had failed. He was beyond his
environment.

"Margaret," he cried, "if I could only prove this!"

"It is easily capable of proof. There is a telegraph-office at Port
Jacob, and you knew Death's address. Telegraph him in plain terms for
the proof; and say, if he has deceived you, there is no occasion for
further experiments."

"You are satisfied that I am satisfied at last?"

"I am," Margaret blushed. "Not yet, Arthur. When the reply comes, I may
kiss you then."

The answer was long in coming. Finally, about sunset, it arrived; a
fisher-boy brought it by the cliffs, whistling shrilly as he came.

Greenstrand snatched the envelope from his hands, and tore it open.

"You have solved the problem," it ran. "Your suggestion correct. Two
failures in one experiment. You would have been the finest capture
of them all; my eagle amongst a collection of kites. Am in midst of
experiment now, which shall finish, and desist as commanded."

Margaret held out her hands. Her face shone like a star.

"You may kiss me," she said. "What does the rest matter, now? You are
convinced, and I have proved you true. And this is the end."

Greenstrand kissed her once on the lips, then suffered her to go.




CHAPTER XIV.—THE LAST EXPERIMENT OF ALL.


PEOPLE in society wondered what was the reason for the friendship
between the Princess of Serena and a mere working journalist like
Ambrose. True, the princess held extremely advanced views; she was a
frequent contributor to the best, e.g. the half-crown ephemerals,
and this might have constituted a bond of sympathy.

To all practical purposes, Princess Corona was English. She had been
caught young, and educated here for political reasons; the consequence
being, that when diplomacy arranged for her to share the little toy
throne of Serena, England found a firm friend at the court there, and
Russia an uncompromising foe.

As most people know, Serena is a buffer state erected by the genius of
Lord Beaconsfield, and confirmed by the Treaty of Berlin. Penetrating
politicians of the Lawson type had sneered at the time, but years had
proved the wisdom of the creation. So long as Serena stood, Russia was
powerless in that direction. And a more popular queen country never
boasted.

As a matter of fact, Princess Corona was king and queen in one. Like
the great majority of rulers, Prince Karmis, her husband, was a victim
to the criminal system of royal inbreeding, which threatens before
long to confine all the crowned heads and their collaterals within
an asylum. He was slight and puny, he was subject to strange fits of
depression, he was a cunning liar of the first water — a sure sign of
moral weakness — and his heart was seriously affected. Small wonder
that the prince was more of a spoilt boy than a responsible sovereign.

But the consort's troubles did not end here. She knew, nobody better,
that Russia was working quietly to break up the State of Serena, a task
rendered all the more easy in consequence of the unruly behaviour of
the hill tribes. Their fanaticism was a constant source of trouble,
all the more so because the hills contained a hybrid sect, who were
the object of constant persecution, and whom Russia chose to regard
as forming the followers of the Greek Church. And Russia, with her
enlightened views and morbid love of liberty, is peculiarly fitted
for the Champion of Christianity — a fact which diplomatists, with
characteristic lack of humour, have come universally to acknowledge.

That the agents of the "divine figure from the North" constantly
fomented these atrocities, Princess Corona knew perfectly well. That
they were devised also to drive her husband from the throne she was
also aware. Prince Karmis out of the way, she, too, would be powerless.
A puppet would grasp the sceptre, and a Russian occupation follow
directly afterwards, as a matter of course.

The princess stood at the top of the stairs at the Shan Embassy,
waiting for the consort. She was a strikingly handsome woman, of some
six-and-twenty years. Her tall slim figure was wrapped in a white
cloak, with down about the throat, behind which a circle of diamonds
glittered. The red lips were a trifle wide; there was both power and
passion in the dark face. The brown eyes looked like slumbering fires.

By the princess stood Ambrose. They made a fine couple, for the man
was big and strong; had he not been a journalist he would have made a
pattern emperor.

"Have you found the prince?" she asked.

"Yes," Ambrose replied, "I have just left him. He cannot come to you."

The princess drew in her lips sharply. She seemed to be suffering from
some physical pain that she was desirous of hiding from her companion.

"Ah," she said, "the old pitiful story; he has been drinking again."

"I fear so. As you suggested, I have been watching him all day. I
suppose you can guess who the prince's companion has been?"

The princess nodded. A great personage passed along the flowery way,
and she forced a smile to her lips. She pulled a rose from a pot beside
her, and plucked its red heart out leaf by leaf.

"You mean Samouiski, of course. Mr. Ambrose, you are my friend?"

She flashed a magnetic glance at him, the look which brought the
wildest of the hillmen to her feet. Ambrose thrilled.

"I am something more than your friend," he replied.

The listener's face flushed. That this man loved her she knew well. And
she was none the less cognizant of the fact because his passion was
returned. The situation was tragic and farcical at the same time, as
are most of the serious businesses of life. That a mere Fleet Street
journalist should dare to lift his eyes to a reigning sovereign seems
absurd; but that the exalted object should return the admiration was
madness. But, madness or otherwise, there it was.

"I will tell you a secret," the princess went on more calmly.

"Samouiski is here to arrange for the prince's abdication. That much I
have gathered. You can guess what will follow that act. My poor little
country will be distracted, there will be strife and bloodshed. And all
my fault for coming here. Heaven knows I did it for the best. I thought
to strengthen our position here, but I know now that we should have
stayed at home. There I knew how to deal with my husband, I promise
you."

The mask fell from the speaker's face for a moment. The native
Berserker blood flamed into her eyes in angry red. After all, the coat
of civilization was no deeper in grain than a tiger-skin.

"Do you know this Samouiski?" Ambrose asked.

"Not well. They tell me he is one of the new favourites at the North.
He is a man with a face like a mask. I believe the grand-duke met
him here recently, and recommended him for this commission — the
grand-duke who collects the orchids, I mean. But there is only one
thing to do; we must get home to Serena without delay. And now take me
to my husband."

Ambrose started. What the princess asked was impossible.

"I cannot do it," he said. "Pardon me, but you know what the prince
is. He is like a vicious youth released from home for the first time.
And this Samouiski has led him on until — You understand? It is a low
gambling den."

"I care not where it is. The prince must have money, though his follies
have drained our exchequer. And when he is in need of money, as at
present, he is capable of any folly to obtain it. I tried hard to keep
him from Samouiski, but my vigilance has been defeated this time. For
all I know to the contrary, the Act of Abdication may be signed. And
before the prince is himself again, take me there."

The manner of the princess had grown suddenly hard and imperious.
Ambrose saw there was nothing for it but to obey.

"Shall I call your carriage?" he asked.

"No, a hansom will do. Quick! There has been delay enough already."

Just as she was, with her white robes about her, and the diamonds
glittering round her milky throat, the princess entered the cab.
The driver whistled low when he heard the direction given. Ambrose
purchased swift discretion with a sovereign.

They came to the place at length, a dark shuttered house in Leicester
Square. Ambrose knocked at the door in a peculiar way, and the same
was opened. There are few mysteries in London impregnable against the
sesame of the journalist.

A man with one eye, and that a focus of many villainies, stood in the
opening. Ambrose brushed him aside in a few words.

"Here is my card," he said. "We are here to see a gentleman who is ill.
He came here with a Russian this afternoon. Take us to him at once."

The resolute tone, plus the great morning newspaper italicized on the
card, clenched the matter. Without demur the single-eyed Cerberus led
the way upstairs.

"You will find the gentleman in there, asleep," he said, indicating a
door. "When you and the lady come down, I shall be prepared to let you
out."

The room was upholstered in a tawdry, showy way. The gas was flaming
high. On a couch lay the slight figure of a man, his face turned to the
light. A cut on the forehead was open and livid, the fair moustache was
clotted with blood. The features were handsome in a delicate way, yet
weak and sensual. Ambrose felt the feeble pulse, which hardly beat at
all. The figure lay like death.

"Will you please to search his pockets?" the princess suggested.

There was nothing found beyond a cigarette-case, some letters, and
inside the vest, in a secret pocket, a roll of notes to the value of
thousands of roubles. A shade of contempt passed over the princess's
face as she saw them.

"It is as I expected," she cried. "Look there."

She pointed to the table, whereon stood pens, ink, and paper, together
with an empty champagne-bottle and two glasses. The princess examined
the latter.

"One of the glasses is perfectly clean and dry," she said. "You can
draw your own inference from that. You may be certain that the Act of
Abdication has been signed here. We must get the prince away, and bring
him to his senses without delay. But not to our hotel like this."

"I have some rooms in Cecil Street," Ambrose said after a pause. "I
sometimes sleep there when I am detained very late in Fleet Street; and
frequently I use my sitting-room for literary purposes. The landlady is
a worthy old soul, who would do anything for me. We will go there, if
you like."

The princess caught eagerly at the suggestion. "If we could only get
him away from here," she sighed.

Ambrose solved the problem curtly. He raised the slight wasted figure
in his arms, and carried it downstairs. Outside, the same cab was still
waiting. In twenty minutes Prince Karmis was in Ambrose's bed in Cecil
Street, and a little later a doctor was making a diagnosis of the case.

"The gentleman is in great danger," he said finally. "In advanced cases
of heart-disease, a large use of alcohol is absolutely suicidal. The
patient will require careful, constant watching for some hours. I will
send a powerful medicine, which must be administered literally drop by
drop at intervals of five minutes. In the morning I will call again."

The busy man departed. Downstairs in the sitting-room the princess
waited.

"And who is to attend him?" she asked, as Ambrose explained. "Who will
save his life?"

Ambrose volunteered to do so, though the promise cost him an effort. If
that wretched creature upstairs were to die!

"Corona," he cried suddenly, "it would be far better so. It would
ensure the happiness you deserve — your happiness and mine. 'Fore
Heaven, as I see you standing there, white and weary, and withal so
strong, I could find it in my heart to poison him! Oh, I am mad, I
know — I, a poor writer, daring to aspire to the hand of a princess!
And yet I feel that, if that man were out of the way, you would throw
precedence to the winds, and marry me. Your affection is as great as
mine."

The princess laid her head upon her hands, and laughed drearily.

"I would," she said, "as Heaven is my witness, I would. We should be
the mark of scorn for fools, yet I should not care. I am as mad as you."

She raised her head, and looked at Ambrose half defiantly. There
was more of the flame of invitation in her eyes than she dreamt of.
Ambrose moved swiftly to her side, and took her in his arms. She swayed
slightly towards him.

How long she reclined there, with Ambrose's kisses flaming on her lips,
the princess could not have told. But the midsummer madness burnt out
presently.

"Let me go," she said. "Assuredly, never was such folly as this. I must
get back to my hotel. In the morning I will come again."

Ambrose made no effort to detain her; he heard the door close, and
wheels drive away. Then, with slow lingering steps, he went up to his
bedroom. Prince Karmis lay like death still. It was so easy, detection
impossible, over-neglect would precipitate the end, and thereafter
loomed for Ambrose a lasting happiness. On the table by the bedside was
the medicine the doctor had sent. Ambrose allowed it to remain there.

* * * * * *

At this point the manuscript closed abruptly. A few hurried pencil
lines at the foot stated that Death had not had time to finish his
story, being called suddenly away upon a delicate and dangerous
mission, but promising the remainder by next post.

"How do you think the narrative will turn out?" Greenstrand asked.

"It looks bad," Ray responded, as Margaret did not speak. She seemed
to be struggling with some puzzling memory. "Death looks like being
successful."

"Nonsense!" Greenstrand cried, with a vehemence that amused the others.
"Ah, you think that there is no zeal like that of the apostate. But I
am prepared to believe in the goodness of every one now. Margaret, why
so silent?"

"Because I am puzzled, and just a little frightened," Margaret
answered. "I fear very much for Death's last subject. The temptation
is a cruel one. We have passionate love and a profound pity for a good
woman, tied to such a creature as you read of. And I cannot rid myself
of the feeling that Ambrose is my own brother."

"Your own brother! But why?"

"Because his name is Ambrose; because he also is a journalist; and
because he, too, has rooms in Cecil Street, Strand. I am anxious."

The afternoon wore on. Still restless and anxious, Margaret returned to
her work. It was late next day when she returned.

Her eyes were dilated; her face was as pale as snow. In her hand she
held a telegram. She threw it across to Greenstrand.

"Read that," she said, in a hoarse, strained voice. "It is as I feared.
I knew that my presentiment would prove correct. Read your work there."

Greenstrand took up the flimsy paper, and read —


"Can you find accommodation for a lady for a few days? If so, wire. Be
silent, and ask no questions, as my happiness depends on the issue. For
my sake I implore you to do this. Reply to my rooms in Cecil Street. —
AMBROSE."


The paper fluttered from Greenstrand's hand. "I do not understand it,"
he murmured.

"And yet it is as plain as daylight," Margaret went on in the same
strained voice. "The Ambrose of Death's story is my brother. He has
fallen. Don't you see that he is going to send the Princess Corona
here? The temptation was too great for him, and the prince is dead.
Need I speak more plainly?"

"But I understood that your brother lived in a kind of romantic
brotherhood," Greenstrand faltered; "that he belonged to a band of men
gathered together to do good in their leisure hours. It cannot be the
same."

"I am afraid so," Ray murmured. "The brothers of St. Thelma have their
work, for the most part, like other people."

"I cannot believe it; I will not!" Greenstrand cried passionately.
"After the light has come back to me, it would be too cruel. And yet if
it is true?"

"I can never look you in the face again," Margaret interrupted. "As
the instrument responsible for the death of my brother, as his moral
murderer——"

She paused, unable to proceed. Greenstrand quivered.

"We may be all wrong yet," he faltered.

"In the face of that telegram?"

"No; I admit the correctness of your deductions. I mean that Ambrose
may have risen superior to temptation, after all."

Margaret laughed, a laugh that curdled the blood of her hearers, so
full of despair it was. She beat her hands wildly upon her breast, the
long hair came tumbling about her shoulders; the beauty of her grief
was fascinating.

"Perhaps you are wrong," Greenstrand repeated. "A chance allusion
to——"

"I am not wrong!" Margaret exclaimed passionately. "My heart tells me
so. My own dear brother is the victim of your devil's instrument. I
have sat here, day by day, allowing you to destroy souls, hoping for
the light to come to you, and God has punished me. And I loved you,
loved you, which is worst of all."

They tried to soothe her; they raised her from the floor, where she had
fallen, but she thrust them aside fiercely. All the wild blood in her
veins was aflame, the fire of adversity had burnt off the veneer, the
natural heart lay bare.

"But listen," Greenstrand urged. "The story may yet end as you wish."

"Never. I could not bear it. I have killed my brother; your friend has
conquered him. I know what will be recorded in the sequel, as well as
if I had learnt the story by heart. The fearful Nemesis, the deserved
Nemesis of it! Let me get away; the place stifles me!"

Margaret burst from their detaining hands again. Her eyes were hard
and tearless. In a blind way she groped for the door, and, opening it,
let in a flood of light. Far below, at her feet, the great waves were
breaking.

She held out her arms towards them, as a tired child does to a mother.

"The sea," she murmured. "Thank God, there is the sea left."

Like an arrow from a bow she darted down the slope, her figure, dark
and lithe against the white spindrift. Atalanta's feet never brushed
the dew more swiftly than she on her race for oblivion.

Ray was the first to recover from his fascination. "Quick!" he cried.
"The girl does not know what she is doing. Once off these rocks into
such a ground sea as this, and nothing could save her."

Down below the great waves rolled in grandly to the shore. The
moonlight glistened upon their crowns of white jewels. They broke
with a white thud, and carried the grey-green spume far up the jagged
fringe that bound them. Save for the roar, the silence was intense. As
Greenstrand shouted, the echo of his voice came back to him clearly.

But Margaret held on her course. Her ears might have been closed, for
all the heed she gave. Fleet as the deer she bounded down from rock
to rock, leaving her pursuers further behind at every step. The free,
fearless life of her childhood lent her speed.

"We shall never reach her," Greenstrand groaned. "I would give all I
had in the world to stand by her side for a moment. My God!"

Margaret had reached the water. She stood on the edge of a black rock,
the white veil surging up to her feet. Then she turned for a moment.
The moonlight fell on her face. She smiled a smile of sweetness. The
light of madness was no longer in her eyes — nothing but steady
resolution.

"I could live no longer," she cried. "It is better thus. Good-bye."

Her hands were raised above her head; her body was bent like a bow. As
Greenstrand gained the rock, she suddenly leapt forward, falling like a
plummet into the trough of the sea. A huge wave curled over her, then
she was seen no more.

Ray held Greenstrand back forcibly. They were met with the flying scud,
the salt lash swept over them like rain before the gale. Underneath
yawned grey hell. Yet it was so calm that the quick breath of each
could be heard clearly.

"Let me go!" Greenstrand cried. "There is nothing to live for now."

With a sudden effort Ray forced the speaker to his knees.

"There is much to live for," he said. "Why add suicide to murder?
Margaret must have been dead directly that wave struck her. Poor child!"

There was no more to be said — nothing to do but wait and watch. The
tide was rising higher; the moon lay like a copper shield on a wall of
oak. They stood there for an hour or more; and then, by common accord,
turned and walked homeward.

The lamp was still burning brightly; Death's last story lay upon the
table. It seemed ages — a lifetime since the first page had been
commenced — an age in which the world had fallen into chaos. Margaret
was dead. Pile Pelion on Ossa, phrase on phrase, and grief on grief,
and it was impossible to say more than that.

They sat thus through the night, saying nothing. Morn came, but they
did not move. The post came presently, and with it another packet from
Death — the conclusion of the last experiment doubtless; but neither
of them touched it. It lay by the first fatal chapter. What did it
matter how the thing ended now?

"Arthur," Ray said at length, "is there a God, now, think you?"

Greenstrand bowed his head as if the words had been a blow.

"Not yet," he said imploringly; "don't strike me yet. Surely I have
been punished sufficiently. I loved her, Julien; I loved her as myself."

"You deemed her to be good and pure — all that goes to make a noble
woman?"

"Ay, ay," Greenstrand said hoarsely. "Why?"

"Why? Was not that enough to restore your lost faith in humanity? But
you must set yourself up against the Almighty — a tinsel devil, a
shoddy Beelzebub — backed by the power of your gold. And the hand of
God lies sorely on you now."

"It does indeed," Greenstrand confessed humbly. "You said that Nemesis
would overtake me, and it has. Oh, there is a God, surely! I felt it
days ago; how much more do I feel it now!"

He bowed his face on his hands, utterly overcome. Of what use was his
money to him now? In the whole wide world there was no poor wretch so
utterly miserable. The starvelings under Waterloo arches were better
off than he. A few of the broad pieces, which had produced so great a
blight, would have rendered their paradise possible.

Presently he took up Death's communication, just received,
mechanically, and began to read. He was too utterly crushed as yet to
realize the severity of the blow. He read on to the end; then cast the
pages from him with a hard laugh — forced, horrible.

"The wrong of it," he cried—" the bitter wrong! Truly fate has sported
with me to some purpose. Why did I not read this first; why did I not
lock that door? Why is not Margaret with us now? For Death has failed,
failed!"

Greenstrand's voice rose to a scream. He dashed the sheets on the
floor; he cast them over his head; he danced upon them violently.

"I tell you Death has failed," he proceeded in the same wild, high
note. "The experiment ended in utter disaster. Ambrose stands before
the world at this moment free, inviolate. And Margaret is dead! Why do
I live?"

Presently Greenstrand's passion exhausted itself. The last stroke was
overwhelming. Nemesis had come, but there was no need of it. Margaret
had not waited to hear. Death's last letter had shaken her faith to the
crumbling-point.

"There can be nothing more," Greenstrand murmured; "the worst is worst."

Ray said nothing. He took up the scattered sheets from the floor. There
were only six folios in all; and as Greenstrand sat there, inert and
listless again, he read the last of the story which had produced chaos
and tragic desolation.




CHAPTER XV.—THE EXPERIMENT COMPLETED.


FOR half an hour Ambrose stood by the bedside of Prince Karmis. Not
until the end of that time did he throw off the hideous nightmare which
lay upon him. He took up the bottle and tore off the cover.

"Dear God!" he cried. "I was going to murder that man! But not now —
not now. Surely I can find some less infamous way than that?"

Prince Karmis had stirred slightly, and lay on his back, his lips
parted. For over an hour Ambrose stood over him, dropping the ruby
fluid spot by spot on his tongue. The time elapsed sufficed to empty
the tiny phial. Then a faint hue of colour crept into the white sodden
cheeks, the chest heaved perceptibly.

For the present Ambrose's task was done. The clock was striking one as
he crept down to his sitting-room. He had conquered self so far, but
the desire to grasp the flower he had won still possessed him.

Corona loved him! Had she not lain in his arms? Did not the nectar
of her kisses still linger on his lips? He would plead with her; the
fervour of his passion should sweep all barriers away.

Ambrose was heavy for lack of sleep, yet his brain was aflame.

Yes; Corona should be his. He would send her away from the world —
hide her from its ken. He would send her to Port Gwyn, to his sister
Margaret.

He wrote out the telegram — it pleased him to do so, though he was
faintly conscious, at the same time, of the absurdity of the action
— as the child who endows her dolls with human possibilities. At the
same time it soothed him; it seemed to bring Corona and himself closer
together.

He compiled the telegram carefully; he laid it on the table, knowing
that it would never be sent — yet he completed the mummery by placing
a florin on the form. At the same time a knock was heard at the front
door. Ambrose answered it in person. It was the doctor, perhaps,
and the rest of the household slept. But it was not the doctor; the
newcomer was one Jermyngham, a leader-writer on the Morning Herald,
Ambrose's paper.

"Found you at last!" the latter cried. "You are wanted at the office
without delay."

"What is wrong?" Ambrose asked.

"A big trouble in the East," Jermyngham responded. "A colossal shindy
between the Serena hill tribes and the Christians. Russia threatens
occupation, and there is a rumour that Prince Karmis has abdicated. As
you are the one man who understands the question thoroughly, you are
wanted."

"I can't come," Ambrose said doggedly. "It is absolutely out of the
question. McNeill must do it. Drop a paper in the letter-box as you go
home."

Jermyngham departed wondering. But he did not forget the paper. Ambrose
heard it fall into the box. He took out the sheet and turned to the
fifth page. It was all there. Russia had doubtless anticipated matters
a little. No doubt they felt certain as to the success of their agent,
Samouiski, and therefore they were prepared to press forward. The
abdication of Prince Karmis would form an excuse which the Powers would
find it difficult to withstand. If Samouiski had parted with the Act of
Abdication, Corona was doomed.

There was only one thing to save the state from a sanguinary conflict
— the prompt return home of the prince, and such vigorous action on
the part of the princess of which she was quite capable.

The news changed the current of Ambrose's thoughts. If he suppressed
this news and won Serena to his will, then, morally, some thousands of
murders would lie at his door. It was his duty to tell her, and save
the country she loved so well. A new and terrible set of temptations
were here.

They grappled with Ambrose till the dawn. And with daybreak the
princess came. She had not slept, evidently. She looked fagged for want
of rest.

"How is he now?" she asked. "My carriage is below. Is he fit to move?"

Ambrose explained that the medicine seemed to have been wonderfully
effective, and that the prince was sleeping peacefully. The princess
went up. She bent over the bed and laid her arm upon the sleeper's
shoulder.

"What is it?" he murmured. "Another bottle! My throat is on fire."

Princess Corona started back with violent repulsion. She was sick to
the soul. To stay there longer at present was impossible. A kingdom
depended upon — another bottle. She crept into the sitting-room,
hectic, defiant.

"Ambrose!" she cried, "Ambrose! take me away — anywhere. It is past my
strength."

He was by her side in a moment. As he strode towards her, his coat
crackled against the copy of the Herald lying on the table. It was
necessary to strangle the temptation before it rose like the fumes from
the sheard where the genii lay concealed.

"Not yet," he said hoarsely; "read what is in the paper there."

There was no mistaking the significance of the tone. The princess
snatched up the sheet. In a few moments she had mastered its contents.

"You are a great and good man," she said, with shining eyes. "I know
what the effort to utter those words cost you. Ambrose, I have never
loved you as I do at this moment. But we must act now. I must get my
incubus home."

"And then, princess?"

"And then to set the wires in motion. By the telegraph I can speak to
my people. I will let the tyrant from the North know whom he has to
deal with. If only I could recover the document which I am certain my
partner signed last night! It may not be too late. Samouiski may have
the document still."

"I understand your meaning. Give me his address. And if that document
is still in his possession, it shall be yours within two hours."

"How can I thank you? You will bring it to the Imperial Hotel?"

"Yes. And now to get the prince away. Courage! we shall win yet."

Within a few minutes Ambrose was on his way towards Jermyn Street,
where Samouiski had his apartments. He found that the Russian had not
long come in, and would see his visitor without delay.

Samouiski was still in evening dress. Ambrose started as they came face
to face. He had seen the man once before, but he had not been called
Samouiski then. But it was not the cue of the intruder to say so yet.

"You wish to see me on important business?" the Russian suggested.

"I do," Ambrose replied. "Yesterday you obtained a certain document
from Prince Karmis of Serena. I know that you have the paper still. I
require it."

"Indeed? And presuming that I refuse?"

Ambrose had closed the door behind him. With one step he placed himself
between Samouiski and the bell.

"In that case I shall be compelled to murder you," he said.

"Ah! You find Princess Corona a most beautiful and fascinating woman?"

"I do. A fact that you, no doubt, counted upon in your scheme, Mr.
Death."

The listener started slightly, but the smile did not leave his face.

"You have ascertained my name, then?" he asked.

"Yes. You were recognized by a friend of mine, one Angus Hume, who is
at present an inmate of our St. Thelma retreat, during the absence of
his wife, who is on a visit, and he told me a great deal about you. Now
that I find you and Samouiski are one and the same, my eyes are opened
considerably. You are the devil's agent that the poet Ray told me of
during a recent visit to London. I see now that the Princess Corona and
myself are to be your victims. I may say you have ignominiously failed."

"The fact causes me no annoyance," Death replied. "I own that my
machinations brought you and the princess together — never mind how.
You want that paper? Why?"

"To return to the princess."

"And you have fully considered what such a course will mean to you?"

"You hound!" Ambrose cried. "Another word like that, and I strangle
you. Give me the paper. If not, I will kill you, certain, if I die for
it; I little care how soon."

He was in earnest; Death could see that plainly. He took from his
breast-pocket a long envelope, and handed it to Ambrose, who glanced at
it for a moment.

"Take the document," Death said; "it is no further use to me."

Ambrose buttoned it up close. With a swift motion he was by Death's
side. With one hand he grasped the collar of his antagonist, with the
other he snatched up a cane that chanced to he lying across the table.
The blows fell like merciless hail. Death writhed and struggled, but no
cry came from him. Not till he felt the figure become inert and limp
did Ambrose desist.

Then he strode out of the room, laughing aloud. Half his amusement
was caused by his own temerity. Who was he to fling himself into the
Niagara of European politics, to try and check the current with his
puny force? The recollection of the telegram he had written tickled him
till he laughed again. He must destroy that foolish evidence when he
got time.

Then that trivial matter escaped him; it never returned again. As a
matter of fact, the telegram was despatched later. His careful landlady
had found the form and the money, and deeming it to be forgotten, had
despatched it herself.

Ambrose reached the Imperial at length. He sent in his name, and
immediately was admitted to the presence of the princess.

"We cross to-night," she said. "A series of special trains are already
ordered. In seventy hours we shall be in Serena. You have the document?"

Without a word Ambrose laid it on the table. Every word the princess
read slowly and carefully; then she tore the paper into fragments,
sifting them thoughtfully between her fingers.

"How can I possibly thank you?" she murmured. "You have saved my
country — and myself."

"And myself also. In time, doubtless, this will be a source of
satisfaction to me. At present it seems to me that our moral code of
ethics is open to criticism. I strive to speak lightly, but I think you
know. Now let me go."

"It is sad to think that you and I may never meet again."

"Do not. As you are strong, be merciful. Good-bye."

Ambrose held out his hand. The princess appeared not to see it. Her
lips were quivering.

"Not like that," she murmured; "not quite like that. This way."

Just for a moment she lapsed into the soft and yielding woman. Her arms
were about the neck of the man she loved; their lips met in a lingering
pressure. It was a moment long as eternity, yet short as death.

"Now go," she whispered. "Good-bye, and God keep you, my hero, now and
always."

Ambrose groped his way to the door. He passed out into the street, away
towards his lodgings. And there, worn out with fatigue, he dropped into
a chair and slept. But there was a smile on his lips, for he had fought
the fight, and been victorious.

* * * * * *

"A fitting termination," Ray murmured. "If we had only known before!"

Greenstrand writhed in his chair. "What might have been" were words
which rung in his ears like the distant fret of the sea.

"Why harp upon that?" he demanded.

Again Ray was silent for a little time.

"We are a pair of murderers," Greenstrand resumed; "only I am the
principal. Julien, my punishment is great, but no greater than I
deserved. Do you feel as if you could not face me, or any honest man,
again?"

They regarded one another quietly. There was more shame with the broad
light of day. Yesterday, at the same time, they had dined gaily. There
was no thought of eating now.

"Pull down the blinds, and shut out the light," Greenstrand groaned.

"The truth must be faced," Ray responded; "the whole story told."

"How easy it is to counsel that for others. Still, I recognize the
truth of your words. The sunshine seems to frighten me. I have lost
my nerve in a single night. Is that the same sky which I shall see
to-morrow, and the next day, and the next? Why is life so long, Julien?"

"Most of us find it far too short," Ray replied.

"I never have. I suppose the money clogged my soul. It will do so no
longer. I am going to destroy my formula. I am going to place it beyond
my power to make more money. What I have already shall he devoted to
the public good. Take as much as you want for your own purposes —
throw it in the sea, where Margaret lies. I must work, Julien; I must
slave for my bread in the sweat of my brow, or lay violent hands upon
myself. Leave me alone for a little while, I pray you."

Ray took a loaf from the cupboard and cut himself a slice. It seemed to
choke him. Only by moistening it with a little milk did he contrive to
swallow the morsel.

"I am going out," he said, taking up his hat. "It will be low water in
an hour's time."

Greenstrand nodded without reply. He knew exactly what Ray meant. It
was his duty to go along, but his whole soul shrank from the ordeal.
And yet the solitude of the cottage seemed almost overwhelming.

He gathered up the sheets of Death's last communication, which still
littered the floor, and burnt them carefully. Then from his own room
he brought more papers, and destroyed them also. One of the documents
was the famous formula for the transmission of refuse into coal. Only
he knew the secret, and it was carried with him always. It lay black
and charred now. The piling up of the fortune was no longer possible,
for the formula was an elaborate one, and impossible to be committed to
memory. Greenstrand's fortune was limited to his absolute possessions.

He felt the better for this. He wrote letter after letter to his
business clients; he disposed of thousands with the stroke of a pen.
Within a few hours the letters had been despatched; he would be
practically a beggar.

He did not forget Ray; his lace industry was provided for handsomely.
By the time all this business was transacted, the sun was westering.
Ray had not returned. Presently a shadow loomed large in the doorway.

"You have returned, then?" Greenstrand said, without looking up.

"Yes. I have come to render an account of my stewardship."

The speaker was not Ray, but Death. His face was more pallid even than
its wont; an ugly strip of black plaster disfigured his cheek. He
limped in slowly with the aid of a stick. He looked like one who had
met with a grievous accident.

As a storm peels the shale from the cliff, so had this misfortune
deprived Death's features of their customary mask. His face was marked
by strong passion, his eyes were broody with hate. For the real man
showed itself.

"You seem to have met with some trouble?" Greenstrand suggested
sardonically.

"I have," replied Death. "The marks you see are the result of personal
violence. I shall never be quite myself again. You got my letter?"

"The brief history of your latest and greatest failure — yes. Should I
be wrong in ascribing your present condition to that catastrophe?"

"You would not, sir. I thought I had laid my plans carefully and well.
To have brought Ambrose Trefroch to his knees had been the greatest
triumph of all. He was so immaculate, so superior to the rest; and
there was a beautiful woman who loved him. He cared for her — but all
that was set out in detail in my report. St. Antony would have fallen.
But he found me out. Look at me now."

"He thrashed you within an inch of your life. Pity he hadn't killed
you."

"For doing my master's bidding?"

"You scoundrel!" Greenstrand cried. "At intervals between the weaving
of your diabolical schemes you have been here to see me. The exigencies
of business demanded your presence. You are no fool; you knew the
attraction which chained me here. And yet you dare to lay hands upon
the brother of the woman I loved."

"Why not?" Death demanded. "There was no restriction; he was a splendid
subject. The undoing of Ambrose Trefroch was the cup I thirsted for."

"You attempted it deliberately! What for?"

Death advanced a pace or two nearer to his employer. His eyes gleamed.

"For revenge," he said. "I meant to spoil your love romance, and come
between you and the woman you cared for. Why should you not suffer like
the rest? Surely fortune did not mean everything for you? For years
I have been a tool, a beast of burden, carrying out your designs to
the letter. You have barely treated me as a man at all. Heavens! how
I have hated you all these years! Yes, you have paid me well, I have
money enough and to spare; but I would give it all to know that I had
succeeded. And from this moment I am no longer servant of yours."

"You mean that you have deliberately tried to do me a great injury?"

"Certainly I do," Death replied without the least trace of emotion.
"It has been my intention for some years to do you a deadly mischief.
Don't prate to me of gratitude; it has nothing to do with the question.
You have been well rewarded in return for my liberal salary. You can't
buy gratitude; money kills it. With contempt you picked me out of the
gutter, with contempt you placed me on my legs again. The experiment
was a great success. But you might have treated me with a little more
consideration. Still, I have failed."

"It may gratify you to hear that you have done nothing of the kind,"
Greenstrand replied. He was so utterly broken down that there was
morbid satisfaction in abasing himself before this crippled wretch,
this paltry tool of his. "Listen."

Without comment, he told the whole story plainly and simply. He
extenuated nothing, and put in no plea on his own behalf.

"I stand before you now," he said in conclusion, "as man to man. I am a
monarch without a kingdom, a general deprived of his army. All the rest
matters nothing. You have not failed, Death; on the contrary, you have
been signally successful."

"And I say you have baffled me entirely," Death replied. "You place the
cup to my lips, and you snatch it away before I can drink. My sense of
justice deprives me of any feeling of personal satisfaction. It is not
I who have reduced you to your present position; it is the avenging
hand of Providence. I am not the principal, but the instrument. And you
stand before me now with a dignity that I envy — curse you!"

"Margaret is dead," Greenstrand whispered. "The rest is nothing."

He seemed to be incapable of any display of strong emotion. Yet he was
not bereft of dignity. There was sullen admiration in Death's brooding
eyes.

"There is but one thing," he said presently—" one thing that I should
like to witness. I would give my right hand to witness your interview
with Ambrose Trefroch."

Death had touched his employer at last.

"You take it for granted that I shall see him, then?" he asked.

"You must. There is nobody else to do so. Ray will decline, and he will
have justice on his side in so doing. Ah! that I should like to see.
You do not know Ambrose Trefroch — I do. Man, you will have your
punishment yet."

"Peace, fool!" Greenstrand cried. "As if anything was equal to the
mental torture which fills me at this moment. What do you know — what
can you know — of my inward feelings? And yet you are not the soulless
creature I took you for. I am ready — nay, eager — to face Ambrose
Trefroch at this moment."

At the same instant Ray entered the room. It was characteristic of the
man that he should find for Death a kind word and a sincere grip.

"A disastrous end to our experiments," he said. "I gather from the few
words I overheard that Greenstrand must have told you everything. You
have done your work well."

Death's pale face flushed; he said nothing. Ray had touched him to the
core. The poet beckoned Greenstrand from the room. The latter divined
what had happened.

"You have found her?" he said simply.

"Yes; but this mission is yours. She loved you. God help me if I wound
you undeservedly, but her death lies at your door. I wash my hands of
it. Come."

The long Atlantic ground-swell had died away; there was a creamy
fringe lying on the crisp sand beyond the rocks. In the tiny pools
green-and-crimson anemones waved their tendrils. The painted weed
floated like brilliant forests, varnished, clear as crystal.

In one of these pools Margaret lay. A bunch of emerald sea-wrack formed
her pillow; she floated still and peaceful, as if asleep. Her long hair
trailed and streamed like a thing of life. It was a picture, a perfect
one; there was no terror there.

"Carry her to the cottage," Ray commanded, "and I will follow."

They laid her out upon Ray's bed. As the news spread, villagers came
in, silently, reverently, and the moisture in their eyes was as the
salt of the sea she had loved so well. Presently the cottage became
silent and deserted again.

"What are you going to do?" Ray asked.

Greenstrand started; his thoughts were far away.

"I am going to London," he replied. "One of us will suffice to attend
the inquest. You may tell as much or as little of the story as you
choose; it is all one to me. I am going to see Ambrose Trefroch, and
confess everything to him. He may kill me; it would be the kindest
thing he could do. The curse of Cain is mine."

Ray said nothing. Presently Greenstrand reappeared, ready for his
journey. Death had stepped away silently; he had vanished, never to be
seen by either of them again.

"Will you shake my hand?" Greenstrand asked with humility.

"Why not?" Ray responded. "There is but little difference between us.
Some day perhaps——"

He turned away, unable to proceed. Greenstrand lingered uneasily. There
was much to say, yet he had no heart for words.

"Good-bye," he said. "Wish me God-speed, and let me go."

Ray's lips trembled, but no sound came from them. Greenstrand passed
out into the sunshine, but the shadow on his face was the shadow of
despair.




CHAPTER XVI.—"GOOD-BYE, AND CHRIST BE WITH YOU."


GREENSTRAND drove at once, on reaching Paddington, to his London
residence. A trim valet met him in the hall without any expression of
surprise. The servants there were far too accustomed to their master's
vagaries for that. Consequently the house was always ready for his
coming, as if it were really a home.

The owner of all this dazzle and costly splendour, this glittering
panoply of art and taste, strode along to the dining-room. He was full
of bitter thoughts. There were hundreds of people who might have been
rendered superlatively happy by the possession of such a place. It
contained treasures which princes and moneyed oligarchs had bid for
against him vainly. Greenstrand was filled with a hysterical desire to
smash everything, to chip the statues, to rip the glowing canvases from
their frames, to hurl the costly china out-of-doors. What a mockery it
all was! In a short time everything would be sold, and the proceeds
applied to one of the great metropolitan hospitals. All was arranged.

Greenstrand pressed the electric button, and his house-steward appeared.

"I am going away, Gilmour," the master said. "Probably I shall be
absent from England for years. This place is to be sold without delay.
Give the servants a year's wages each, and what character you please,
and let them go. Let this be done in the morning."

Gilmour bowed and withdrew. There was nothing surprising to him in this
command.

"Mr. Death was here yesterday and the day before, sir," he said. "He
left this letter."

Greenstrand tore open the bulky packet. It contained an account
of Death's expenditure during the past two years. The total was
stupendous. Upon such a sum of money as that a man might have set up
an establishment in Park Lane; on it a yacht and a country house would
have been a mere necessity. Greenstrand crushed the papers together and
tossed them carelessly into the grate.

It was night before he found himself outside the gate at St. Thelma. A
brother whom he recognized as a popular actor opened the outer portal
and inquired his business. Beyond, Greenstrand could dimly discern an
ancient cloister, a trim lawn, in the centre of which a fountain was
playing. Behind it all rose the delicate tracery of the chapel. A light
filtered through its stained-glass windows; there was a drony sound
of music made by a mellow, silver-throated organ, like the murmur of
insects on the sleepy summer evenings. How restful it all was!

"I am very sorry," said the brother; "Ambrose is away for two days. He
has lost his sister, and has gone home to bury her. He will return on
Saturday."

Greenstrand retired, disappointed, yet relieved. So Trefroch must have
heard, for ill news travels fast. Eight and forty hours to wait.

The days dragged on heavily. With the exception of a deaf old
caretaker, Greenstrand had the house to himself. Would the hour of
Trefroch's coming never arrive? Greenstrand's thoughts grew more dark
and gloomy, the desire to live less supportable.

Why not end it all? Life was a hell without Margaret; there could not
be a worse torture. The miserable man hurriedly dashed off a few lines
to Ambrose Trefroch. The writer had done the latter a great injury, he
said; he was about to throw himself into the Thames. A crime like his
was utterly beyond forgiveness. He knew now that Christ had died for
sinners, but not such sinners as he.

He signed this letter, and left it with the caretaker for Trefroch.
That the latter would attempt to see him sooner or later he felt
certain. About the same hour Margaret's brother would be returning to
St. Thelma.

In an aimless way Greenstrand wandered along the Embankment. The
tide was running out dankly swift, and there might be an opportunity
presently. Greenstrand felt a sense of relief now that his mind was
made up.

By the Needle an itinerant preacher had taken his stand. A listless
group was listening to the raucous voice, watching the wild gestures
of the man. He was illiterate, grammarless, but this he made up in
earnestness.

"This night," he cried—" ay, this next moment — we may stand in the
presence of our Maker. How does the record read, my friends? Are you
ready? Is there anything left undone? Our hopes of salvation rest upon
a slender thread. Face it out, show courage, confess your faults, and
God's hand will rest gently even on you. Cowards every one!"

The speaker's eyes seemed to light upon Greenstrand for a moment. Was
that man right? Was there hope for him even yet? A coward! Yes, he was
a coward. Greenstrand turned away from the man towards the City. Not
that way yet.

He would see Ambrose Trefroch; he would try to face out his life.
Presently he came to the outer gate of St. Thelma and knocked. He
knocked again, without result. He tried the fastening, which yielded to
his touch.

Inside was peace and quietness. The dwellings round the cloister were
all in darkness; evidently the brothers were away. A shaft of purple
light from the chapel turned the waters of the fountain to a livid
blue. Inside, the organ droned with mournful cadence. Anon there came a
swell of chords like a triumphant march. The music drew Greenstrand on
with a fascination he could not resist.

He crept into the chapel, which looked dim and ghostly in the uncertain
light. There was quiet beauty there; the music served to soothe
Greenstrand's fretful soul. He could see the features of the organist;
he went forward and accosted him.

"I am here in search of Brother Ambrose," he said.

The music ceased with a loud discord. Greenstrand's voice echoed loudly
there. He saw that the musician had a handsome clean-shaven face. He
was dressed in black; there was the shadow of a recent grief under his
eyes.

"I am Brother Ambrose," the other said; "and you are Arthur
Greenstrand."

"Yes; I might have known Margaret's brother anywhere."

"I went directly to your house on my return to London," Trefroch
replied, with the even, gentle tones he might have used towards a
casual stranger. "I found a letter there for me, which, insecurely
fastened, I opened and resealed. You meant to make away with yourself;
the proof that you had done so is there. Who admitted you?"

"I could make nobody hear, so I took the liberty of entering."

"I am the only person here, save one; all the rest have gone to a
meeting, from which they will not return until late. What have you to
say to me?"

"You have learnt everything, I presume?" Greenstrand asked.

"On the contrary. But I have surmised much. From your creature Death I
forced a kind of confession. What have you to say?"

Greenstrand spread out his hands hopelessly. The fine scorn glowing in
Trefroch's eyes rendered him abashed and humble. And, in sooth, what
had he to say?

"I loved your sister," he murmured, "and she is dead. There is no more."

"And you killed her; as sure as we are standing face to face, you
killed her! The inquest was a perfunctory affair; the jury said it was
a case of suicide whilst in a state of unsound mind. Perhaps they were
correct. But who was responsible for Margaret's mental condition? Come,
sir, we stand in a holy place; the shadow of God's altar is upon us.
Tell the truth."

"I will," Greenstrand cried. "I came for that purpose. You know what my
life has been. Margaret, doubtless, told you of me. I had no faith and
no hope; God, to me, was a chimera — a superstition of the fool."

"You know better now, then?"

"Can you look in my face twice and doubt it? I would be in revolt
against the Almighty Christ! To think that such a miserable man as
myself should set up to tinker with the scheme of creation! Picture it,
and pity me."

Greenstrand grasped the rood screen, shaking it in a perfect passion of
despair. Trefroch's face changed not from its marble rigidity. No reply
came from him.

"In all my life," Greenstrand proceeded again, "I have met but two
people in whose sincerity and integrity I believed — your sister
and Julien Bay. All the rest were knaves, self-seekers — anything.
There was no good in humanity. And I set out to prove it with such
temptations as my vast wealth placed in my power. For a time I was
successful — miserably successful. I wanted to fail, and failures
came——"

"Amongst others," Trefroch replied quietly, "myself. Still, I take no
credit for that. I suppose it never occurred to your arrogant mind that
there are limits to human endurance — that you could not practically
compel an honest man to be a knave? Proceed."

Greenstrand did so. He disguised nothing. He told how the dread of her
brother's fate had driven Margaret to sudden madness. He painted his
own conduct in the blackest colours. Nothing was extenuated.

"So that is all," Trefroch said, after a long pause. "You had no pity
for your victims, no sympathy for their weakness. I could kill you as
you stand now, and none be any the wiser. None saw you enter; we are
practically alone here. In your own house is your confession that you
intend to destroy yourself."

"Margaret is dead," said Greenstrand; "what does the rest matter?"

Trefroch went on to speak freely. From his heart came barbed words.
He poured out a withering stream of sarcasm; he rose to the limits of
invective. But nothing touched the listener; no tinge of shame stained
his cheek.

"Margaret is dead," he repeated. "What is all your scorn to me? Hold
me up to public execration; imprison me; put me in the pillory if you
like, and I shall not feel it. My heart is dead; there is no feeling
left."

The dreary hopelessness of the words touched Trefroch.

"I will say no more on that score," he said. "Who am I to judge you?
And, in the end, Margaret could never have been happy with such a man,
despite the newborn faith you boast of. And, had I not been guided, I,
too, might have been outside the pale at this moment. Come with me."

Greenstrand obediently followed. Trefroch led the way from the chapel
across the quadrangle and into one of the small rooms there, which
formed the cells of the brothers. There was only one apartment for
each, the library and refectory and recreation rooms being common. On a
bed lay a man asleep.

"Look at him carefully and mark his face," Trefroch whispered.

Greenstrand did so. The sleeper was evidently not long for this world.

"You do not recognize him, of course," Trefroch said, as they withdrew;
"but you have heard of the author Hume. He was one of your victims, I
understand."

The adventure of King Rameses' Scarab came vividly into Greenstrand's
mind.

"Hume is dying," Trefroch resumed. "He is not one of our permanent
brothers, but a visitor. His story is known to us, and we pity him
sincerely. We pity and admire Alma Ogilvy more. When your tool came
to tempt me, Hume saw him by accident and told me. Then I began to
comprehend dimly. After a time suspicion became certainty. But Death
will remember me for some time to come."

"What are you going to do with me?" Greenstrand asked.

"I? — nothing. You must live. Life shall be your punishment. Were I
disposed to slay you, it is too late now, for I see that there are
lights in the refectory, and by that I know most of the brothers have
returned. I have other things to show you yet. Follow me."

Trefroch led the way into the refectory, a noble granite hall with a
high groined roof. The stone walls were bare. Down the centre of the
hall ran a long table, at which a number of men were seated, supping.
The meal was plain; fruit there was in plenty, and a little wine. Each
man waited upon himself. There were a few ladies present.

They were all laughing and chatting gaily; of the stranger they took no
heed.

"There is no pretence of austerity here, you see," said Trefroch. "Most
of our brothers are men of the world, working in the world, and only
their leisure is spent here. There are some notable people amongst
them. You see that man with the fine head — the one opposite the
fireplace?"

"The features seem familiar to me," Greenstrand murmured.

"They should be," said Trefroch. "He is a Cabinet Minister. There are
many great and good men here; but even some of them might not have been
proof against Death's evil arts. This is shown you as an instance of
what you might have done."

Greenstrand's lips moved, but no sound came from them.

"What am I to do now?" he asked presently.

Trefroch regarded him with stern displeasure.

"Live," he said almost passionately. "Live and work. Find some useful
sphere; set up some ideal, and try to mould yourself to it. Your
penance has not commenced yet; there are years of remorse and agony
before you ere you find comfort. You must serve your probation, as a
prisoner does his sentence. There is no royal road to the throne of God
for sinners such as you."

"Is there any road at all?" Greenstrand asked hopelessly.

"Yes, scores, when you can find them. Do you hear anything?"

Greenstrand listened. It was silent enough there; but faintly from
beyond the grey stone walls came the roar of the mighty city that never
sleeps.

"I hear nothing but the murmur of the town," he replied.

"That is what I meant. It is the voice calling you. That sound is
made up of happiness and misery, want and splendour, despair and joy.
And the minor predominates. Go out and lessen it if you can; try and
do good, and be tolerant of the feelings of others. Remember that no
man knows how honest he be till dire temptation and opportunity come
together. You will find the work of your life waiting for you there."

"Stop," Greenstrand cried, as the other turned away. "If the time comes
when you can say freely from your heart that you forgive me——"

Trefroch's hand fell not unkindly on the speaker's shoulder.

"I forgive you now," he said. "I speak in all sincerity, God knows.
Come to me in a year's time, and tell me what you have done. Good-bye,
and Christ be with you."


THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia

