
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: A Voice from the Dead
Author: Arthur Gask
* A Project Gutenberg Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 2001011.txt
Language: English
Date first posted:  September 2020
Date last updated:  September 2020

Produced by: Maurie Mulcahy

Production Notes:

Project Gutenberg Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg Australia Licence which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

------------------------------------------------------------------------


A VOICE FROM THE DEAD



By Arthur Gask



Published in the Chronicle (Adelaide, SA : 1895 1954), Wednesday 30
September 1942.



IT was quite late at night, and they had just returned from a bridge
party. The two of them were discussing the people who had been present,
as they were drinking a nightcap cup of tea.

"And then Camilla Brendon," said Mrs. James, a lively little woman,
seemingly full of the joy of life, "isn't she smart and hasn't she kept
her good looks? Do you know, dear, she's turned forty-two? Oh, yes, I
know it for certain! We went to the same school together and she's a
year older than I, and I'm forty-one."

"Well, she could have passed for thirty tonight," commented the other.
"Hasn't she got a clever face?"

"And she is clever, Lucy; the cleverest woman I know. She's well read
and highly intellectual. She's the president of our Literary Society
and none of the men can take her down."

"But her husband looks very ordinary. I mean he's not a bit clever. I
can't imagine her marrying a man like him."

"Neither can anyone else," commented Mrs. James, "but then Ted
Brendon's a dear old chap. As you say, he's not a bit clever, but he's
an ideal family man, and he just worships Camilla and the children."

Lucy smiled. "Then, of course, she married him for money. I remember
old man Brendon left plenty when he died."

Her friend shook her head. "No, dear, you're wrong there. Camilla never
was that sort. Besides, she was doing journalistic work then, and must
have had quite a good salary." She looked thoughtful. "No, Lucy, she
didn't marry him for money and I'm certain she didn't marry him for
love. I rather think she married him out of gratitude for his kindness
to the man she'd been engaged to before. That one died as the result of
a terrible accident when they were miles away from everywhere, and Ted
had nursed him and cared for him until he was dead."

"Then she had had a lover before her present husband!" exclaimed Lucy.
She nodded. "And I suppose she loved him!"

"Yes, passionately," replied Mrs. James with emphasis. She smiled.
"Under the mask of that proud and cold face of hers, Camilla hides what
is left of feelings of the deepest passion.

"As a girl, as you can guess, she was very lovely, but no man appealed
to her until Ransom Hellingsby came into her life. Then from an icicle
she became the burning fiery furnace. I knew her intimately then, and
she confided in me more than she did in anyone else. She just idolised
this Ransom of hers."

"And what sort of man was he? An Adonis superman, with all the virtues!"

Her friend sighed. "At any rate, she thought so. Oh, yes, he was
good-looking, right enough, and very clever, too. He was a barrister,
and everyone said he had a great future. He just swept Camilla off her
feet and she loved him with every nerve and drop of blood in her."

"And he worshipped her in return?"

Mrs. James hesitated. "Yes and no. He couldn't help being fond of her
in a man's sort of way, for she was so lovely to look at. Still, he'd
been fond of many others before her, and, even when he was engaged to
Camilla, he's supposed to have had other girl friends." She shook her
head. "He wouldn't have made her the husband Ted Brendon has." She
nodded again. "There were tales, too, that he drank."

"Well, what happened to him? You haven't told me."

"Oh, he was killed on a holiday! He and Ted Brendon and Michael
Barling, now His Honor Judge Barling, were away shooting and fishing
on Kangaroo Island, and in the wildest and most desolate part, Ransom
fell over a cliff and got terribly hurt. His injuries were so bad,
they daren't move him. Their car was 20 miles away, and, leaving Ted
to look after him, Michael started to tramp 20 miles to get help. He
sprained his ankle on the way, however, and it was two days before he
was able to direct the rescue party to where Ransom was lying. Ted had
done everything he could for him, but only a skilful surgeon could have
saved him, and he was dead when they arrived."

"What a dreadful tragedy!" exclaimed Lucy. "I wonder it didn't kill
Camilla."

"It almost did. She was heart-broken, and it was only to Ted Brendon
she could ever bring herself to talk about what had happened. He often
saw her, and, as Ransom's greatest friend, I suppose she thought he
was all of Ransom that was left to her. At any rate, she must have
been so grateful to him for his devotion to her dead Ransom and become
so accustomed to him, that in the end she thought she could put up
with him always. She could see, as everyone else did, that he was
desperately in love with her. So two years later she married him."

"Is she happy?"

"Oh, yes, I think so--in a way. She's got two boys, the elder is 17,
and a lovely girl of 15, and everything in the way of money she could
want. Still, although it's more than 20 years ago, I think she still
lives a bit in the past. When no one's watching her, her face in repose
is sad."

The next morning the object of their conversation was seated alone in
the breakfast room of her beautiful and well-appointed house. She had
just seen her husband off in his car, but had returned to the table to
finish her cup of coffee and glance through the morning newspaper.

As her old school friend had stated, she was still, at 42, a very
handsome woman. She was well and tastefully dressed, and everything
about her spoke of the woman of refinement. She had a good profile and
perfect complexion. Her eyes were large and of a deep blue. She held
herself gracefully and her general poise was as of one who was very
sure of herself.

It happened to be the 18th anniversary of her wedding, and she smiled
faintly as she thought of the warm good-bye her husband had just given
her.

Dear old Ted, she had known him since she was a little child, but had
never given it a thought that he had been in love with her in those
far-off years when she was only a long-legged girl just out of pigtails!

But then Ted had always been shy, and one to keep himself in the
background. Even all that time after her great trouble he would have
never dared to speak of his feelings for her if she hadn't taken pity
on him and met him three parts of the way.

Well, he had proved the kindest of husbands for her, and she could not
wish for anyone more considerate. He was so unselfish, too, and without
a trace of jealousy. He had not minded in the least when she had asked
if their first little one could be called Ransom, whereas most men
would not have liked it that their son should be named after an old
lover of their wife's, but he had just smiled and bowed his head in
sorrowful memory, she had known, for the dead. Of course, he had loved
Ransom, too. David and Jonathan they had been called at school, and in
their college life, later, they had been inseparable.

Then that awful tragedy when Ransom had been killed! What torture it
had been for Ted to give her all the ghastly details. But she had
insisted she should know all at once, so that there should never be
anything more terrible to tell her.

Her thoughts wandered then to her children and her mother's heart
warmed within her. What a splendid man her elder son Ransom the second
was going to be! Strong, masterful, and capable as the other Ransom
had been. Indeed, she always liked to think he was not unlike him in
appearance, too. And that must be, so her secret thoughts ran, because
her first lovers image had remained so vivid in her mind.

Then her daughter, 15, only two years younger than Ransom, how lovely
she was, and what a sweet disposition was hers. She had her father's
ways, and what a treasure she would be for some man one day! She
was--but her thoughts were interrupted by the entrance of the maid with
the letters.

She ran through them carelessly, and then her face brightened as she
saw one in the handwriting of her one-time lover's sister. She had
always liked old Miss Hellingsby, who had been ten years older than
Ransom.

The letter was a thick one in a big envelope, and, opening it, she
found another envelope wrapped round with a piece of white paper, upon
which was written, "Do not open this until you have read my letter."
Miss Hellingsby's letter read:--


"Dearest Camilla--I was clearing out an old cupboard yesterday and came
across a jacket of poor Ransom's. It was the spare one he must have
taken with him on that dreadful holiday. As I was handling it, I felt
something which had slipped down in the lining. It was this letter
from him to you, which I now enclose. Of course, I have not opened it,
and at first was inclined to burn it. But, then, I realised it really
belonged to you, and so send it along.

Your affectionate friend,

Clare Hellingsby."


Camilla caught her breath, and, even after all those years, her heart
beat much quicker. She opened the enclosed letter with trembling
fingers, and her eyes wonderingly devoured what was written. It was
dated Thursday, December 29. "The day before the accident," she
murmured. "It was on the Friday he fell over that awful cliff."

After a few lines of endearment, and his declaring he was quite well,
except for an occasional bout of neuralgia which bothered him a little,
she came to a part which made her face blanch, and almost choked her as
she breathed.


"Now here's something very strange, sweetheart," she read, "and I can't
make it out. It sounds incredible, but something's happened to Ted, and
I believe that for some reason he has come to hate me. Yesterday I had
caught him several times looking very queerly at me when he thought I
wasn't watching, and last night I half think he wanted me to do myself
an injury.

"It was like this. Our camp is in a hollow just behind a big cliff,
with a bit of a creek on the land side, where one can often get a duck
when they come over about dusk. Well, after tea I went out by myself
to try and pot some, and was in hiding behind some bushes. Of course,
I had got my gun loaded. Then something, I don't know what, made me
take the cartridges out and have a squint down the barrels of the gun.
Perhaps I thought I hadn't cleaned them the previous day after we had
been out after quail. At any rate, to my horror, I found one of the
barrels was choked up hard with caked mud. Only one of them, that was
the funny part, but if I had fired the gun, then, good God! I might
have got my hand blown off or even worse than that.

"I knew the day before that the ground had been very muddy after the
rain, and I had certainly put down my gun once or twice, but I couldn't
credit the barrel having got in that state. Of course, that Ted has
really been looking at me queerly and that he put the mud in the barrel
of the gun may be all imagination, and I only tell you so that when you
write back you may tell me what an ass I am. I have such great faith in
your good sense. Some days fishing boats come in close to the shore,
and I may get one to take this tomorrow."


The letter finished up with more endearing terms.

Camilla sat on with a white, set face. It was inconceivable, but what
if Ransom had been pushed over that cliff and had not fallen over as
had been made out?

When he had been killed there had been practically no enquiry at all.
The island sergeant of police had made his report, and the coroner, to
save himself trouble, everyone said, had not thought it necessary to
hold any inquest.

But Ted----a murderer! It was incredible! Still, who could fathom the
secrets of a man's heart where the passion for a woman was concerned?
Had not history told over and over again how the natures of the
gentlest and most inoffensive of men could harden and become brute-like
when baulked in their pursuit of one of the other sex. They, too, then
had lost all sense of conscience.

And Ted had been loving her all the time! He had told her so and how
miserable his life had been, believing as he did then, that she could
never be his!

Oh, how sorry she was she had been given that letter! Her affection for
her husband had never merged into real passion, and she would loathe
him now if she learnt he had had any part in Ransom's death.

Again she told herself it was impossible, but she added she could not
let the matter rest there. No, she would go and see Michael Barling,
the judge, and get the truth out of him that very day. He had been
there with Ted when the accident had occurred, and so she would spring
the letter upon him, being confident that, from the expression upon his
face, she would be able to make out whether her husband had been guilty
or not. It was vacation time, and the judge would probably be working
in his garden in the afternoon. He was a bachelor, and flowers were the
absorbing hobby of his life.

As she had expected, she found the judge at home, and he took her at
once into his study.

"Michael," she said solemnly, "I can trust you, can't I? You'll always
tell me the truth."

A distinguished looking man, with a keen, intellectual face and calm
grey eyes, he regarded her curiously. "Certainly, Camilla," he replied,
and he added, "there should surely have been no need for you to ask me
that?"

"Well, here's a letter of Ransom's," she went on quickly, "and it was
only given me this morning. His sister found it in the lining of the
spare jacket he took away with him when you all went on that dreadful
holiday." Her voice shook. "It is dated the day before he died. Here it
is. Yes, read it right through and then you'll be sure it's his letter."

The judge took the letter from her with a calm impassive face, but he
was soon frowning heavily. A long silence followed, for he read the
letter twice before he looked up at her.

He spoke very quietly. "I don't know what to tell you, Camilla," he
said. He tapped the letter disdainfully. "But, of course, what he
suggests about Ted is all nonsense. All our guns were liable to get
muddied, and Ransom was notoriously careless about his."

"Then what do you mean by saying you didn't know what to tell me?"
asked Camilla sharply. "Are you keeping anything back?" Her voice
shook. "Didn't Ransom die in the way it was given out?" She almost
broke down. "Did my husband push him over the cliff?"

The judge's face was dark with indignation. "Don't be a fool, Camilla,
and don't give way to hysteria. How dare you think such a thing
about Ted?" He spoke scornfully. "I thought time had made you into a
sensible, level-headed woman, and that----"

"But you said just now you didn't know what you ought to tell me,"
broke in Camilla tearfully, "and I thought you meant you were keeping
something back."

"And so I was," commented the judge sternly, "but now I see I'll have
to tell it you." He pointed to the letter he had given back to her.
"For that neuralgia he refers to there, Ransom had been drinking
heavily. He wasn't responsible for what he wrote, and, to make no bones
about it, the next day he was drunk when he fell over that cliff."

Camilla covered her face with her hands. "Oh, but I can't believe it,"
she choked. "Ransom was always such a particular man. I'm sure he never
drank too much."

"But he did," retorted the judge sharply. "He broke out occasionally
when he was away. It wasn't often, but then he was as bad as anyone."
He spoke regretfully. "I'm sorry, Cam, I had to tell you this, but you
forced me to. I couldn't let the very faintest suspicion of anything
rankle on in your mind."

"Then Ted wasn't near him when he fell over the cliff?" she asked
faintly.

"Half the length of this room away," replied the judge. "I was much
closer." He patted her kindly on the shoulder. "Look here, little
woman, go back home and be the very nicest wife in the world to Ted.
He's worth it, I tell you, every inch of him."

She began to mop her eyes. "I know that, Michael. He's been an ideal
husband and father. I'll forget all about this letter, and burn it
directly I get home. I've been very foolish."

"Yes, you have," smiled the judge, "but don't wait until you get home
to burn this letter. Burn it straightaway in this grate. Here, give it
to me and I'll set a match to it. That's right. There--it's all gone up
in smoke," he raised his finger warningly, "and now you never breathe
a word to your husband that you received it. Promise me, now. Good,
you're a sensible woman again!"

He saw her out of the house, and then, returning to his study, sank
back wearily into an armchair and wiped over his forehead with his
handkerchief.

"Whew, that was unpleasant," he murmured with a wry face, "and may God
forgive me for the lie!" He nodded. "Still, he was drunk right enough
two nights before, or else, with Ted present, he'd have never let out
about that other woman he was carrying on with. The brute, going to be
married within a month to an innocent and lovely girl like Cam., and
yet boasting about the mistress he'd got! Gad, how Ted glared at him,
the devoted Ted who up to then had always regarded him as his hero! But
with Ted's secret adoration of Cam. Ransom's admission was sacrilege of
the vilest nature."

He sighed heavily. "Yes, I had to tell her that lie, or else their two
lives would have become one long drawn-out misery. She'd have never
forgiven Ted because, indirectly, of course, everything was due to him.
He certainly provoked the fight by suddenly blurting out to Ransom
what he thought of him. Still, the fighting was perfectly fair, I saw
to that, and there'd have been no accident at all if Ransom hadn't
staggered back too far under that blow and lost his balance." He sighed
again. "But it was best for Cam that he was killed. He'd have made her
a shocking husband, and I don't wonder old Ted told me the other day
that he regretted nothing."

Then, suddenly, the judge's eyes happening to rove round the room, fell
upon the ashes of the burnt letter in the grate and, with a gesture as
if of great annoyance, he strode over and ground them to powder under
his foot.

All at once, then, he started and stood stock still. His jaw dropped
and his forehead became all puckered up in a puzzled frown. He stared
into vacancy and held his breath as if he were listening. But he was
not listening--it was only that a sudden thought had come to him, and
for the moment he would not give it expression.

"God, I had quite forgotten about that!" he exclaimed at last. "What
about the choked-up barrel of the gun? Men have been killed by less
than that."

With seeming reluctance he followed up the train of thought. "Was
Ransom purposely lying about it to prejudice Camilla against Ted,
in case Ted told her anything? He could tell by Ted's manner what
he thought of him. Or did Ted really block up that barrel? Did he
deliberately intend to----"

He shrugged his shoulders. "Well, I'll never ask him, anyhow. Goaded
by Ransom's treachery to Camilla, it would have been a sort of wild
justice, and with a man of Ted's kind and gentle disposition"--he half
smiled--"the wrath of the sheep."



THE END.

Project Gutenberg Australia
