
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: Invasion
Author: Arthur Gask
* A Project Gutenberg Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 2001031.txt
Language: English
Date first posted:  September 2020
Date last updated:  September 2020

Produced by: Maurie Mulcahy

Production Notes:

Project Gutenberg Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg Australia Licence which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

------------------------------------------------------------------------


"INVASION"



By Arthur Gask



Published in the Chronicle (Adelaide, SA : 1895 1954), Thursday 27 May
1943.



ALL the long and sweltering afternoon, from under the bank of a small
creek some 20 miles inland off one of the most desolate stretches of
the north-west coast of Western Australia, the three Japanese airmen
had been watching the lonely little homestead. The whole time they had
been chattering like monkeys, with their ape-like faces contorted in
excitement.

They were ravenously hungry and the house meant food for them. Four
days previously their plane had crashed some 20 miles behind the Ninety
Mile Beach, and all they had had to eat in their wandering since then
had been two small parrots which, with a prodigious expenditure of
ammunition, they had managed to bring down with the one automatic
pistol they possessed between them.

The house, however, meant more to them than food, for they would be
able to learn from its inmates exactly where they were. They were sure
they could not be very far from the mouth of the de Grey river and, if
they could reach the coast there, they thought they would be able to
steal a boat and escape out to sea where their submarines were always
lurking.

Still, they dared not approach the house until darkness had well
fallen, because there were from three to four hundred yards of open
ground to be crossed, and they knew they would almost certainly be seen
by the tall lanky man who had come into view several times. They were
sure he would have a gun or rifle of some kind, and they had only one
cartridge left in their pistol.

They had soon been confident they knew everyone who was living in the
house. Besides the man, there was a young woman whom they took to be
his wife, a small child, and an old woman who might be the mother
of either of the parents. Several times they had seen all the four
together, sitting in the shade on the verandah.

They had a good pair of binoculars with them, and they smiled and
nodded quite a lot as they noted the younger woman was comely and of a
good figure.

They guessed what the occupation of the man must be, for the house was
situated only a short distance away from a high vermin-proof fence
stretching to beyond sight over the barren wilderness of sand. They
had heard of this fence and knew it to be the one running for thirteen
hundred and fifty miles across Western Australia. So a certain length
of it would be under the man's care for him to see it was always in
good enough repair to keep out the rabbits. They guessed, also, that
the next habitation would be many miles distant, perhaps even half a
day's journey by car, and that the telephone they saw connected to the
house would probably lead there.

For a long while they had wondered angrily why the man had not gone
off upon his daily work in the car, which they could see through the
open door of a shed at the side of the house, but, with a curse, they
suddenly remembered that the day was Sunday, the day upon which the
fool Australians did nothing except eat huge meals and loaf about.

Still for a short time at all events, the man had been doing some kind
of work, as they had heard sounds of hammering coming from somewhere
at the back of the house. The hammering, however, had soon stopped and
they had seen the man come slouching on to the verandah and slump down
on to a bench there close to the two women and the child.

All unaware of the danger threatening them, the girl and her mother had
been talking animatedly together, finding quite a lot to talk about,
as indeed so often happens with people living in very lonely places,
notwithstanding that from one month to another they see no new faces to
relieve the monotony of their lives.

Now the young wife turned to her husband. "You've been quick in mending
that gutter, Jim," she said. "Have you made a good job of it?"

"No job at all," grunted Jim. "I haven't got any nails long enough.
I'll have to ring up old Sandy to give me some. He'll be at the end of
his beat tomorrow, and I'll meet him at the hill. I'll go and ring up
now before I forget," and he got up and went into the house. He was
back again in a few minutes and resumed his seat upon the bench. He had
now got a rather rusty-looking gun with him and he proceeded to polish
it up vigorously with a piece of oiled rag.

"Now if you had not been so careless as to run out of cartridges," said
the older woman severely, "you could have got us a pigeon or two. There
were a lot down among the trees by the creek this morning----" she
looked across into the distance "--though they seem all to have flown
away now."

"Yes, I mustn't run short again," said the man, "but as I've told you I
thought I'd got another box."

"The war news is pretty good, isn't it?" remarked his wife. "The
wireless says the Japs didn't do much harm with that raid on Wyndham."
She looked troubled. "But I'm always thinking we shall have them here
one day, and not a door in the house locks. We should be quite helpless
if they came."

Her husband guffawed. "What would they want to come here for," he
asked, "and what good would any flimsy doors do if they did come."

"Oh, they might want to come to blow up the fence and let the rabbits
through," broke in his mother-in-law, "anything to frighten us and do
harm. At any rate I shan't feel happy until we've killed them all and
the war's over." She nodded vigorously. "Somehow I don't feel easy
today. That big rooster was crowing at one o'clock this morning and
that's a bad sign. It means there's going to be a death somewhere."

"And it'll be him who's going to die," grinned Jim. "I'll be killing
him on Thursday, so that he'll be nice and tender for Sunday." He
scowled at the old woman. "But don't you talk such nonsense, Mother.
You'll be frightening Mary with your rotten ideas."

An hour, nearly two, passed and, dusk approaching, the wife went inside
to prepare the evening meal. The Japanese saw a light appear in one
of the windows of the house, and, a few minutes later, the family all
sitting round the table. With their binoculars the airmen could see
quite plainly through the wire screen of the open window.

The moment they had been waiting for had at last arrived and, climbing
up over the bank of the creek, they ran stealthily up to the house.
They opened the wire door very quietly and, traversing a short passage,
burst into the living-room.

The younger woman shrieked and sprang up to seize her child. The elder
woman jumped to her feet, too, but from her tightly pressed lips came
no sound. Only the man remained seated where he was. He seemed stunned,
and his mouth gaped and his face paled, even under its heavy tan.

"Hold up your hands," shouted one of the Japanese in perfectly good
English, pointing his pistol at the man, and the latter, recovering
from his surprise, obeyed instantly.

"Stand up," ordered the Japanese sharply. "Turn round," and again the
man obeyed. Then very quickly his wrists were tied tightly together
behind him with part of a torn teacloth and he was pushed back into
his chair. Next, his ankles were tied to the rails of the chair. The
Japanese now took some notice of the women.

"Don't be frightened, ladies," said their leader with an ugly smile.
"All we want is plenty to eat and drink." He leered at the young wife.
"We mean you no harm."

"But you shan't have anything," called out the old woman with blazing
eyes. "We won't----"

"Be quiet, Mother," said the husband sternly, "or you'll only make
things worse." He nodded to his wife. "Give them everything we've got,
Mary. It'll be best for us if we do."

The Japanese spokesman now started to question the man. "How far are
you from the next house?" he demanded.

"About forty miles. My mate, Sandy, lives there. He works on the fence,
same as I do."

"And how far are you from the de Grey River?"

"Nearly fifty, not quite."

"Is your car in good running order?"

"Yes, I could take you to the de Grey in a couple of hours."

"Which way should we go?"

"You can't make any mistake. You follow the track going west."

"Could we get a boat there without being seen?"

The man hesitated. "Yes, if you turn off south into the bush directly
you come in sight of the township and work your way round to the wharf.
You'll find several boats tied up there, and there's no one looking
after them at night."

The old woman burst out angrily. "You're a traitor, Jim! These men are
our enemies, and you're going to help them to escape."

The man shrugged his shoulders. "Can't help it, mother. They've got the
upper hand of us and if we treat them fair they'll go away and leave
us. You heard him say they're not going to hurt us."

"You fool," shouted the old woman savagely, "can't you see they're
only----"

"Shut your mouth, woman," ordered the Japanese sharply, "and bring us
all you've got to eat in the house. We'll be taking some of it away
with us."

The old woman subsided mutteringly into her chair, but the wife did as
her husband had told her to and put more food on the table.

The Japanese, seating themselves down, proceeded to eat hastily,
talking, however, among themselves most of the time. Every now and then
they eyed the younger woman in a way which made her feel sick with
fear. She was clutching her child again and choking back her tears with
a great effort. Presently the Japanese who was, apparently, the only
one of three who could speak English, remarked smilingly to her, "It's
a pity there are not three of you, young lady. Still . . .,' but he
shrugged his shoulders and said something to his companions in their
own language which, from their expressions, seemed to them to be a good
joke.

So the intense drama proceeded in that little room. The old woman was
like a baffled tigress who knew she had neither teeth nor claws; the
young wife was terrified at the thought of what might be going to
happen to them all, and the Japanese were pleasurably excited, with
more than even murder in their hearts. Only the bound man in the chair
was calm, though his forehead was now pricked out in little beads of
sweat.

His eyes kept wandering to the clock upon the mantelshelf as if he were
considering how much longer he had to live, for, notwithstanding the
promise of the Japanese who spoke English, he was under no delusion
that he could expect any mercy from him. They would just take him out
and kill him when they had finished their meal, and his child and his
wife's mother would meet the same fate. He shuddered when he thought
what would happen to his wife.

He watched the three men intently. They were just like animals in the
way they took their food. Their small yellow faces were hard and cruel,
their arms were long like ape's, and their strong bony hands looked the
very hands for throttling people. He wondered how he would have to die;
the bullet, the knife or those dreadful hands about his neck.

Their hunger and thirst at last satisfied, with meaning nods to one
another, the three Japanese rose simultaneously to their feet. Their
leader said a few quick words to his companions and then turned to the
others in the room, "You," he said to the man, "are to go out with
these gentlemen and show them how to start the car. We shall drive it
ourselves and shan't want you to come. Take the old woman out with
you to carry the lantern. The child can go with her, too." He made a
smiling bow to the wife. "You will remain here."

The girl shuddered and went white as death, and for the first time
there was terror upon the husband's face, but the old woman was
undaunted and prepared to show fight. "You yellow beasts," she shouted,
"I'll not leave my daughter alone. I'll . . ." She made a dash towards
a big carving knife on the table, but one of the Japanese was too quick
for her and seized her roughly by the arm. His leader gave him a sharp
order and the man pulled out an ugly-looking knife from his belt. The
old woman struggled fiercely.

Then the avalanche descended.

In quick succession three rifle bullets came tearing through the
wire screen of the window, and two of the Japanese crashed on to the
floor. They had both been shot in the head, and after a few convulsive
movements lay quite still where they had fallen, but the third man,
their leader, had been missed, and, taking in like lightning that the
danger was coming from the window, he darted to the door to escape from
the room.

But the old woman was between him and the door, and, though looking
as ghastly as if she were dead, had yet got all her wits about her.
Exactly at the right moment she put out her foot and tripped him
heavily. Then, before he could get up, she had snatched a chopper off
the dresser and given him a vicious blow upon the back of his head. He
groaned and lay still.

A few moments of dreadful silence followed, and then an elderly
red-haired man with a still smoking rifle in his hand burst into the
room. "Gude for you, mother," he shouted gleefully as he took in the
old woman with her chopper standing over the prostrate Japanese. He
bent down. "Yes, you've done for him, all recht," he went on in the
broadest Scotch. "But if not, I'll finish him off outside," and with
no ceremony he grabbed him by the heel and dragged him out along the
passage to the front entrance of the house.

He was back again very quickly and patted the old woman on the back.
"But you're a bonny lassie, you are," he exclaimed admiringly. "It were
a gude blow, and he's as dead as a herring." He turned to the trembling
wife. "Dinna ye fash yerself, ye poor gal. Them yeller deils can do no
harm no more." He regarded the two bodies on the floor with obvious
satisfaction. "But I were taking no chances, as I were not sure what
pistols they had got. So I just put ma bullets furst."

"But Jim was talking to them quite friendly," choked the old woman. "He
was telling them how to escape to the de Grey River. He's a traitor and
a coward."

"Nay, nay," reproved the Scotchman, "he war a brave mon and full of
sense. He war keeping them talking 'till I got here with ma gun. He
knew what he were aboot all the time."

"But it was touch and go for us all, Sandy," said Jim reproachfully.
"You cut it very fine."

"But I didn't," laughed the other, "not near so fine as ye think. I
was biding ootside some wee minutes till I could get 'em quite clear
without hurting any of ye. I were watchin' over ye, dinna fear."

He untied Jim quickly, and the latter gave him a warm clasp of the hand
before throwing his arms round his wife. "I was sure you'd come, Sandy.
I knew you wouldn't fail us."

"Not I," exclaimed Sandy stoutly, "but I had to leave ma car a gude
mile away so that they shouldna hear it, and run the rest of the way
for ma verra life." Then turned to the old woman. "That mon you hit
with the chopper war a verra bad fellow. Ye ken I picked up a bit of
their beastly language when the pearling boats war in and I heard him
tell they others to stick a knife in Jim's back when they got him
ootside and give ye a stick, too."

"But Jim," gasped the wife, lifting her tear-stained face from his
shoulder, "how did you know Sandy was coming?"

"Because I had phoned him," laughed her husband happily. "When I went
up on that ladder to mend the gutter I saw the three devils hiding
in the creek, and I guessed they were only waiting until it got dark
to rush the house. So it was Sandy and his gun that I phoned for,
and not any big nails. That's why, too, I brought my old gun on to
the verandah, to let them see it. They weren't to know I'd got no
cartridges for it. Then when we all came inside I knew it would be no
good barricading the place because they'd have broken in easily or shot
at us through the windows somewhere."

"And I coom at wunce," nodded Sandy, "after I'd had a wee talk with de
Grey station an told 'em what war oop. They'll no be long in gettin'
here, either. Hark, hark, there be a car cooming the noo. Let's bide
for 'em ootside, awa from these dead pigs."

They went out at once as he suggested, the old woman, however, lagging
behind just long enough to acquire a pair of laces from the shoes of
one of the dead men.

"They're just what Jim wants so badly," she muttered darkly, "and I owe
him something for calling him a traitor."

She smiled grimly to herself. "Yes, I'll give them to him as a present,
and he'll never know where I got them."



THE END.

Project Gutenberg Australia
