

Project Gutenberg Australia



Title:      Witch Wood (1927)
Author:     John Buchan
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.:  0301331.txt
Edition:    1
Language:   English
Character set encoding:     Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted:          October 2003
Date most recently updated: October 2003

This eBook was produced by: Don Lainson dlainson@sympatico.ca

Production notes:
Note on e-text edition--Square brackets contain the English
equivalents to the Scottish dialect.  These were originally printed
as footnotes.

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

--------------------------------------------------------------------------


A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook

Title:      Witch Wood (1927)
Author:     John Buchan






And Asa did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord . . . and
removed all the idols that his fathers had made. . . .  But the
high places were not removed.

I KINGS XV 11-14





CONTENTS

PROLOGUE

I.  THE COMING OF THE MINISTER

II.  THE ROAD TO CALIDON

III.  GUESTS IN CALIDON TOWER

IV.  THE FAITHFUL SERVANT

V.  THE BLACK WOOD BY DAY

VI.  THE BLACK WOOD BY NIGHT

VII.  THE FIRST BLAST

VIII.  THE SECOND BLAST

IX.  BEFORE LAMMAS

X.  WHAT THE MOON SAW

XI.  THE MINISTER GIRDS UP HIS LOINS

XII.  THE MAN WITH THE SQUINT

XIII.  WHITE MAGIC

XIV.  THE COUNTERBLAST

XV.  HALLOWMASS

XVI.  THE WITCH HUNT

XVII.  WOODILEE AND CALIDON

XVIII.  THE PLAGUE

XIX.  THE SACRIFICE

XX.  THE JUDGMENT

XXI.  THE GOING OF THE MINISTER

EPILOGUE




WITCH WOOD



PROLOGUE


Time, my grandfather used to say, stood still in that glen of his.
But the truth of the saying did not survive his death, and the
first daisies had scarcely withered on his grave before a new world
was knocking at the gate.  That was thirty years ago, and to-day
the revolution is complete.  The parish name has been changed; the
white box of a kirk which served the glen for more than two
centuries has been rebuilt in red suburban gothic; a main railway
line now runs down the Aller, and the excellent summer service
brings holiday-makers from a hundred miles distant: houses and
shops have clustered under the Hill of Deer; there may be found a
well-reputed boarding school for youth, two inns--both of them
reformed--a garage, and a bank agent.  The centre of importance has
moved from the old village to the new town by the station, and even
the old village is no more a clachan of thatched roofs straggling
by a burnside.  Some enemy of the human race has taught the burn to
run straight like a sewer, and has spanned it with a concrete
bridge, while the thatch of the houses has been replaced by slates
of a metallic green.  Only the ruins of the old kirkton have not
been meddled with; these stand as I remember them, knee-deep in
docks and nettles, defended by a crumbling dry-stone dyke against
inquisitive cattle from Crossbasket.

The old folk are gone, too, and their very names are passing from
the countryside.  Long before my day the Hawkshaws had disappeared
from Calidon, but there was a respectable Edinburgh burgess family
who had come there in the seventeenth century; now these have given
place to a rawer burgess graft from the West.  The farmers are
mostly new men, and even the peasant, who should be the enduring
stock, has shifted his slow bones.  I learned from the postman that
in Woodilee to-day there was no Monfries, no Sprot, but one
Pennecuik, and only two bearers of the names of Ritchie and
Shillinglaw, which had once been plentiful as ragwort.  In such a
renovated world it was idle to hope to find surviving the tales
which had perplexed my childhood.  No one could tell me when or why
the kirk by the Crossbasket march became a ruin, and its
gravestones lay buried in weeds.  Most did not even know that it
had been a kirk.

I was not greatly surprised by this, for the kirk of Woodilee had
not been used for the better part of three centuries; and even as a
child I could not find many to tell me of its last minister.  The
thing had sunk from a tale to an "owercome," a form of words which
every one knew but which few could interpret.  It was Jess Blane,
the grieve's daughter, who first stirred my curiosity.  In a whirl
of wrath at some of my doings she prayed that the fate of the
minister of Woodilee might be mine--a fate which she expounded as
to be "claught by the Deil and awa' wi'."  A little scared, I
carried the affair to my nurse, who was gravely scandalized, and
denounced Jess as a "shamefu' tawpie, fyling the wean's mind wi'
her black lees."  "Dinna you be feared, dearie," she reassured me.
"It wasna the Deil that cam' for the minister o' Woodilee.  I've
aye heard tell that he was a guid man and a kind man.  It was the
Fairies, hinny.  And he leev'd happy wi' them and dee'd happy, and
never drank out o' an empty cup."  I took my information, I
remember, to the clan of children who were my playmates, and they
spread it among their households and came back with confirmation or
contradiction.  Some held for the Devil, some for the Fairies--a
proof that tradition spoke with two voices.  The Fairy school
slightly outnumbered the others, and in a battle one April evening
close to the ruined kirk we routed the diabolists and established
our version as the canon.  But save for that solitary fact--that
the minister of Woodilee had gone off with the Fairies--the canon
remained bare.

Years later I got the tale out of many books and places: a folio in
the library of a Dutch college, the muniment-room of a Catholic
family in Lancashire, notes in a copy of the second Latin edition
of Wishart's Montrose, the diaries of a captain of Hebron's and of
a London glove-maker, the exercise book of a seventeenth-century
Welsh schoolgirl.  I could piece the story together well enough,
but at first I found it hard to fit it to the Woodilee that I knew--
that decorous landscape, prim, determinate, without a hint of
mystery; the bare hilltops, bleak at seasons, but commonly of a
friendly Pickwickian baldness, skirted with methodically-planned
woods of selected conifers, and girdled with mathematical stone
dykes; the even, ruled fields of the valley bottom; the studied
moderation of the burns in a land meticulously drained; the dapper
glass and stone and metal of the village.  Two miles off, it was
true, ran the noble untamed streams of Aller; beyond them the hills
rose in dark fields to mid-sky, with the glen of the Rood making a
sword-cut into their heart.  But Woodilee itself--whither had fled
the savour?  Once, I knew from the books, the great wood of
Melanudrigill had descended from the heights and flowed in black
waves to the village brink.  But I could not re-create the picture
out of glistening asphalted highway, singing telegraph wires,
spruce dwellings, model pastures, and manicured woodlands.

Then one evening from the Hill of Deer I saw with other eyes.
There was a curious leaden sky, with a blue break about sunset, so
that the shadows lay oddly.  My first thought, as I looked at the
familiar scene, was that, had I been a general in a campaign, I
should have taken special note of Woodilee, for it was a point of
vantage.  It lay right in the pass between the Scottish midlands
and the south--the pass of road and water--yes, and--shall I say?--
of spirit, for it was in the throat of the hills, on the march
between the sown and the desert.  I was looking east, and to my
left and behind me the open downs, farmed to their last decimal of
capacity, were the ancient land of Manann, the capital province of
Pictdom.  The colliery headgear on the horizon, the trivial moorish
hilltops, the dambrod-pattern fields, could never tame wholly for
me that land's romance, and on this evening I seemed to be gazing
at a thing antique and wolfish, tricked out for the moment with a
sheep's coat. . . .  To my right rose the huddle of great hills
which cradle all our rivers.  To them time and weather bring little
change, yet in that eerie light, which revealed in hard outline
while it obscured in detail, they seemed too remote and awful to be
the kindly giants with whose glens I daily conversed. . . .  At my
feet lay Woodilee, and a miracle had been wrought, for a gloom like
the shadow of an eclipse seemed to have crept over the parish.  I
saw an illusion, which I knew to be such, but which my mind
accepted, for it gave me the vision I had been seeking.

It was the Woodilee of three hundred years ago.  And my mind, once
given the cue, set out things not presented by the illuded eye. . . .
There were no highways--only tracks, miry in the bogs and stony
on the braes, which led to Edinburgh on one hand and to Carlisle on
the other.  I saw few houses, and these were brown as peat, but on
the knowe of the old kirkton I saw the four grey walls of the kirk,
and the manse beside it among elders and young ashes.  Woodilee was
not now a parish lying open to the eye of sun and wind.  It was no
more than a tiny jumble of crofts, bounded and pressed in upon by
something vast and dark, which clothed the tops of all but the
highest hills, muffled the ridges, choked the glens and overflowed
almost to the edge of the waters--which lay on the landscape like a
shaggy fur cast loosely down.  My mouth shaped the word
"Melanudrigill," and I knew that I saw Woodilee as no eye had seen
it for three centuries, when, as its name tells, it still lay in
the shadow of a remnant of the Wood of Caledon, that most ancient
forest where once Merlin harped and Arthur mustered his men. . . .

An engine whistled in the valley, a signal-box sprang into light,
and my vision passed.  But as I picked my way down the hillside in
the growing dusk I realized that all memory of the encircling
forest had not gone from Woodilee in my childhood, though the name
of Melanudrigill had been forgotten.  I could hear old Jock Dodds,
who had been keeper on Calidon for fifty years, telling tales for
my delectation as he sat and smoked on the big stone beside the
smithy.  He would speak of his father, and his father's father, and
the latter had been a great hero with his flintlock gun.  "He would
lie in the moss or three on the winter mornin's, and him an auld
man, and get the wild swans and the grey geese when they cam' ower
frae Clyde to Aller.  Ay, and mony's the deer he would kill."  And
when I pointed out that there were no deer in the countryside, Jock
shook his head and said that in his grandfather's day the Black
Wood was not all destroyed.  "There was a muckle lump on Windyways,
and anither this side o' Reiverslaw."  But if I asked for more
about the Wood, Jock was vague.  Some said it had been first set by
the Romans, others by Auld Michael Scott himself. . . .  "A grand
hidy-hole for beasts and an unco bit for warlocks." . . .  Its
downfall had begun long ago in the Dear Years, and the last of it
had been burnt for firewood in his father's day, in the winter of
the Sixteen Drifty Days. . . .

I remembered, too, that there had been places still sacrosanct and
feared.  To Mary Cross, a shapeless stone in a field of bracken, no
one would go in the spring or summer gloaming, but the girls decked
it with wild flowers at high noon of Midsummer Day.  There was a
stretch of Woodilee burn, between the village and the now-drained
Fennan Moss, where trout, it was believed, were never found.  Above
all, right in the heart of Reiverslaw's best field of turnips was a
spring, which we children knew as Katie Thirsty, but which the old
folk called the Minister's Well, and mentioned always with a shake
of the head or a sigh, for it was there, they said, that the
minister of Woodilee had left the earth for Fairyland.



CHAPTER I

THE COMING OF THE MINISTER


The Reverend David Sempill began his ministry in Woodilee on the
fifteenth day of August in the year of grace sixteen hundred and
forty-four.  He was no stranger to the glen, for as a boy he had
spent his holidays with his grandfather, who was the miller of
Roodfoot.  In that year when the horn of the Kirk was exalted the
voice of a patron mattered less; Mr. Sempill had been, as they
said, "popularly called," and so entered upon his office with the
eager interest of the parish which had chosen him.  A year before
he had been licensed by the presbytery of Edinburgh; he was
ordained in Woodilee in the present year on the last Sabbath of
June, and "preached in" on the first Sabbath of August by the
weighty voice of Mungo Muirhead, the minister of Kirk Aller.  His
plenishing--chiefly books--had come from Edinburgh on eight pack-
horses, and, having escaped the perils of Carnwath Moss, was now
set out in an upper chamber of the little damp manse, which stood
between the kirk and Woodilee burn.  A decent widow woman, Isobel
Veitch by name, had been found to keep his house, and David
himself, now that all was ready, had ridden over on his grey cob
from his cousin's at Newbiggin and taken seisin of his new home.
He had sung as he came in sight of Woodilee; he had prayed with
bowed head as he crossed the manse threshold; but as he sat in the
closet which he named his "study," and saw his precious books on
the shelf, and the table before him on which great works would be
written, and outside the half-glazed window the gooseberry bushes
of the garden and the silver links of the burn, he had almost wept
with pure gratitude and content.

His first hour he had spent exploring his property.  The manse was
little and squat, and gave lodging in its heather-thatched roof to
more than one colony of bees.  The front abutted on the kirkton
road, save for a narrow strip of green edged with smooth white
stones from the burn.  The back looked on a garden, where stood a
score of apple trees, the small wild fruit of which was scarcely
worth the gathering.  There was also a square of green for
bleaching clothes, a gean tree, a plot of gillyflowers and
monkshood, and another of precious herbs like clary, penny-royal,
and marjoram.  At one end of the manse stood a brewhouse and a
granary or girnel, for the storing of the minister's stipend meal;
at the other a stable for two beasts, a byre with three stalls, a
hen-house of mud, and, in the angle of the dykes of the kirk loan,
a midden among nettles.

Indoors the place was not commodious, and even on that warm August
day a chill struck upward from the earthen floors.  The low-ceiled
lobby had no light but the open door.  To the right of it was the
living-room with a boarded ceiling, a wooden floor, and roughly
plastered walls, where the minister's eight-day clock (by John
Atchison, Leith, 1601) had now acclimatized itself.  To the left
lay Isobel's kitchen, with a door leading to the brewhouse, and
Isobel's press-bed at the back of it, and a small dog-hole of a
cellar.  The upper story was reached by a wooden staircase as steep
as a ladder, which opened direct into the minister's bedroom--an
apartment of luxury, for it had a fireplace.  One door led from it
to the solitary guest-chamber; another to a tiny hearthless room,
which was his study or closet, and which at the moment ranked in
his mind as the most miraculous of his possessions.

David ranged around like a boy back from school, and indeed with
his thick, sandy hair and ruddy countenance and slim, straight back
he seemed scarcely to have outgrown the schoolboy.  He spilt the
browst in the brewhouse, and made a spectacle of himself with
pease-meal in the girnel.  Isobel watched him anxiously out of
doors, where he sampled the fruit of the apple trees, and with
various rejected specimens took shots at a starling in the glebe.
Then, in response to his shouts, she brought him a basin of water
and he washed off the dust of his morning ride.  The August sun
fell warm on the little yard; the sound of the burn in the glen,
the clack of the kirkton smithy, the sheep far off on Windyways,
the bees in the clove gillyflowers, all melted into the soothing
hum of a moorland noontide.  The minister smiled as he scrubbed his
cheeks, and Isobel's little old puckered apple-hued face smiled
back.  "Ay, sir," she said, "our lines is fallen intil a goodly
place and a pleasant habitation.  The Lord be thankit."  And as he
cried a fervent amen and tossed the towel back to her, a stir at
the front door betokened his first visitors.

These were no less than three in number, neighbouring ministers who
had ridden over on their garrons to bid the young man welcome to
Woodilee.  Presently stable and byre were crowded with their
beasts, and the three brethren had bestowed themselves on the rough
bench which adjoined the bleaching-ground.  They would have their
dinner at the village ordinary--let not Mr. Sempill put himself
about--they would never have come thus unannounced if they had
thought that they would be pressed to a meal.  But they allowed
themselves to be persuaded by the hospitable clamour of Isobel, who
saw in such a function on her first day at the manse a social
aggrandizement.  "Mr. Sempill would think black burnin' shame if
the gentlemen didna break breid. . . ."  There was walth o'
provender in the house--this moment she had put a hen in the pot--
she had a brace of muir-fowl ready for brandering that had been
sent from Chasehope that very morn. . . .  The three smiled
tolerantly and hopefully.  "Ye've gotten a rare Abigail, Mr.
Sempill.  A woman o' mense and sense--the manse o' Woodilee will be
well guidit."

The Reverend Mungo Muirhead had a vast shaven face set atop of a
thick neck and a cumbrous body.  He had a big thin-lipped mouth
which shut tight like a lawyer's, a fleshy nose, and large grey
eyes which at most times were ruminant as a cow's, but could on
occasion kindle to shrewdness.  His complexion was pale, and he was
fast growing bald, so the impression at first sight was of a
perfect mountain of countenance, a steep field of colourless skin.
As minister of Kirk Aller he was the metropolitan of the company,
and as became a townsman he wore decent black with bands, and
boasted a hat.  The Reverend Ebenezer Proudfoot, from the moorland
village of Bold, was of a different cast.  He wore the coarse grey
homespun of the farmer, his head-covering was a blue bonnet, his
shoes were thick brogues with leather ties, and he had donned a
pair of ancient frieze leggings.  A massive sinewy figure, there
was in his narrow face and small blue eyes an air of rude power and
fiery energy.  The third, Mr. James Fordyce from the neighbouring
parish of Cauldshaw, was slight and thin, and pale either from ill-
health or from much study.  He was dressed in worn blue, and even
in the August sun kept his plaid round his shoulders.  In his face
a fine brow was marred by the contraction of his lean jaws and a
mouth puckered constantly as if in doubt or pain, but redeemed by
brown eyes, as soft and wistful as a girl's.

At the hour of noon they sat down to meat.  Mr. Muirhead said a
lengthy grace, which, since he sniffed the savour from the kitchen,
he began appropriately with "Bountiful Jehovah."  All the dishes
were set out at once on the bare deal table--a bowl of barley kail,
a boiled fowl, the two brandered grouse, and a platter of oatcakes.
The merchant in the Pleasance of Edinburgh had given his son a
better plenishing than fell to the usual lot of ministers, for
there were pewter plates and a knife and a fork for each guest.
The three stared at the splendour, and Mr. Proudfoot, as if to
testify against luxury, preferred to pick the bones with his hands.
The home-brewed ale was good, and all except Mr. Fordyce did full
justice to it, so that the single tankard, passed from hand to
hand, was often refilled by Isobel.  "Man, Mr. David," cried Mr.
Muirhead in high good-humour, "this is a great differ from the days
of your predecessor.  Worthy Mr. Macmichael had never muckle but
bannocks to set before his friends.  But you've made us a feast of
fat things."

David inquired about his predecessor, whom he remembered dimly from
his boyhood as a man even then very old, who ambled about the
parish on a white shelty.

"He was a pious and diligent minister," said Mr. Muirhead, "but
since ever I kenned him he was sore fallen in the vale of years.
He would stick to the same 'ordinary' till he had thrashed it into
stour.  I've heard that he preached for a year and sax months on
Exodus fifteen and twenty-seven, the twelve wells of water and
three score and ten palm trees of Elim, a Sabbath to ilka well and
ilka tree.  I've a notion that he was never very strong in the
intellectuals."

"He wrestled mightily in prayer," said Mr. Proudfoot, "and he was
great at fencing the Tables.  Ay, sirs, he was a trumpet for the
pure Gospel blast."

"I doubt not he was a good man," said Mr. Fordyce, "and is now gone
to his reward.  But he was ower auld and feeble for a sinful
countryside.  I fear that the parish was but ill guided, and, as ye
ken, there was whiles talk of a Presbytery visitation."

"I differ!" cried Mr. Muirhead.  "I differ in toto.  Woodilee has
aye been famous for its godly elders.  Has it not Ephraim Caird,
who was a member of Assembly and had a hand in that precious work
of grace done in the East Kirk of St. Giles's two years syne?  Has
it not Peter Pennecuik, who has a gift of supplication like Mr.
Rutherford himself?  Ay, and in the Bishops' War you'll mind how
Amos Ritchie was staunch to uphold the Covenant with the auld
matchlock that had been his gudesire's.  There's no lack of true
religion in Woodilee."

"There's no lack of carnal pride, Mr. Mungo.  The folk of Woodilee
are ready enough for any stramash in Kirk or State.  But what of
their perishing souls, I ask?  Are they striving to get a grip of
Christ, as a bird scrapes with its claws at a stone wall?  And do
they bring forth works meet for repentance?"

"There was no clash of cauld morality in worthy Mr. Macmichael,"
said Mr. Proudfoot sourly.

"Is there the spirit of God in the people?  That's what I want to
ken.  There's ill stories in the countryside anent Woodilee.  The
Black Wood could tell some tales if the trees could talk."

Mr. Muirhead, having finished his meal and said a second grace, was
picking his teeth in great good-humour.

"Hoot toots, Mr. James, you'll give our young brother a scunner of
the place, to which it has pleased the Almighty to call him, before
he has had a look at it himself.  I'm not denying that the Wood is
ower near Woodilee.  It's a wanchancy thing for any parochine to
have a muckle black forest flung around it like a maud [plaid].
And no doubt the Devil walks about like a roaring lion in Woodilee
as in other bits.  But there's men of God here to resist him.  I
tell you, sirs, there have been more delations to the Presbytery
for the sin of witchcraft in Woodilee than in any other parish on
the water of Aller."

"And what does that prove, Mr. Mungo?"

"That there's wealth of prayerful and eident [careful] folk to
confound the Adversary.  This is no season to despair of Kirk and
Covenant, when this day they hold the crown of the causeway.
You'll no have heard of the astonishing mercy vouchsafed to us in
England?  A post came to Kirk Aller yestreen, and it seems that
some weeks syne there was a great battle beside the city of York,
where our Scots wrought mightily, and our own Davie Leslie gave the
King's horsemen their kail through the reek.  What does that
portend?"

"It portends," said Mr. Proudfoot, whom food did not mellow, "that
our pure and reformed Kirk of Scotland is linked more than ever
with sectaries and antinomians and those, like the bloody and
deceitful Cromwell, that would defile the milk of the Word with the
sour whey of their human inventions.  What avails a triumphant Kirk
if its doctrine be sullied?"

Mr. Muirhead laughed.  "It portends nothing of the kind.  The good
work goes cannily on, and the noble task to which the Assembly of
Divines at Westminster set itself is advanced by a long mile.  Man,
Eben, you folk at Bold live ower far from the world.  It's the Kirk
of Scotland that holds the balance to-day and can enforce its will
on both King and sectaries.  Two days back I had a letter from that
gospel-loving nobleman, the Earl of Loudoun . . ."

Mr. Muirhead was mounted on his high horse.  He lit his pipe and
for the space of half an hour dealt comprehensively with politics,
labouring to show the happy posture of affairs for what he called
the "good cause."  The Solemn League and Covenant bound all
Scotland in a pact with the Lord, and presently all England would
follow suit.  There would be soon that comfortable sight which had
been foretold by their godly fathers, a uniform Kirk and a pure
Gospel established by law from London to the Orkneys, and a
covenanted Sion to which all the peoples of the earth would go up.
Mr. Muirhead was eloquent, for he repeated a peroration which he
had once used in the General Assembly.

"I have heard," he concluded, "that in Woodilee there was a signing
of the Covenant by every soul that could make a scart with a pen.
That for your encouragement, Mr. David."

Mr. Fordyce shook his head.  "How many appended their names out of
fear or from mere carnal policy?  Mankind will run like jukes after
a leader.  I much misdoubt if there is any spiritual health to be
got from following a multitude under duress.  I would have left the
choice to every man's conscience."

"You're not sound," cried Mr. Muirhead.  "You're shaky on the
fundamentals, Mr. James.  I will confound you out of the Word.
When King Josiah made a solemn covenant, did he leave it to ilka
man's fancy to sign or no?  Nay, he caused all--all, I say--in
Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it.  See Second Chronicles
thirty-four and thirty-two."

There was a touch of asperity in the one disputant and of
recalcitrance in the other, so David for good-fellowship's sake
suggested that he might show them the manse in its new guise.  But
at that moment Isobel appeared with word that Chasehope was at the
door seeking speech with the minister of Kirk Aller.  At her back
appeared the fiery head of the visitor, who was that Ephraim Caird
whom Mr. Muirhead had already praised as a pillar of the Covenant
and who farmed the largest tack in the parish.  He was a big
fellow, red as a fox, with a white freckled face, no eyebrows, and
greenish blue eyes, a man of over forty, whose muscular frame was
now somewhat overlaid by flesh.  His mouth was small and generally
puckered together, a habit which gave him an air of thought and
gravity.  He had been an opponent of David Sempill before the call,
but had acquiesced in the majority vote and had welcomed the new
minister at the "preaching in" with a great show of goodwill.  To-
day he was apologetic and affable.  He asked pardon for his
intrusion--he would take neither bite nor sup--he had heard that
the ministers were at the manse, and he begged a word with Mr.
Muirhead on Presbytery matters which would save him a journey to
Kirk Aller, when he was busy with the bog hay.  So David took the
other two to his closet and left Chasehope and Mr. Muirhead to
their colloquy.

Mr. Proudfoot eyed with disapproval the books in the little dark
chamber.  He was content, he said, with the Bible and the
Institutes of John Calvin and old Robert Rollock's commentary on
the Prophet Daniel.  He read the lettering on one volume, Sancti
Clementi Opera, and on another, a work by a Dutch theologian, De
Sancti Pauli Epistolis.  The word "Saint" roused his ire.  "Rags of
Popery," he muttered, as he banged the books back on their shelves.
"What for 'Saint' Paul and not 'Saint' Moses or 'Saint' Isaiah?
It's a queer thing that Antichrist should set himself to miscall
the godly Apostles of the New Testament and let the auld prophets
alone.  You're a young man, Mr. Sempill, and, as is natural in
youth, with but a small experience of religion.  Take the advice of
an older man, and no clog yourself on the road to Heaven with ower
much printit lear, when you can put the whole Word of God in your
pouch."

But Mr. Fordyce looked at the shelves with greedy eyes.  The moor-
fowl at dinner had loosened a tooth, and now it came out in his
hand and was wrapped carefully in his kerchief.  "I have kept ilka
tooth I have ever cast," he told the others, "and they will go into
my coffin with me that my bodily parts may be together at the
Resurrection."  "Would you shorten the arm of the Lord?" Mr.
Proudfoot had asked testily.  "Can He no gather your remnants from
the uttermost parts of the earth?"  "True, true," the other had
answered gently, "but it's just my fancy to keep all my dust in the
one place."  This ceremony over, he flung himself on the books like
a hungry man on food.  He opened them lovingly, read their titles,
fingered them as if he could scarcely bear to part with them.
"You're no half my age," he told the owner, "but you've twice as
many books as there are in the Cauldshaw manse.  You start well
provided, Mr. David."

The theology he knew already and approved, but there were other
works over which he shook a moralizing head.  "You've a hantle of
pagan writers, Mr. David.  I would counsel a young minister to
apply himself rather to the Hebrew than to the Greek, for though
the Greek was the tongue of the New Testament, it was also the
tongue of lascivious poets and mocking philosophers, whereas the
Hebrew was consecrate wholly to God. . . .  But you have the Hebrew
too, I see.  Losh, here's the lexicon of Bamburgius, of which I
have read but have never seen.  We must consult, Mr. David.  I've a
new theory of the Hebrew accents on which I would like your
judgment."

As he ran over the list he suddenly cried aloud with pleasure, and
then checked himself almost shamefacedly.  "Preserve us, but here's
Hieronymus Cardanus, and other astrologic works.  Man, I've
diverted myself whiles with the science of the stars, and can make
a shape at calculating a nativity.  I cannot see why the thing
should not be turned to holy uses, as when the star guided the Wise
Men of the East to Bethlehem.  You and me must have long cracks
some day.  These books will be like the Pole Star to draw me to
Woodilee, and I'm looking to see you soon at Cauldshaw.  It's but a
poor desert bit, but there have been precious occasions there and
many an outpouring of grace.  I'm sore troubled with the gravel,
Mr. David, and the goodwife has had a flux in the legs this
twelvemonth back, but the Lord has showed me singular favour, and
my damps are lightened since a leech in Edinburgh prescribed a
hyperion of bourtree and rue. . . .  We're a childless household,
for we had but the one bairn, and sax year syne the Lord gathered
her to Himself."

Downstairs Mr. Muirhead had finished his talk, and the three
ministers took their leave--they of Bold and Cauldshaw to jog the
moorland miles to their homes, he of Kirk Aller to take his "four-
hours" with Chasehope at Lucky Weir's in the clachan.  Each of the
three kissed David on the cheek and blessed him after his fashion.
"May you live to be a pillar of the Kirk," said Mr. Muirhead.
"Keep a Gospel walk," said Mr. Proudfoot, "on the narrow rigging of
the truth."  But Mr. Fordyce took the young man's hand, after
saluting him, and held it with a kind of wistful affection.  "I
pray," he said, "that your windows may be ever open towards
Jerusalem."



When his guests had gone David Sempill explored once more his
little domain, like a child who counts his treasures.  Then, as the
afternoon mellowed into evening, the slopes of the Hill of Deer,
red with flowering heather, drew him for a walk.  He wanted a wide
prospect, to see his parish in its setting of hill and glen, and
recall the landmarks now blurred in his childhood's memory.  His
black coat and breeches were of Edinburgh make and too fine for
moorland work, but he had stout country shoes and hose of ram's
wool, the gift of his cousin's wife at Newbiggin, and he moved over
the bent with the long stride of a shepherd.  He crossed the burn
of Mire, and saw below him the farm-town of Mirehope, with barley
and nettles at strife in the infield, and the run-rigs of the
outfield feathered with very green oats.  Presently he was on the
Hill of Deer, where the long stacks of peats were drying so well
that every breath of air sent up from them a fine flurry of dust.
The Mirehope cattle, wretched little black beasts, were grazing
under the charge of a herd-boy, and the Mirehope sheep, their coats
matted with tar till they looked like monstrous slugs, were picking
up an uneasy livelihood among the heather bushes, leaving tufts of
smelly wool behind them on the scraggy twigs which were still
charred from the March moorburn.  He reached the low summit, and
flung himself down on a patch of thymy turf between the whinstone
screes, with his face to the valley.

His holiday mood still held.  The visit of his ministerial brethren
had not dashed him, for he saw their prosiness through a golden
haze.  Mr. Muirhead was a stout warder on the walls of Sion, Mr.
Proudfoot a guardian of the purity of the Temple, and Mr. Fordyce
beyond question a saint, with his haggard face and his wistful
eyes.  It was Mr. Fordyce who stuck in his memory.  A lovable
saint, with his cast teeth saved up to make easy the business of
a bodily resurrection, his love of the stars, his pathetic
bookishness.  David was full of the zest of his calling, but for
himself he was ready to circumscribe its duties.  Not for him to
uphold the Kirk against its ill-wishers in the State; in that cause
he would do battle when the need arose, but not till then.  He left
to others the task of keeping the canon of truth pure from alloy:
he accepted the Kirk's doctrine loyally, but let others do the
dogmatizing.  The work for which he longed was to save and comfort
human souls.

Seen on that hilltop the minister of Woodilee was a different
figure from that beheld by his colleagues in the dim light of the
manse.  His active form, his colour, his tumbled hair, spoke of the
boy, but his face was not boyish.  In its young contours there were
already thought and resolution and spiritual fineness, and there
was a steady ardour in the eyes.  If his chin was the fighter's,
his mouth was the comforter's.  Five years before he had been set
on a scholar's life.  At the college he had been a noted Grecian,
and in Robert Bryson's bookshop at the Sign of the Prophet Jonah in
the West Bow his verses, Latin and English, had been praised by the
learned.  When religion called him it was as a challenge not to
renounce but to perfect his past.  A happy preoccupation with his
dream made him blind to the harshness and jealousies which beset
the Kirk, and he saw only its shining mission.  The beauty which
was to be found in letters seemed in very truth a part of that
profounder beauty which embraced all earth and Heaven in the
revelation of God.  He had not ceased to be the humanist in
becoming the evangelist.  Some had looked askance at him as too
full of carnal learning for the sacred office, some as too cheerful
for a shepherd of souls in a perishing world.  But his critics as
yet were few, for David carried with him a light and warmth which
it was hard for the sourest to resist.  "He is a gracious youth,"
an old minister had said at his ordination.  "May the Lord deal
tenderly with him!"

David's eyes from his perch on the hilltop rested first on the
kirkton of Woodilee.  He saw the manse among its trees, and the
church with its thatched roof--the roof had been lead till Morton
the Regent stripped it and melted it down for bullets.  He saw the
little beehive cottages in the clachan with the taller gable-end of
Lucky Weir's ale-house.  He saw the adjoining farm-towns--the
Mains, Chasehope, Nether Windyways, Crossbasket, the two Fennans,
each with its patches of crops lifted well above the bogs of the
glen.  He saw the mill of Woodilee at present idle by the burn, and
hay being cut on the side of Windyways hill, and what looked like
the clipping of the miller's sheep.  In the bright evening the
scene was all of peace and pastoral, and David's heart kindled.
There dwelled his people, the little flock whom God had appointed
him to feed.  His heart yearned over them, and in a sudden glow of
tenderness he felt that this sunset prospect of his parish was a
new and more solemn ordination.

It was long before he lifted his eyes beyond the glen to the great
encircling amphitheatre of the hills.  At first he gazed at them in
an abstraction, till childish memories came back to him and he
began to name the summits to himself one by one.  There was the
bald top of the Lammerlaw, and the peak of the Green Dod, and far
beyond the long line of the great Herstane Craig, which in that
childhood had been the synonym for untravelled mystery.  He saw the
green cleft in the hills where the Aller came down from its distant
wells, and the darker glen of the Rood where bent was exchanged for
rock and heather.  He saw the very patches of meadow by Roodside
which he had made his boyish playground.  Such a hilltop prospect
he had never before known, for a child lives in a magnified world,
and finds immensity in short vistas.  One thing struck hard on his
mind.  Never before had he realized the extent of the forest
ground.  He remembered travelling to Roodfoot through trees, and
all up the water of Rood there had been a drift of scrub.  But it
was the meadows and the open spaces that had been his kingdom, and
his recollection was of a bare sunny land where whaup and peewit
cried and the burns fell headlong from windy moors.  But now, as he
gazed, he realized that the countryside was mainly forest.

Everywhere, muffling the lower glen of the Woodilee burn and the
immediate vale of the Aller, and climbing far up the hillside, was
the gloom of trees.  In the Rood glen there was darkness only at
the foot, for higher up the woods thinned into scrub of oak and
hazel, with the knees of the uplands showing through it.  The sight
powerfully impressed his fancy.  Woodilee was a mere clearing in a
forest.  This was the Silva Caledonis of which old writers spoke,
the wood which once covered all the land and in whose glades King
Arthur had dwelt.  He remembered doggerel Latin of Merlin the Bard
and strange sayings of True Thomas--old wives' tales which
concerned this sanctuary.  He had grown up beside it and had not
known of it, and now he had come back to a revelation.  Silva
Caledonis!  Up the Rood water lay the house of Calidon.  Were the
names perhaps the same?

The young man's fancy was quick to kindle, and he looked with new
eyes at the great cup of green, broken only at one spot by Aller
side with the flash of water.  At first in the soft evening light
it had worn a gracious and homely air, even the darkness of the
pines seemed luminous, and the feathery top of a patch of birches
was like the smoke of household fires. . . .  But as the sun sank
behind the Rood hills a change seemed to come over the scene.  The
shade became gloom, a hostile, impenetrable darkness.  The birches
were still like smoke, but a turbid smoke from some unhallowed
altar.  The distant shallows of Aller caught a ray of the dying sun
and turned to blood. . . .  The minister shivered and then laughed
at himself for his folly.

The evening deepened in the hollows, though the hilltops were still
faintly bright.  The great wood seemed now to be a moving thing, a
flood which lapped and surged and might at any moment overflow the
sandspit which was Woodilee.  Again the minister laughed at
himself, but without conviction.  It must be an eerie life under
the shadow of that ancient formless thing.  Woodilee could not be
quite as other parishes, or its folk like other folk.  The Wood,
this hoary Wood of Caledon, must dominate their thoughts and form
their characters. . . .  Had not some one called it the Black
Wood?--Yes, they had spoken of it that afternoon.  Mr. Muirhead had
admitted that it must be queer to live so near it, and Mr. Fordyce
had shaken his head solemnly and hinted at tales that would be told
if the trees could speak. . . .  Did the Devil use the place as a
stronghold and seduce the foolish into its shadows?  Could it be
said of a lost soul, Itur in antiquam silvam?

David was less superstitious than most men, but he had too ready a
fancy and a mind too well stored with learning to be easy at the
thought.  Already he felt that he had found an antagonist.  Was
Woodilee to prove a frontier-post for God's servant against the
horrid mysteries of heathendom? . . .  He gave a sudden start, for
a voice had sounded behind him.

The voice was singing--a charm against bogles which he remembered
himself using as a child:


     "Weary, Ovie, gang awa',
      Haste ye furth o' house an' ha',
      Ower the muir and doun the burn,
      Wearie, Ovie, ne'er return."


A grotesque figure emerged from the dusk.  It was a tall fellow,
who seemed to have been broken in the middle, for he walked almost
doubled up.  His face, seen in the half-light, was that of a man of
thirty or so, with a full black beard and red protuberant lips.
His clothes were ruinous, an old leather jerkin which gaped at
every seam, ragged small-clothes of frieze, and for hosen a
wrapping of dirty clouts.  There were no shoes on his feet, and his
unwashed face was dark as a berry.  In his hand he had a long ash
pole, and on his head a blue cowl so tight that it was almost a
skull-cap.

David recognized the figure for Daft Gibbie, the village natural,
who had greeted him with mewing and shouting at his ordination.  In
the clachan street he had seemed an ordinary deformed idiot--what
was known locally as an "object"--but up on this twilight hilltop
he was like an uncouth revenant from an older world.  The minister
instinctively gripped his staff tighter, but Gibbie's intention was
of the friendliest.

"A braw guid e'en to ye, Mr. Sempill, sir.  I saw ye tak' the hill
and I bode to follow, for I was wantin' to bid ye welcome to
Woodilee.  Man, ye gang up the brae-face like a maukin [a hare].
Ower fast, I says to mysel', ower fast for a man o' God, for what
saith the Word, 'He that believeth shall not make haste!'"

The creature spoke in a voice of great beauty and softness--the
voice rather of a woman than of a man.  And as he spoke he bowed,
and patted the minister's arm, and peered into his face with bright
wild eyes.  Then he clutched David and forced him round till again
he was looking over the Wood.

"The Hill o' Deer's a grand bit for a prospect, sir, for is it no
like the Hill o' Pisgah from which ye can spy the Promised Land?
Ye can lift up your eyes to the hills, and ye can feast them on the
bonny haughs o' the Aller, or on the douce wee clachan o' Woodilee,
wi' the cots sittin' as canty round the kirk as kittlins round an
auld cat."

"I was looking at the Wood," said David.

The man laughed shrilly.  "And a braw sicht it is in the gloamin'
frae the Hill o' Deer.  For ye can see the size o' the muckle
spider's wab, but doun in the glen ye're that clamjamphried wi'
michty trees that your heid spins like a peery and your e'en are
dozened.  It's a unco thing the Wud, Mr. Sempill, sir?"

"Do you know your ways in it, Gibbie?"

"Me!  I daurna enter it.  I keep the road, for I'm feared o' yon
dark howes."  Then he laughed again, and put his mouth close to the
minister's ear.  "Not but what I'll tak' the Wud at the proper
season.  Tak' the Wud, Mr. Sempill, like other folk in Woodilee."

He peered in the minister's face to see if he were understood.
Satisfied that he was not, he laughed again.

"Tak' Gibbie's advice, sir, and no gang near the Wud.  It's nae
place for men o' God, like yoursel', sir, and puir Gibbie."

"Do they call it the Black Wood?"

Gibbie spat.  "Incomin' bodies, nae doot," he said in contempt.
"But it's just the Wud wi' nae 'black' aboot it.  But ken ye the
name that auld folk gie'd it?"  He became confidential again.
"They ca'd it Melanudrigill," he whispered.

David repeated the word.  His mind had been running on heathen
learning, and he wondered if the name were Greek.

"That might mean the 'place of dark waters,'" he said.

"Na, na.  Ye're wrong there, Mr. Sempill.  There's nae dark waters
in Melanudrigill.  There's the seven burns that rin south, but
they're a' as clear as Aller.  But dinna speak that name to ither
folk, Mr. Sempill, and dinna let on that Gibbie telled ye.  It's a
wanchancy name.  Ye can cry it in a safe bit like the Hill o' Deer,
but if ye was to breathe it in the Wud unco things micht happen.  I
daurna speak my ain name among the trees."

"Your name is Gibbie.  Gibbie what?"

The man's face seemed to narrow in fear and then to expand in
confidence.  "I can tell it to a minister o' the Word.  It's
Gilbert Niven.  Ken ye where I got that name?  In the Wud, sir.
Ken ye wha gie'd it me?  The Guid Folk.  Ye'll no let on that I
telled ye."

The night was now fallen, and David turned for home, after one last
look at the pit of blackness beneath him.  The idiot hobbled beside
him, covering the ground at a pace which tried even his young legs,
and as he went he babbled.

"Tak' Gibbie's advice and keep far frae the Wud, Mr. Sempill, and
if ye're for Roodfoot or Calidon haud by the guid road.  I've heard
tell that in the auld days, when there was monks at the kirkton,
they bode to gang out every year wi' bells and candles and bless
the road to keep it free o' bogles.  But they never ventured into
the Wud, honest men.  I'll no say but what a minister is mair
powerfu' than a monk, but an eident body will run nae risks.  Keep
to fine caller bits like this Hill o' Deer, and if ye want to
traivel, gang west by Chasehope or east by Kirk Aller.  There's
nocht for a man o' God in the Wud."

"Are there none of my folk there?"

For a second Gibbie stopped as if thunderstruck.  "Your folk!" he
cried.  "In the Wud!"  Then he perceived David's meaning.  "Na, na.
There's nae dwallin' there.  Nether Fennan is no far off and
Reiverslaw is a bowshot from the trees, but to bide in the Wud!--
Na, na, a man would be sair left to himsel' ere he ventured that!
There's nae hoose biggit [built] by human hand that wadna be clawed
doun by bogles afore the wa' rase a span frae the grund."

At the outfield of Mirehope Gibbie fled abruptly, chanting like a
night bird.



CHAPTER II

THE ROAD TO CALIDON


The minister sat at his supper of porridge and buttermilk when
Isobel broke in on him, her apple-hued face solemn and tearful.

"There's ill news frae up the water, Mr. Sempill.  It's Marion
Simpson, her that's wife to Richie Smail, the herd o' the
Greenshiel.  Marion, puir body, has been ill wi' a wastin' the past
twalmonth, and now it seems she's near her release.  Johnnie Dow,
the packman, is ben the house, and he has brocht word that Richie
is fair dementit, and that the wife is no like to last the nicht,
and would the minister come up to the Greenshiel.  They've nae
bairns, the Lord be thankit; but Richie and Marion have aye been
fell fond o' ither, and Richie's an auld exercised Christian and
has been many times spoken o' for the eldership.  I doot ye'll hae
to tak' the road, sir."

It was his first call to pastoral duty, and, though he had hoped to
be at his books by candle-light, David responded gladly.  He put
his legs into boots, saddled his grey cob, flung his plaid round
his shoulders, and in ten minutes was ready to start.  Isobel
watched him like a mother.

"I'll hae a cup o' burned yill [ale] waitin' for ye to fend off the
cauld--no but what it's a fine lown [mild] nicht.  Ye ken the road,
sir?  Up by Mirehope and round by the back o' the Hill."

"There's a quicker way by Roodfoot, and on this errand there's no
time to lose."

"But that's through the Wud," Isobel gasped.  "It's no me that
would go through the Wud in the dark, nor naebody in Woodilee.  But
a minister is different, nae doot."

"The road is plain?" he asked.

"Aye, it's plain eneuch.  There's naething wrong wi' the road.  But
it's an eerie bit when the sun's no shinin'.  But gang your ways,
sir, for a man o' God is no like common folk.  Ye'll get a mune to
licht ye back."

David rode out of the kirkton, and past the saughs and elders which
marked the farm of Crossbasket, till the path dipped into the glen
of the Woodilee burn and the trees began.  Before he knew he was
among them, old gnarled firs standing sparsely among bracken.  They
were thin along the roadside, but on the hill to his right and down
in the burn's hollow they made a cloud of darkness.  The August
night still had a faint reflected light, and the track, much ribbed
by tree roots, showed white before him.  The burn, small with the
summer drought, made a far-away tinkling, the sweet scents of pine
and fern were about him, the dense boskage where it met the sky had
in the dark a sharp marmoreal outline.  The world was fragrant and
quiet; if this be the Black Wood, thought David, I have been in
less happy places.

But suddenly at a turn of the hill the trees closed in.  It was
almost as if he had stripped and dived into a stagnant pool.  The
road now seemed to have no purpose of its own, but ran on
sufferance, slinking furtively as the Wood gave it leave, with many
meaningless twists, as if unseen hands had warded it off.  His
horse, which had gone easily enough so far, now needed his heel in
its side and many an application of his staff.  It shied at nothing
visible, jibbed, reared, breathing all the while as if its wind
were touched.  Something cold seemed to have descended on David's
spirits, which, as soon as he was aware of it, he tried to exorcise
by whistling a bar or two, and then by speaking aloud.  He recited
a psalm, but his voice, for usual notably full and mellow, seemed
not to carry a yard.  It was forced back on him by the trees.  He
tried to shout, with no better effect.  There came an echo which
surprised him, till he perceived that it was an owl.  Others
answered, and the place was filled with their eldritch cries.  One
flapped across the road not a yard from him, and in a second his
beast was on its haunches.

He was now beyond the throat of the glen, and the Woodilee burn had
left him, going its own way into the deeps of Fennan Moss, where
the wood was thin.  The road plucked up courage, and for a little
ran broad and straight through a covert of birches.  Then the pines
closed down again, this time with more insistence, so that the path
was a mere ladder among gnarled roots.  Here there were moths
about--a queer thing, David thought--white glimmering creatures
that brushed his face and made his horse half crazy.  He had ridden
at a slow jog, but the beast's neck and flanks were damp with
sweat.  Presently he had to dismount and lead it, testing every
step with his foot, for there seemed to be ugly scaurs breaking
away on his left.  The owls kept up a continuous calling, and there
was another bird with a note like a rusty saw.  He tried to
whistle, to shout, to laugh, but his voice seemed to come out of
folds of cloth.  He thought it was his plaid, but the plaid was
about his chest and shoulders and far from his mouth. . . .  And
then, at one step the Wood ceased and he was among meadows.

He knew the place, for after the darkness of the trees the land,
though the moon had not risen, seemed almost light.  There in front
was the vale down which Aller flowed, and on the right was his own
familiar glen of Rood.  Now he could laugh at his oppression--now
that he was among the pleasant fields where he had played as a
boy. . . .  Why had he forgotten about the Black Wood, for it had no
part in his memories?  True, he had come always to Roodfoot by the
other road behind the Hill of Deer, but there were the dark pines
not a mile off--he must have adventured many times within their
fringes.  He thought that it was because a child is shielded by
innocence from ugliness. . . .  And yet, even then, he had had many
nightmares and fled from many bogles.  But not from the Wood. . . .
No doubt it was the growing corruption of a man's heart.

The mill at Roodfoot stood gaunt and tenantless, passing swiftly
into decay.  He could see that the mill-wheel had gone, and its
supports stood up like broken teeth; the lade was choked with
rushes; the line of a hill showed through the broken rigging.  He
had known of this, but none the less the sight gave him a pang, for
David was a jealous conserver of his past. . . .  But as the path
turned up the glen beside the brawling Rood, he had a sudden
uplifting of spirit.  This could not change, this secret valley,
whose every corner he had quartered, whose every nook was the home
of a delightful memory.  He felt again the old ardour, when,
released from Edinburgh, he had first revisited his haunts, tearful
with excited joy.  The Wood was on him again, but a different wood,
his own wood.  The hazels snuggled close to the roadside, and the
feathery birches and rowans made a canopy, not a shadow.  The oaks
were ancient friends, the alders old playmates.  His horse had
recovered its sanity, and David rode through the dew-drenched night
in a happy rapture of remembrance.

He was riding up Rood--that had always been the thing he had hoped
to do.  He had never been even so far as Calidon before, for a
boy's day's march is short.  But he had promised himself that some
day when he was a man he would have a horse, and ride to the utmost
springs--to Roodhope-foot, to the crinkle in Moss Fell where Rood
was born. . . .  "Up the water" had always been like a spell in his
ear.  He remembered lying in bed at night and hearing a clamour at
the mill door: it was men from up the water, drovers from Moffat,
herds from the back of beyond, once a party of soldiers from the
south.  And up the water lay Calidon, that ancient castle.  The
Hawkshaws were a name in a dozen ballads, and the tales of them in
every old wife's mouth.  Once they had captained all the glens of
Rood and Aller in raids to the Border, and when Musgrave and
Salkeld had led a return foray, it was the Hawkshaws that smote
them mightily in the passes.  He had never seen one of the race;
the men were always at the wars or at the King's court; but they
had filled his dreams.  One fancy especially was of a little girl--
a figure with gold hair like King Malcolm's daughter in the "Red
Etin of Ireland" tale--whom he rescued from some dire peril,
winning the thanks of her tall mail-clad kin.  In that dream he too
had been mail-clad, and he laughed at the remembrance.  It was a
far cry from that to the sedate minister of Woodilee.

As he turned up the road to the Greenshiel he remembered with
compunction his errand.  He had been amusing himself with vain
memories when he was on the way to comfort a bed of death.  Both
horse and rider were in a sober mood when they reached the
sheiling, the horse from much stumbling in peat-bogs, and the man
from reflections on his unworthiness.

Rushlights burned in the single room, and the door and the one
window stood open.  It was a miserable hut of unmortared stones
from the hill, the gaps stuffed with earth and turf, and the roof
of heather thatch.  One glance showed him that he was too late.  A
man sat on a stool by the dead peat-fire with his head in his
hands.  A woman was moving beside the box bed and unfolding a piece
of coarse linen.  The shepherd of the Greenshiel might be an old
exercised Christian, but there were things in that place which had
no warrant from the Bible.  A platter full of coarse salt lay at
the foot of the bed, and at the top crossed twigs of ash.

The woman--she was a neighbouring shepherd's wife--stilled her
keening at the sound of David's feet.

"It's himsel'," she cried.  "Richie, it's the minister.  Wae's me,
sir, but ye're ower late to speed puir Mirren.  An hour syne she
gaed to her reward--just slipped awa' in a fit o' hoastin'
[coughing].  I've strauchten'd the corp and am gettin' the deid
claes ready--Mirren was aye prood o' hers, and keepit them fine and
caller wi' gall and rosmry.  Come forrit, sir, and tak' a look on
her that's gane.  There was nae deid-thraws wi' Mirren, and she's
lyin' as peacefu' as a bairn.  Her face is sair faun in, but I mind
when it was the bonniest face in a' Rood water."

The dead woman lay with cheeks like wax, a coin on each eye, so
that for the moment her face had the look of a skull.  Disease had
sculptured it to an extreme fineness, and the nose, the jaw, and
the lines of the forehead seemed chiselled out of ivory.  David had
rarely looked on death, and the sight gave him a sense first of
repulsion and then of an intolerable pathos.  He scarcely heard the
clatter of the shepherd's wife.

"She's been deein' this mony a day, and now she's gane joyfully to
meet her Lord.  Eh, but she was blithe to gang in the hinner end.
There was a time when she was sweir to leave Richie.  'Elspet,' she
says to me, 'what will that puir man o' mine dae his lee lane?'
and I aye says to her, 'Mirren, my wumman, the Lord's a grand
provider, and Richie will haud fast by Him.  Are not twa sparrows,'
I says--"

David went over to the husband on the creepie by the fireside, and
laid his hand on his shoulder.  The man sat hunched in a stupor of
misery.

"Richie," he said, "if I'm too late to pray with Marion, I can pray
with you."

He prayed, as he always prayed, not in a mosaic of Scripture texts,
but in simple words; and as he spoke he felt the man's shoulder
under his hand shake as with a sob.  He prayed with a sincere
emotion, for he had been riding through a living, coloured world,
and now felt like an icy blast the chill and pallor of death.  Also
he felt the pity of this lifelong companionship broken, and the old
man left solitary.  When he had finished, Richie lifted his face
from his hands, and into his eyes, which had been blank as a wall,
came the wholesome dimness of tears.

"I'm no repinin'," he said.  "The Lord gave and the Lord has taken
away, and I bless His name.  What saith the Apostle--Mirren has
gane to be with Christ, whilk is far better.  There was mony a time
when the meal-ark was toom [empty], and the wind and weet cam' in
through the baulks, and the peats wadna kindle, and we were baith
hungry and cauld.  But Mirren's bye wi' a' that, for she's bielded
in the everlasting arms, and she's suppin' rich at the Lord's ain
table.  But eh, sir, I could wish it had been His will to hae ta'en
me wi' her.  I'm an auld man, and there's nae weans [children], and
for the rest o' my days I'll be like a beast in an unco loan
[strange lane].  God send they binna mony."

"The purposes of the Lord are true and altogether righteous.  If He
spares you, Richie, it's because He has still work for you to do on
this earth."

"I kenna what it can be.  My fit's beginnin' to lag on the hill,
and ony way I'm guid for nocht but sheep.  Lambin's and clippin's
and spainin's [weanings] is ower puir a wark for the Lord to fash
wi'."

"Whatever you put your hand to is the work of the Lord, if you keep
His fear before you."

"Maybe, sir."  The man rose from his stool and revealed a huge
gaunt frame, much bowed at the shoulders.  He peered in the
rushlight at the minister's face.

"Ye're a young callant to be a minister.  I was strong on your
side, sir, when ye got the call, for your preachin' was like a
rushin' michty wind.  I mind I repeated the heids o' your sermon to
Mirren. . . .  Ye've done me guid, sir--I think it's maybe the
young voice o' ye.  Ye wad get the word from Johnnie Dow.  Man, it
was kind to mak' siccan haste.  I wish--I wish ye had seen Mirren
in life. . . .  Pit up anither petition afore ye gang--for a
blessin' on this stricken house and on an auld man who has his
title sure in Christ, but has an unco rebellious heart."

It seemed to David as he turned from the door, where the shepherd
stood with uplifted arm, that a benediction had been given, but not
by him.

The moon had risen and the glen lay in a yellow light, with the
high hills between Rood and Aller shrunk to mild ridges.  The
stream caught the glow, and its shallows were like silver chased in
amber.  The young man's heart was full with the scene which he had
left.  Death was very near to men, jostling them at every corner,
whispering in their ear at kirk and market, creeping between them
and their firesides.  Soon the shepherd of the Greenshiel would lie
beside his wife; in a little, too, his own stout limbs would be a
heap of dust.  How small and frail seemed the life in that cottage,
as contrasted with the rich pulsing world of the woods and hills
and their serene continuance.  But it was they that were the
shadows in God's sight.  The immortal thing was the broken human
heart that could say in its frailty that its Redeemer liveth.
"Thou, Lord," he repeated to himself, "in the beginning hast laid
the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the work of Thy
hands.  They shall perish, but Thou shalt endure; they all shall
wax old as doth a garment, and as a vesture shalt Thou change them,
and they shall be changed: but Thou art the same, and Thy years
shall not fail."

But as the road twined among the birches David's mood became
insensibly more pagan.  He could not resist the joy of the young
life that ran in his members, and which seemed to be quickened by
the glen of his childhood.  Death was the portion of all, but youth
was still far from death. . . .  The dimness and delicacy of the
landscape, the lines of hill melting into a haze under the moon,
went to his head like wine.  It was a world transfigured and spell-
laden.  On his left the dark blotch which was Melanudrigill lay
like a spider over the hillsides and the mouths of the glens, but
all in front and to his right was kindly and golden.  He had come
back to his own country, and it held out its arms to him.  "Salve,
O venusta Sirmio," he cried, and an owl answered.

The glen road was reached, but he did not turn towards Roodfoot.
He had now no dread of the wood of Melanudrigill, but he had a
notion to stand beside Rood water, where it flowed in a ferny
meadow which had been his favourite fishing-ground.  So he pushed
beyond the path into a maze of bracken and presently was at the
stream's edge.

And then, as he guided his horse past a thicket of alders, he came
full upon a little party of riders who had halted there.

There were three of them--troopers, they seemed, with buff caps and
doublets and heavy cavalry swords, and besides their own scraggy
horses there was a led beast.  The three men were consulting when
David stumbled on them, and at the sight of him they had sprung
apart and laid hands on their swords.  But a second glance had
reassured them.

"Good e'en to you, friend," said he who appeared to be the leader.
"You travel late."

It was not an encounter which David would have sought, for
wandering soldiery had a bad name in the land.  Something of this
may have been in the other's mind, for his next words were an
explanation.

"You see three old soldiers of Leven's," he said, "on the way north
after the late crowning mercy vouchsafed to us against the
malignants.  We be Angus men, and have the general's leave to visit
our homes.  If you belong hereaways you can maybe help us with the
road.  Ken you a place of the name of Calidon?"

To their eyes David must have seemed a young farmer or a bonnet-
laird late on the road from some errand of roystering or
sweethearting.

"I lived here as a boy," he said, "and I'm but now returned.  Yet I
think I could put you on your way to Calidon.  The moon's high."

"It's a braw moon," said the second trooper, "and it lighted us
fine down Aller, but the brawest moon will not discover you a
dwelling in a muckle wood, if you kenna the road to it."

The three had moved out from the shade of the alders and were now
clear under the sky.  Troopers, common troopers and shabby at that,
riding weary, ill-conditioned beasts.  The nag which the third led
was a mere rickle of bones.  And yet to David's eye there was that
about them which belied their apparent rank.  They had spoken in
the country way, but their tones were not those of countrymen.
They had not the air of a gaunt Jock or a round-faced Tam from the
plough-tail.  All three were slim, and the hands which grasped the
bridles were notably fine.  They held themselves straight like
courtiers, and in their voices lurked a note as of men accustomed
to command.  The leader was a dark man, with a weary thin face and
great circles round his eyes; the second a tall fellow, with a
tanned skin, a cast in his left eye, and a restless dare-devil
look; the third, who seemed to be their groom, had so far not
spoken, and had stood at the back with the led horse, but David had
a glimpse above his ragged doublet of a neat small moustache and a
delicate chin.  "Leven has good blood in his ranks," he thought,
"for these three never came out of a but-and-ben."  Moreover, the
ordinary trooper on his way home would not make Calidon a house of
call.

He led them up to the glen road, intending to give them directions
about their way, but there he found that his memory had betrayed
him.  He knew exactly in which nook of hill lay Calidon, but for
the life of him he could not remember how the track ran to it.

"I'll have to be your guide, sirs," he told them.  "I can take you
to Calidon, but I cannot tell you how to get there."

"We're beholden to you, sir, but it's a sore burden on your good-
nature.  Does your own road lie in that airt?"

The young man laughed.  "The night is fine and I'm in no haste to
be in bed.  I'll have you at Calidon door in half an hour."

Presently he led them off the road across a patch of heather,
forded Rood at a shallow, and entered a wood of birches.  The going
was bad, and the groom with the led horse had the worst of it.  The
troopers were humane men, for they seemed to have a curious care of
their servant.  It was "Canny now, James--there's bog on the left,"
or "Take tent of that howe;" and once or twice, when there was a
difficult passage, one or the other would seize the bridle of the
led horse till the groom had passed.  David saw from the man's face
that he was grey with fatigue.

"Get you on my beast," he said, "and I'll hold the bridle.  I can
find my way better on foot.  And do you others each take a led
horse.  The road we're travelling is none so wide, and we'll make
better speed that way."

The troopers docilely did as they were bidden, and the weary groom
was hoisted on David's grey gelding.  The change seemed to ease
him, and he lost his air of heavy preoccupation and let his eyes
wander.  The birch wood gave place to a bare hillside, where even
the grey slipped among the screes and the four horses behind
sprawled and slithered.  They crossed a burn, surmounted another
ridge, and entered a thick wood of oak, which David knew cloaked
the environs of Calidon and which made dark travelling even in the
strong moonlight.  Great boulders were hidden in the moss, withered
boughs hung low over the path, and now and then would come a patch
of scrub so dense that it had to be laboriously circumvented.  The
groom on the grey was murmuring to himself, and to David's
amazement it was Latin.  "Ibant obscuri sola sub nocte per umbram,"
were the words he spoke.

David capped them.


     "Perque domos Ditis vacuas et inania regna,
      Quale per incertam lunam . . ."


The man on the horse laughed, and David, looking up, had his first
proper sight of his face.  It was a long face, very pale, unshaven
and dirty, but it was no face of a groom.  The thin aquiline nose,
the broad finely arched brow, were in themselves impressive, but
the dominant feature was the eyes.  They seemed to be grey--ardent,
commanding, and yet brooding.  David was so absorbed by this sudden
vision that he tripped over a stone and almost pulled the horse
down.

"I did not look," said the rider, in a voice low-pitched and
musical, "I did not look to find a scholar in these hills."

"Nor did I know," said David, "that Virgil was the common reading
of Leven's men."

They had reached a field of wild pasture studded with little
thorns, in the middle of which stood a great stone dovecot.  A burn
falling in a deep ravine made a moat on one side of the tower of
Calidon, which now rose white like marble in the moon.  They
crossed the ravine, not without trouble, and joined the main road
from the glen, which ended in a high-arched gate round which
clustered half a dozen huts.

At the sound of their arrival men ran out of the huts, and one
seized the bridle of the leader.  David and the groom had now
fallen back, and it was the dark man who did the talking.  These
were strange troopers, for they sat their horses like princes, so
that the hand laid on the bridle was promptly dropped.

"We would speak with the laird of Calidon," the dark man said.
"Stay, carry this ring to him.  He will know what it means."  It
seemed curious to David that the signet given to the man was
furnished by the groom.

In five minutes the servant returned.  "The laird waits on ye,
sirs.  I'll tak' the beasts, and your mails, if ye've ony.  Through
the muckle yett an it please ye."

David turned to go.  "I've brought you to Calidon," he said, "and
now I'll take my leave."

"No, no," cried the dark man.  "You'll come in and drink a cup
after the noble convoy you've given us.  Nicholas Hawkshaw will be
blithe to welcome you."

David would have refused, for the hour was already late and he was
many miles from Woodilee, had not the groom laid his hand on his
arm.  "Come," he said.  "I would see my friend, the student of
Virgil, in another light than the moon," and to his amazement the
young man found that it was a request which he could not deny.
There was a compelling power in that quiet face, and he was
strangely loth to part from it.

The four dismounted, the three troopers staggering with stiff
bones.  The dark man's limp did not change after the first steps,
and David saw that he was crippled in the left leg.  They passed
through the gate into a courtyard, beyond which rose the square
massif of the tower.  In the low doorway a candle wavered, under a
stone which bore the hawk in lure which was the badge of the house.

The three men bowed low to the candle, and David saw that it was
held by a young girl.



CHAPTER III

GUESTS IN CALIDON TOWER


"Will you enter, sirs?" said the girl.  She was clad in some dark
homespun stuff with a bright-coloured screen thrown over her head
and shoulders.  She held the light well in front of her, so that
David could not see her face.  He would fain have taken his leave,
for it seemed strange to be entering Calidon thus late at e'en in
the company of strangers, but the hand of the groom on his arm
restrained him.  "You will drink a stirrup-cup, friend.  The night
is yet young and the moon is high."

A steep stairway ran upward a yard or two from the doorway.
Calidon was still a Border keep, where the ground-floor had once
been used for byres and stables, and the inhabitants had dwelt in
the upper stories.  The girl moved ahead of them.  "Will you be
pleased to follow me, sirs?  My uncle awaits you above."

They found themselves in a huge chamber which filled the width of
the tower, and, but for a passage and a further staircase, its
length.  A dozen candles, which seemed to have been lit in haste,
showed that it was raftered with dark oak beams, and that the walls
were naked stone where they were not covered with a coarse arras.
The floor, of a great age, was bare wood blackened with time and
use, and covered with a motley of sheepskins and deerskins.  Two
long oak tables and a great oak bench made the chief furniture, but
there were a multitude of stools of the same heavy ancient make,
and by a big open fireplace two ancient chairs of stamped Spanish
leather.  A handful of peats smouldered on the hearth, and the thin
blue smoke curled upward to add grime to an immense coat of arms
carved in stone and surmounted by a forest of deer horns and a
trophy of targes and spears.

David, accustomed only to the low-ceiled rooms of the Edinburgh
closes, stared in amazement at the size of the place and felt
abashed.  The Hawkshaws had made too great a sound in his boyhood's
world for him to enter their dwelling without a certain tremor of
the blood.  So absorbed was he in his surroundings that it was with
a start that he saw the master of the house.

A man limped forward, gathered the leader of the party in his arms
and kissed him on both cheeks.

"Will," he said, "Will, my old comrade!  It's a kind wind that has
blown you to Calidon this night.  I havena clapped eyes on you
these six year."

The host was a man about middle life, with the shoulders of a bull
and a massive shaggy head now in considerable disorder from the
fact that a night-cap had just been removed from it.  His clothes
were of a comfortable undress, for the tags of his doublet and the
points of his breeches were undone, and over all he wore an old
plaid dressing-gown.  He had been reading, for a pipe of tobacco
marked his place in a folio, and David noted that it was Philemon
Holland's version of the Cyropdia.  His eyes were blue and frosty,
his cheeks ruddy, his beard an iron grey, and his voice as gusty as
a hill wind.  He limped heavily as he moved.

"Man, Will," he cried, "it's a whipping up of cripples when you and
me forgather.  The Germany wars have made lameters of the both of
us.  And who are the lads you've brought with you?"

"Just like myself, Nick, poor soldiers of Leven's, on our way home
to Angus."

"Angus is it this time?"  The host winked and then laughed
boisterously.

"Angus it is, but their names and designations can wait till we
have broken our fast.  'Faith, we've as wolfish a hunger as ever
you and me tholed in Thuringia.  And I've brought in an honest man
that guided us through your bogs and well deserves bite and sup."

Nicholas Hawkshaw peered for a moment at David.  "I cannot say I'm
acquaint with the gentleman, but I've been that long away I've
grown out of knowledge of my own countryside.  But ye shallna lack
for meat and drink, for when I got your token I bade Edom stir
himself and make ready.  There's a good browst of yill, and plenty
of French cordial and my father's Canary sack.  And there's a
mutton ham, and the best part of a pie--I wouldna say just what's
intil the pie, but at any rate there's blackcocks and snipes and
leverets, for I had the shooting of them.  Oh, and there's whatever
more Edom can find in the house of Calidon.  Here's back your ring,
Will.  When I read the cognizance I had a notion that I was about
to entertain greater folk--"

"Than your auld friend Will Rollo and two poor troopers of Leven's.
And yet we're maybe angels unawares."  He took the ring and handed
it to the groom, who with David stood a little back from the
others, while Nicholas Hawkshaw's eyes widened in a momentary
surprise.

An ancient serving-man and a barefoot maid brought in the materials
for supper, and the two troopers fell on the viands like famished
crows.  The groom ate little and drank less; though he was the
slightest in build of the three travellers, he seemed the most
hardened to the business.  The lame man, who was called Will Rollo,
was presently satisfied, and deep in reminiscences with his host,
but the other required greater sustenance for his long wiry body,
and soon reduced the pie to a fragment.  He pressed morsels upon
the groom--a wing of grouse, a giblet of hare--but the latter
smiled and waved the food away.  A friendly service, Leven's, David
thought, where a servant was thus tenderly considered.

"Yon were the brave days, when you and me served as ensigns of
Meldrum's in the Corpus Evangelicorum.  And yon was the lad to
follow, for there never was the marrow of the great Gustavus for
putting smeddum into troops that had as many tongues and creeds as
the Tower of Babel.  But you and me were ower late on the scene.
We never saw Breitenfeld--just the calamitous day of Lutzen, and
the blacker day of Nordlingen, where Bernhard led us like sheep to
the slaughter.  That was the end of campaigning for you, Will.  I
mind leaving you on the ground for dead and kissing your cheek, the
while I was near my own end with a musketoon ball in my ribs.  Then
I heard you were still in life and back in Scotland, but I was off
with auld Wrangel to Pomerania, and had to keep my mind on my own
affairs."

So the talk went on, memories of leaguers and forced marches and
pitched battles, punctuated with the names of Leslies and Hamiltons
and Kerrs and Lumsdens and a hundred Scots mercenaries.--"I got my
quietus a year syne serving with Torstensson and his Swedes--a
pitiable small affair in Saxonia, where I had the misfortune to
meet a round shot on the ricochet which cracked my shin-bone and
has set me hirpling for the rest of my days.  My Colonel was Sandy
Leslie, a brother of Leslie of Balquhain, him that stuck
Wallenstein at Eger, but a man of honester disposition and a good
Protestant.  He bade me go home, for I would never again be worth a
soldier's hire, and faith! when the chirurgeon had finished with my
leg I was of the same opinion.--So home you find me, Will, roosting
in the cauld rickle of stones that was my forbears', while rumours
of war blow like an east wind up the glens.  I'm waiting for your
news.  I hear word that Davie Leslie . . ."

"Our news can wait, Nick.  We've a gentleman here to whose ears
this babble of war must sound outlandish."  It seemed to David that
some secret intelligence passed between the two, and that a foot of
one was pressed heavily on the other's toes.

"I am a man of peace," David said, for the talk had stirred his
fancy, "but I too have word of a glorious victory in England won by
the Covenant armies.  If you have come straight from the south you
can maybe tell me more."

"There was a victory beyond doubt," said the tall man with the
squint, "and that is why we of Leven's are permitted to go home.
We have gotten our pay, whilk is an uncommon happening for the poor
soldier in this land."

"I have heard," said David, "that the ranks of the Army of the
Covenant fought for higher matters than filthy lucre."

"For what, belike?"

"For the purity of their faith and the Crown honours of Christ."

The other whistled gently through his teeth.

"No doubt.  No doubt.  There's a braw sough of the Gospel in
Leven's ranks.  But we must consider the loaves and fishes, good
sir, as well as the preaching of the Word.  Man canna live by bread
alone, but he assuredly canna live without it, and to fill his
belly he wants more than preaching.  Lucre's none so filthy if it
be honestly earned, and goes to keep a roof over the wife and
bairns.  I have served in many lands with a kennin' o' queer folk,
and, believe me, sir, the first thing a soldier thinks of is just
his pay."

"But he cannot fight unless he has a cause to fight for."

"He'll make a very good shape at it if he has been learned his
business by a heavy-handed sergeant.  I have seen the riddlings of
Europe stick fast as rocks before Wallenstein's horse, because they
had been taught their trade and feared death less than their
Colonel's tongue.  And I have seen the flower of gentrice, proud as
Lucifer and gallant as lions, and every one with a noble word on
his lips, break like rotten twigs at the first musket volley.  It's
discipline that's the last word in war."

"But if the discipline be there, will not a conviction of the right
of his cause make a better soldier?"

"You have spoken a true word, and there's a man in England this day
that knows it.  That is what Cromwell has done.  He has built up a
body of horse that stand like an iron wall and move like a river in
spate.  They have the discipline of Gustavus's Swedes, and the
fires of Hell in their hearts.  I tell you, there is nothing in
this land that can stand against them."

"I have no love for sectaries," said David.  "But cannot our Scots
do likewise, with the Covenant to nerve them?"

The other shrugged his shoulders.

"The Covenant's but sour kail to the soldier.  Davie Leslie has
hammered his men into a wise-like army, because he learned his
trade from Gustavus.  But think you our bannock-fed foot-sentinels
care a doit for the black gowns at Westminster?  A man will fight
for his King and for his country, and for liberty to worship God in
his own way.  But, unless he has a crack in his head, he will not
fight for a fine point of Church government."

David was becoming ill at ease.  He felt that it was his duty to
testify, or otherwise he would be guilty of the sin of Meroz, the
sin of apathy when his faith was challenged.  But he was far from
clear as to the exact nature of his faith.  There was no blasphemy
in questioning whether the Covenant were truly in the hearts of the
people.  Had not the minister of Cauldshaw that very afternoon
expressed the same doubt?

Nicholas Hawkshaw was peering at him intently.

"I should ken you, friend, for they tell me you belong to this
countryside.  And your face sticks in my memory, but I canna put a
name to it."

"They call me David Sempill.  I am the new-ordained minister of
Woodilee."

Nicholas cried out.  "Auld Wat o' the Roodfoot's grandson.  I heard
of your coming, sir, and indeed I'm your chief heritor.  I'll nave
your hand on that.  Man, I kenned your gudesire well, and many a
pouchful of groats I had from him when I was a laddie.  You're back
among kenned folk, Mr. Sempill, and I wish you a long life in
Woodilee."

The troopers did not seem to share their host's geniality.  Quick
glances passed between them, and the tall man shifted his seat so
that he came between David and the groom.  This latter had taken no
part in the conversation, indeed he had not spoken a word, but
after his meal was finished had sat with his head on his breast as
if sunk in meditation.  Now he raised his eyes to David, and it was
he who spoke.

"I am not less loyal to the Kirk of Scotland than you, Mr. Sempill.
You are a placed minister, and I am a humble elder of that Kirk."

"In what parish?" David asked eagerly.

"In my native parish benorth of Forth."

The man's dress and station were forgotten by David when he looked
at his face.  Now that he saw clearly in the candle-light, it was
not the face of a common groom.  Every feature spoke of race, the
firm mouth of command, the brooding grey eyes of thought.  The
voice was sweet and musical, and the man's whole air had a gentle
but imperious courtesy.

The movement of the tall trooper, while it had separated David from
the groom, had brought the latter full into the view of Nicholas
Hawkshaw.  Then a strange thing happened.  The host, after a long
stare, during which amazement and recognition woke in his eyes,
half rose from his seat and seemed on the verge of speaking.  His
gaze was fixed on the groom, and David read in it something at once
deferential and exulting.  Then the toe of the lame man's boot came
down on his shin, and the lame man's hand was laid on his arm.  The
lame man, too, said something in a tongue which David could not
understand.  Nicholas subsided in his chair, but his face remained
both puzzled and excited.

The groom spoke again.

"You are a scholar, and you are young, and you are full of the
ardour of your calling.  This parish is fortunate in its minister,
and I would that all Scotland were as happily served.  What is it
that you and I seek alike?  A pure doctrine and a liberated Kirk?
Is there no more?"

"I seek above all things to bring men and women to God's mercy-
seat."

"And I say Amen.  That is more than any disputation about the forms
of Presbytery.  But you seek also, or I am mightily mistook in you,
the freedom and well-being of this land of ours--that our Israel
may have peace and prosperity in her borders."

"If the first be won, all the rest will be added unto us."

"Doubtless.  But only if the first be truly won--if the Kirk attend
to the work of salvation and does not expend her toil in barren
fields.  Her sovereign must be King Jesus.  Take heed that instead
it be not King Covenant."

The words recalled to David Mr. Fordyce's doubts, which had been so
scornfully repelled by the ministers of Kirk Aller and Bold.

"Does it lie in the mouth of a minister or an elder of the Kirk to
cavil at the Kirk's doings?" he asked, but without conviction in
his tone.

The other smiled.  "You give due loyalty, as the Scripture enjoins,
to the King, Mr. Sempill?"

"I am faithful to his Majesty so long as his Majesty is faithful to
law and religion."

"Even so.  It is my own creed.  The King must respect the limits of
his prerogative--it is the condition on which he rules in a free
land.  My loyalty to the Kirk is in the same case.  I am loyal when
she fulfils those duties which God has laid upon her--that duty,
above all, of bringing mortal men to God.  If she forget those
duties, and meddle arrogantly with civil matters that do not
concern her, then I take leave to oppose her, as in a like case I
would oppose his Majesty.  For by such perversities both King and
Kirk become tyrants, and tyranny is not to be endured by men who
are called into the liberty of Christ."

"Or by Scots," added the tall trooper.

"I have no clearness on the point," said David after a pause.  "I
have not thought deeply on these matters, for I am but new to the
ministry, and my youth was filled with profane study."

"Nevertheless, such study is a good foundation for a wise theology.
I judge that you are a ripe Latinist--maybe also a Grecian.  You
have read your Aristotle?  You are familiar with the history of the
ancient world, which illumines all later ages?  I would point my
arguments from that armoury."

"I cannot grant that the doings of ancient heathendom give any rule
for a Christian state."

"But, sir, the business of government is always the same.  We have
our Lord's warning that there are the things of Csar and the
things of God.  The Roman was the great master of the arts of
government, and he did not seek throughout his empire to make a
single religion.  He was content to give it the peace of his law,
and let each people go its own way in matters of worship.  It was
in that tolerant world which he created that our Christian faith
found its opportunity."

"Doubtless God so moved the Roman mind for His own purpose.  But I
join issue on your application.  The Church of Christ is now in
being, and the faith of Christ is the foundation of a Christian
state.  Civil law is an offence against God unless it be also
Christian."

The young man smiled.  "I do not deny it.  This realm of ours is
professedly a Christian realm--I would it were more truly so.  But
that does not exempt it from obedience to those laws of government
without which no realm, Christian or pagan, may endure.  If a man
is so ill a smith that he cannot shoe my horse, I will be none the
better served because he is a good Christian.  If a land be ill
governed, the disaster will be not the less great because the
governors are men of God.  If his Majesty--to take a pertinent
example--override the law to the people's detriment, that tyranny
will be not the less grievous because his Majesty believes in his
heart that he is performing a duty towards the Almighty.  Honest
intention will not cure faulty practice, and the fool is the fool
whether he be unbeliever or professor."

David shook his head.  "Where does your argument tend?  I fear to
schism."

"Not so.  I am an orthodox son of the Kirk, a loyal servant of his
Majesty, and a passionate Scot.  Here, my friend, is my simple
confession.  There is but one master in the land, and its name is
Law--which is in itself a creation of a free people under the
inspiration of the Almighty.  That law may be changed by the
people's will, but till it be so changed it is to be revered and
obeyed.  It has ordained the King's prerogative, the rights of the
subject, and the rights and duties of the Kirk.  The state is like
the body, whose health is only to be maintained by a just
proportion among its members.  If a man's belly be his god, his
limbs will suffer; if he use only his legs, his arms will dwindle.
If, therefore, the King should intrude upon the subject's rights,
or the subject whittle at the King's prerogative, or the Kirk set
herself above the Crown, there will be a sick state and an ailing
people."

Nicholas Hawkshaw had been listening intently with a puzzled air,
his eyes fixed on the groom's face, but the two troopers seemed ill
at ease.

"Man, James," said the tall man, "you've mistook your calling.  You
should have been a regent in the college of St. Andrews, and
hammered sense into the thick heads of the bejaunts."

Rollo, the lame man, shifted his seat and seemed inclined to turn
the conversation.

"Patience, Mark," said the groom.  "It's not often a poor soldier
of Leven's gets a chance of a crack with a like-minded friend.  For
I'm certain that Mr. Sempill is very near my way of thinking."

"I do not quarrel with your premises," said David, "but I'm not
clear about the conclusion."

"It's writ large in this land to-day.  There are those that would
make the King a puppet and put all authority in parliaments, and
there are those who would make the Kirk like Calvin's at Geneva, a
ruler over both civil and religious matters.  I say that both ways
lie madness and grief.  If you upset the just proportion of the law
you will gain not liberty but confusion.  You are a scholar, Mr.
Sempill, and have read the histories of Thucydides?  Let me counsel
you to read them again and consider the moral."

"What side are you on?" David asked abruptly.

"I am on the side of the free people of Scotland.  And you by your
vows are on the same side, for your concern is to feed the flock of
God which is among us.  Think you, sir, if you depress the balance
against the King, that thereby you will win more for the people?
Nay, nay, what is lost to the prerogative will go, not to the
people, but to those who prey on them.  You will have that anarchy
which gives his chance to the spoiler, and out of anarchy will come
some day a man of violence who will tyrannically make order again.
It is the way of the world, my friend."

"Are you for the Covenant?"

At the question the others started.  "Enough of politics," cried
Rollo.  "These are no matters to debate among weary folk."  But the
groom raised his hand, and they were silent.

"I am for the Covenant.  Six years back I drew sword for it, and I
did not sheathe that sword till we had established the liberties of
this land.  That was indeed a Covenant of Grace."

"There is another and a later.  What say you of that?"

"I say of that other that it is a Covenant of Works in which I have
no part, nor any true lover of the Kirk.  It is a stepping of the
Kirk beyond the bounds prescribed by the law of God and the law of
man, and it will mean a weakening of the Kirk in its proper duties.
And that I need not tell you, as a minister of Christ, will be the
starvation and oppression of Christ's simple folk.  Quicquid
delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi.  Is it not more pleasing to God
that His ministers should comfort the sick and the widow and the
fatherless, and guide souls to Heaven, than that they should
scrabble for civil pre-eminence?"

Into David's mind came two visions--that of the complacent
ministers of Kirk Aller and Bold as they had discoursed at meat,
and that of the old herd at the Greenshiel, sitting by his dead
wife.  The pictures belonged to different worlds, and at the moment
he felt that these worlds were eternally apart.  He had the
disquieting thought that the one had only the husks of faith, and
the other the grain.  Dimly he heard the voice of the groom.  "I
will give you a text, Mr. Sempill.  'The vineyard of the Lord of
hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah His pleasant
plant; and He looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for
righteousness, but behold a cry.'"



He scarcely realized that the others had sprung to their feet, and
it was only when Nicholas Hawkshaw exclaimed that he turned his
head.

A girl stood before them, the girl who had opened the door, but
whose face he had scarcely seen at the time in the poor light.

"Katrine, my dear, you've been long of coming."  It was Nicholas
who spoke.  "I thought you had slipped off to your bed.  This is my
sister's child, sirs, who keeps me company in this auld barrack--
Robert Yester's daughter, him that fell with Monro in the year
'thirty-four.  You see three gentlemen-troopers of Leven's, my
dear, and Mr. Sempill, the new minister of Woodilee."

The girl was dressed in a gown of blue velvet, the skirts of which
were drawn back in front to show an embroidered petticoat of stiff
yellow satin.  It was cut low at the neck and shoulders, and round
the top ran a broad edging of fine lace.  Her dark hair was caught
up in a knot behind, but allowed to fall in curls on each side of
her face.  That face, to David's startled eyes, was like none that
he had ever seen before, certainly like none of the Edinburgh
burgher girls whom he had observed in their finery on the Saturday
causeway.  It was small and delicately featured, the cheeks flushed
with youth and health, the eyes dark, brilliant, and mirthful.  At
another time he would have been shocked at her dress, for the
fashion of a low bodice had not spread much beyond the Court, but
now he did not take note of what she wore.  He was gazing
moonstruck upon a revelation.

She smiled on him--she smiled on them all.  She curtsied lightly to
her uncle, to Rollo, and to the dark man.  But she did not curtsy
to the minister.  For suddenly, as she looked at the groom, her
composure deserted her.  Her mouth moved as if she would have
spoken, and then she checked herself, for David saw that the groom
had put his finger to his lips.  Instead she curtsied almost to the
ground, a reverence far more deep than she had accorded to the
others, and when he gave her his hand she bent her head as if her
impulse was to kiss it.

All this David saw with a confused vision.  He had scarcely spoken
ten words in his life to a woman outside his own kin, and this
bright apparition loosened his knees with nervousness.  He
stammered his farewells.  He had already outstayed the bounds of
decency, and he had a long ride home--he wished his friends a safe
conclusion to their journey--in the course of his pastoral
visitations he would have the chance of coming again to Calidon.
"'Deed, sir, and you'll make sure of that," said the hospitable
Nicholas.  "There's aye a bite and a sup at Calidon for the
minister of Woodilee."

He bowed to the girl, and she looked at him for the first time, a
quizzical appraising look, and gave him a fleeting smile.  Five
minutes later he was on his horse and fording Rood.

He took the long road by the back of the Hill of Deer, riding in
bright moonshine up the benty slopes and past the hazel thickets.
His mind was in a noble confusion, for on this, his first day in
his parish, experiences had thronged on him too thick and fast.
Out of the welter two faces stood clear, the groom's and the
girl's. . . .  He remembered the talk, and his conscience pricked
him.  Had he been faithful to his vows?  Had he been guilty of the
sin of Meroz?  Had he listened to railing accusations and been
silent? . . .  He did not know--in truth he did not care--for the
sum of his recollection was not of an argument but of a person.
The face of the young man had been more than his words, for it had
been the face of a comrade, and an intimate friendliness had looked
out of his eyes.  He longed to see him again, to be with him, to
follow him, to serve him--but he did not know his name, and they
would doubtless never meet again.  David was very young, and could
have wept at the thought.

And the girl . . . ?  The sight of her had been the coping-stone to
a night of marvels.  She was not like the groom--he had been glad
to flee from her company, for she had no part in his world.  But a
marvel beyond doubt!  The recollection of her made him a poet, and
as he picked his way over the hill he was quoting to himself the
lines in Homer where the old men of Troy see Helen approaching, and
wonder at her beauty. . . .  [Greek text]--how did it go?  "Small
wonder that the Trojans and the mailed Greeks should endure pain
through many years for such a woman.  In face she is strangely like
to some immortal."

And then he felt compunction, for he remembered the worn face of
the dead woman at the Greenshiel.



CHAPTER IV

THE FAITHFUL SERVANT


For two days the minister of Woodilee was a man unbalanced and
distraught.  He sat at his books without concentration, and he
wandered on the hills without delight, while Isobel's face puckered
in dismay as she removed his scarcely tasted meals.  It was hot
thundery weather, with storms that never broke in rain grumbling
among the glens, and to this she set down his indisposition to eat.
But David's trouble was not of the body.  He had thought himself
the mailed servant of God, single in purpose, armed securely
against the world, and lo! in a single night he had been the sport
of profane fancies and had rejoiced in vanities.

The girl he scarcely thought of--she had scared rather than
enthralled him.  But the Wood of Melanudrigill lay heavy on his
conscience.  Where was his Christian fortitude if a black forest at
night could set him shivering like a lost child?  David had all his
life kept a tight hand on his courage; if he dreaded a thing, that
was good reason why he should go out of his road to face it.  His
instinct was to return alone to Melanudrigill in the dark,
penetrate its deepest recesses, and give the lie to its
enchantments. . . .  But a notion which he could not combat
restrained him.  That was what the Wood wanted, to draw him back to
it through curiosity or fear.  If he yielded to his impulse he
would be acknowledging its power.  It was the part of a minister of
God to deny at the outset that the place was more than a common
wilderness of rock and tree, to curb his fancies as things too vain
for a grown man's idlest thought.

On this point he fixed his resolution and found some comfort.  But
the memory of Calidon and the troopers and the groom's words
remained to trouble him.  Had he not borne himself in their company
as a Laodicean, assenting when he should have testified? . . .  He
went over every detail of the talk, for it stuck firmly in his
mind.  They had decried the Solemn League and Covenant in the name
of the Kirk, and he had not denounced them. . . .  And yet they had
spoken as Christian men and loyal sons of that Kirk. . . .  What
meant, too, the groom's disquisition on law and government?  David
found the argument hard to gainsay--it presented a doctrine of the
state which commended itself to his reason.  Yet it was in flat
contradiction of the declared view of that Kirk which he was sworn
to serve, and what then became of his ordination vows? . . .  But
was it contrary to the teaching of the Word and the spirit of his
faith?  He searched his mind on this point and found that he had no
clearness.

His duty, it seemed, was to go to some father-in-God, like the
minister of Kirk Aller, and lay his doubts before him.  But he
found that course impossible.  The pale fleshy face of Mr. Muirhead
rose before him, as light-giving as a peat-stack; he heard his
complacent tones, saw the bland conceit in his ruminant eyes.  Nor
would he fare better with the militancy of his brother of Bold, who
classed all mankind as Amalekites, save the chosen few who wore his
own phylacteries.  Mr. Fordyce might give him comfort, and he was
on the point many times of saddling his horse and riding to the
manse of Cauldshaw. . . .  But each time he found it impossible,
and when he asked himself the cause he was amazed at the answer.
Loyalty forbade him--loyalty to the young man, habited as a groom,
who had spoken both as counsellor and comrade.  That was the
enduring spell of that strange night.  David as a youth in
Edinburgh had had few familiar friends, and none that could be
called intimate.  For the first time he had met one from whom had
gone forth an influence that melted his heart.  He recalled with a
kind of aching affection the gentle, commanding courtesy, the
winning smile, the masterful and yet wistful grey eyes.  "I
wonder," he thought, "if I was not meant to be a soldier.  For I
could follow yon man most joyfully to the cannon's mouth."

On the third day peace returned to him, when he buried Marion of
the Greenshiel.  The parish coffin was not used, as was the custom
for poor folk, since the farmer of Reiverslaw, Richie's master,
paid the cost of a private one, and himself attended the "chesting"
the night before.  On the day David walked the seven miles to the
cottage, where Richie had set out a poor entertainment of ale and
oatcakes for the mourners.  It was not the fashion for the minister
to pray at the house or at the grave, as savouring of Popish
prayers for the dead, nor was it the custom for a widower to attend
the funeral; but David took his own way, and prayed with the
husband, the wailing women, and the half-dozen shepherds who had
assembled for the last rites.  The light coffin was carried by four
young men, and David walked with them all the way to Woodilee.  The
farmer of Reiverslaw joined them at a turn of the road--his name
was Andrew Shillinglaw, a morose, dark man not over-well spoken of
in the parish--and he and the minister finished the journey side by
side.  The bellman, Nehemiah Robb, who was also the gravedigger and
the beadle, met them at the entrance to the kirkton, and with him a
crowd of villagers.  Preceded by the jangling of Robb's bell, the
procession reached the shallow grave, the women remaining at the
kirkyard gate.  The coffin was lowered, the earth shovelled down,
and the thing in five minutes was over.  There was no "dredgy"
[funeral feast] at the poor house of the Greenshiel to draw the
mourners back upon the seven moorland miles.  The men adjourned to
Lucky Weir's, the kirk bell was restored to its tree, a woman or
two sobbed, and the last of Marion Smail was a thin stream of
figures vanishing in the haze of evening, one repeating to the
other in funereal voices that "puir Mirren had got weel awa'."

Yet the occasion, austere and bare as poverty could make it, woke
in David a mood of tenderness and peace.  The lowering clouds had
gone from the sky, all morning it had rained, and the afternoon had
had a soft autumn freshness.  He had prayed with Richie, but his
prayers had been also for himself, and as he walked behind the
coffin on the path by the back of the Hill of Deer his petition
seemed to have been answered.  He had an assurance of his vocation.
The crowd at the kirkyard, those toil-worn folk whose immortal
souls had been given into his charge, moved him to a strange
exultation.  He saw his duty cleared from all doubts, and there
must have been that in his face which told of his thoughts, for men
greeted him and then passed on, as if unwilling to break in on his
preoccupation.  Only Reiverslaw, who was on his way to Lucky
Weir's, whence he would depart drunk in the small hours, was obtuse
in his perceptions.  He took the minister's hand and shook it as he
would a drover's at a fair, seemed anxious to speak, found no
words, and left with a grunted farewell.



It was a fine, long-drawn-out back-end, the best that had been
known for twenty years.  All September the sun shone like June, and
it was well into October before the morning frosts began, and the
third week of November before the snow came.  The little crops--
chiefly grey oats and barley, with an occasional rig of peas and
flax--were well ripened and quickly reaped.  The nettie-wives were
busy all day in the fields, and the barefoot children made the
leading in of the harvest a holiday, with straw whistles in their
mouths and fantastic straw badges on their clothing.  Then came the
threshing with jointed flails, and the winnowing on barn roofs when
the first east winds blew.  There were no gleaners in the empty
stubbles, for it was held a pious duty to leave something behind
for the fowls of the air.  Presently the scanty fruits of the earth
were under cover, the bog hay in dwarfish ricks, the unthreshed
oats and bear in the barns, the grain in the girnels, and soon the
wheel of the Woodilee mill was clacking merrily to grind the
winter's meal.  In that parish the burden of the laird lay light.
Nicholas Hawkshaw asked no more than his modest rental in kind, and
did not exact his due in labour, but for a week the road by the
back of the Hill of Deer saw a procession of horses carrying the
"kain" meal to the Calidon granary.  As the minister watched the
sight one day, Ephraim Caird, the Chasehope tenant, stood beside
him, looking gloomily at his own beasts returning.  "That's the way
our puir crops are guided," he said.  "As the auld folk used to
say, 'Ane part to saw, ane part to gnaw, and ane to pay the laird
witha'.'"  His eyes showed that he had no love for Calidon.

Hallowmass that year was a cheerful season.  The elders shook their
heads at the Hallowe'en junketings, and the severe Chasehope was
strong in his condemnation.  But on the night of Hallowe'en, as
David walked in the bright moonlight and saw the lights in the
cottages and heard laughter and a jigging of fiddles, he did not
find it in his heart to condemn the ancient fashions.  Nor
apparently did Chasehope himself, for David was much mistaken if it
was not Ephraim's great shoulders and fiery head that he saw among
the cabbage-stalks in Nance Kello's garden.  He had been to
Hallowe'en frolics himself in past days when he stayed with his
cousin at Newbiggin, but it seemed to him that here in Woodilee
there was something oppressed and furtive in the merriment.  There
was a secrecy about each lit dwelling, and no sign of young lads
and lasses laughing on the roads.  He noticed, too, that for the
next few days many of the people had a look of profound weariness--
pale faces, tired eyes, stealthy glances--as if behind the apparent
decorum there had been revels that exhausted soul and body.

With the reaping of the harvest the ill-conditioned cattle were
brought from the hills to the stubbles, and soon turned both
outfield and infield into a miry wilderness.  David, whose
knowledge of farming was derived chiefly from the Georgics, had yet
an eye in his head and a store of common sense, and he puzzled at
the methods.  The land at its best was ill-drained, and the
trampling of beasts made a thousand hollows which would be puddles
at the first rains and would further sour the rank soil.  But when
he spoke on the matter to the farmer of Mirehope, he was answered
scornfully that that had been the "auld way of the land," and that
those who were proud in their own conceit and had tried new-fangled
methods--he had heard word of such in the West country--could not
get two bolls from an acre where he had four.  "And Mirehope's but
wersh [sour] land, sir, and not to be named wi' the Clyde howms."

When the November snows came all live stock was gathered into the
farm-towns.  The cattle were penned in yards with thatched
shelters, and soon turned them into seas of mud.  The milking cows
were in the byre; the sheep in paddocks near-by: the draught-oxen
and the horses in miserable stables of mud and heather.  It was the
beginning of the winter hibernation, and the chief work of the
farms was the feeding of the stock on their scanty winter rations.
The hay--coarse bog grasses with little nutriment in them--went
mainly to the sheep; horses and cattle had for fodder straw and
messes of boiled chaff; while Crummie in the byre was sometimes
regaled with the dbris of the kailyard and the oddments left from
the family meals.  Winter each year was both for beast and man a
struggle with famine, and each was rationed like the people of a
besieged city.  But if food was scarce at the best, Woodilee did
not want for fuel.  It had been a good year for peats, for they had
ripened well on the hills, and the open autumn had made them easy
to carry.  Each cottage had its ample peat-stack, and when harvest
was over there had been also a great gathering of windfalls from
the woods, so that by every door stood a pile of kindlings.

Melanudrigill in the bright October days had lost its menace for
David.  He had no occasion to visit it by night, but more than once
he rode through it by day on his pastoral visitations to Fennan or
the Rood valley, and once in a flaming sunset he returned that way
from Kirk Aller.  The bracken was golden in decay, and the
yellowing birches, the russet thorns, and the occasional scarlet of
rowans made the sombre place almost cheerful.  In his walks on the
hill the great forest below him seemed to have grown thin and open,
no longer a vast enveloping cloak, but a kindly covering for the
ribs of earth.  Some potency had gone from it with the summer,
as if the tides of a fierce life had sunk back into the ground
again.  He had seen deer in the glades, and they looked innocent
things. . . .  But he noticed as curious that none of the villagers
in their quest for wood penetrated far into it, and that on its
fringes they only gathered the windfalls.  Up at the back of the
Hill of Deer and in the Rood glen men were busy all day cutting
birch and hazel billets, but no axe was laid to any tree in the
Black Wood.

A week before Yule came the great snow.  It began with a thin cold
fog which muffled every fold of the hills.  "Rouk's [fog] snaw's
wraith," said the parish, and saw to its fuel-stacks and looked
gloomily at its shivering beasts.  The thick weather lasted for
three days and three nights, weather so cold that it was pain to
draw breath, and old folk at night in their box beds could not get
warmth, and the Woodilee burn was frozen hard even in the linns.
It was noted as a bad omen that deer from Melanudrigill were seen
in the kirkton, and that at dawn when the Mirehope shepherd went
out to his sheep he found half-frozen blue hares crouching among
the flocks.  On the fourth morning the snow began, and fell for
three days in heavy flakes, so that it lay feet deep on the roads
and fields.  Then the wind rose and for six furious hours a
blizzard raged, so that the day was like night, and few dared stir
from their doors.  David, setting out to visit Amos Ritchie's wife,
who was sick of a congestion, took two hours over a quarter of mile
of road, wandering through many kitchen middens, and had to
postpone his return till the wind abated in the evening, while
Isobel in the manse was demented with anxiety.  The consequence was
that the snow was swept bare from the knowes, but piled into
twelve-foot drifts in the hollows.  It was an ill time for the
sheep in the paddocks, which were often one giant drift, where the
presence of the flock could only be detected by the yellowish
steaming snow.  Chasehope lost a score of ewes, Mirehope half as
many, and Nether Fennan, where the drifts were deep, the best part
of his flock.  To David it seemed that the farmers' ways were a
tempting of Providence.  Had the sheep been left on the hill they
would have crowded in the snow to the bare places; here in the
confined paddocks they were caught in a trap.  Moreover, on the
hill in open winter weather there was a better living to be picked
up than that afforded by the narrow rations of sour bog hay.  But
when he spoke thus his hearers plainly thought him mad.  Sheep
would never face a winter on the hills--besides, the present
practice was the "auld way."

The snow lay till the New Year was a week old, and when the thaw
came and the roads ran in icy streams, David took to his bed for
two days in utter exhaustion.  All through the storm he had been on
his legs, for there were sick folk and old folk in Woodilee who
would perish miserably if left alone.  The farm-towns could look
after themselves, but in the scattered cottages of the kirkton
there was no one to take command, and neighbourliness languished
when each household was preoccupied with its own cares.  Peter
Pennecuik, a ruling elder, whose gift of prayer had been commended
by Mr. Muirhead, had lost a tup and had his byre roof crushed in by
the drift, so he became a fatalist, holding that the Lord had
prepared a visitation which it would be impiety to resist, and sat
lugubriously by his fireside.  David's fingers itched for his ears.
From Amos Ritchie the blacksmith he got better assistance.  Amos
was a shaggy, black-bearded man of thirty-five, a great fiddler and
a mighty putter of the stone, whose godliness might have been
suspect but for his behaviour in the Bishops' War.  His wife was at
death's door all through the storm, but he nevertheless constituted
himself the minister's first lieutenant, and wrought valiantly in
the work of relief.  There were old women too chilled and frail to
kindle their fires in the morning and melt snow for water; there
were households so ill provided that they existed largely on
borrowed food; there were cots where the weather had broken roof or
wall.  Isobel in the manse kitchen was a busy woman, and her girdle
was never off the fire.  David had looked forward to the winter
snows as a season of peace, when he could sit indoors with his
books; instead he found himself on his feet for fourteen hours out
of the twenty-four, his hands and face chapped like a ploughman's,
and so weary at night that he fell off his chair with sleep while
Isobel fetched his supper.

Yet it was the storm which was David's true ordination to his
duties, for it brought him close to his people, not in high
sacramental things like death, but in their daily wrestling for
life.  He might visit their houses and catechize their families,
but these were formal occasions, with all on their best behaviour,
whereas in the intimate business of charity he saw them as they
were.

The new minister was young and he was ardent, and his duties were
still an adventure.  His Sabbath sermons were diligently meditated.
For his morning lecture he took the book of the prophet Amos,
which, as the work of a herdsman, seemed fitting for a country
parish.  His two weekly discourses dealt laboriously with the
fourfold state of man--his early state of innocence, his condition
after the Fall, his state under grace, his condition in eternity.
That winter David did not get beyond the state of innocence, and in
discoursing on it he exhausted his ingenuity in piecing texts
together from the Scriptures, and in such illustrations as he
believed would awaken his hearers' minds.  Profane learning openly
used would have been resented, but he contrived to bring in much
that did not belong to the divinity schools, and he escaped
criticism, it may be, because his Kirk Session did not understand
him.  His elders were noted theologians, and what was strange to
them, if it was weightily phrased, they took for theological
profundity.

At ten o'clock each Sabbath morning Robb the beadle tinkled the
first bell; at the second the congregation moved into the kirk, and
Peter Pennecuik, who acted as precentor, led the opening psalm,
reading each line before it was sung.  When Robb jerked the third
bell, David entered the pulpit and began with prayer.  At one
o'clock the people dispersed, those who came from a distance to
Lucky Weir's ale-house; and at two fell the second service, which
concluded at four with the coming of the dark.  The kirk, with its
earthen floor, was cold as a charnel-house, and the dimness of the
light tried even David's young eyes.  The people sat shivering on
their little stools, each with the frozen decorum and strained
attention which was their Sabbath ritual.  To the minister it
seemed often as if he were speaking to sheeted tombstones, he felt
as if his hearers were at an infinite distance from him, and only
on rare occasions, when some shining text of Scripture moved his
soul and he spoke simply and with emotion, did he feel any contact
with his flock.

But his sermons were approved.  Peter Pennecuik gave it as his
verdict that he was a "deep" preacher and sound in the fundamentals.
Others, remembering the thrill that sometimes came into his voice,
called him an "affectionate" preacher, and credited him with
"unction."  But there were many that longed for stronger fare,
something more marrowy and awful, pictures of the hell of torment
which awaited those who were not of the Elect.  He had the "sough,"
no doubt, but it was a gentle west wind, and not the stern
Euroclydon which should call sinners to repentance.  Their minister
was a man of God, but he was young; years might add weight to him
and give him the thunders of Sinai.

To David the Sabbath services were the least of his duties.  He had
come to Woodilee with his heart full of the mighty books which he
would write in the solitude of his upper chamber.  The chief was
that work on the prophet Isaiah which should be for all time a
repository of sacred learning, so that Sempill on Isaiah would be
quoted reverently, like Luther on the Galatians or Calvin on the
Romans.  In the autumn evenings he had sketched the lines of his
masterpiece, and before the great snow he had embarked on its
prolegomena.  But the storm made a breach in his studies.  He felt
himself called to more urgent duties, for he was a pastor of souls
before he was a scholar.  His visitations and catechizings among
his flock were his chief care, and he began to win a name for
diligence.  On nights when even a shepherd would have kept the
ingle side, David would arrive at a moorland cottage, and many a
time Isobel had to welcome in the small hours a dripping or frozen
master, thaw him by her kitchen fire, and feed him with hot ale and
bannocks, while he recounted his adventures.  He was strong and
buoyant, and he loved the life, which seemed to him to have the
discipline of a soldier.  His face high-coloured by weather, his
cheerful eyes, and his boyish voice and laugh were soon popular in
the length of the parish.  "He is a couthy lad," said the old
wives, "and for a man o' God he's terrible like a plain body."

Also he took charge of the children.  In Woodilee there was no
school or schoolmaster.  There were three hundred communicants, but
it was doubtful if more than a dozen could read a sentence or write
their names.  In the Kirk Session itself there were only three.  So
David started a school, which met thrice a week of a morning in the
manse kitchen.  He sent to Edinburgh for horn-books, and with them
and his big Bible taught his class their rudiments.  These were the
pleasantest hours of the day for master and children, and weekly
the gathering grew till there was not a child in the kirkton or in
the farm-towns of Mirehope and Chasehope that would have missed
them.  When they arrived, blue with cold and often breakfastless,
Isobel would give each a bowl of broth, and while the lesson
proceeded she would mend their ragged garments.  Indeed more than
one child emerged new clad, for the minister's second-best cloak
and an old pair of breeches were cut up by Isobel--expostulating
but not ill-pleased--for tattered little mortals.

David was more than a private almoner.  He and his Session had the
Poor Box to administer, the sole public means of relieving the
parish's needs.  Woodilee was better off than many places, in that
it possessed a mortification of a thousand pounds Scots, bequeathed
fifty years earlier by a certain Grizel Hawkshaw for the comfort of
the poor.  Also there was the weekly collection at the kirk
services, where placks and doits and bodles, and a variety of
debased coins, clinked in the plate at the kirk door, and there
were the fines levied by the Session on evil-doers.  In the winter
the task of almoner was easier, for there were few beggars on the
roads, and those that crossed the hills came as a rule only to die,
when the single expense was the use of the parish coffin.  Yet the
administration of the scanty funds was a difficult business, and it
led to David's first controversies with his Session.  Each elder
had his own favourites among the poor, and Chasehope and Mirehope
and Nether Fennan wrangled over every grant.  The minister, still
new to the place, for the most part held his peace, but now and
then, in cases which he knew of, he asserted his authority.  There
was a woman, none too well reputed, who lived at Chasehope-foot,
with a buxom black-eyed daughter, and whose house, though
lamentably dirty and ill guided, seemed to lack nothing.  When he
opposed Chasehope's demand that she should receive a benefaction as
a lone widow, he had a revelation of Chasehope's temper.  The white
face crimsoned, and the greenish eyes looked for a moment as ugly
as a snarling dog's.  "Worthy Mr. Macmichael . . ." he began, but
David cut him short.  "These moneys are for the relief of the
helpless poor," he said, "and they are scant enough at the best.  I
should think shame to waste a bodle except on a pitiful necessity.
To him or her that hath shall not be given, while I am the minister
of this parish."  Chasehope said nothing, and presently he mastered
his annoyance, but the farmer of Mirehope--Alexander Sprot was his
name--muttered something in an undertone to his neighbour, and
there was tension in the air till the laugh of the Woodilee miller
broke it.  This man, one Spotswood, reckoned the richest in the
parish and the closest, had a jolly laugh which belied his
reputation.  "Mr. Sempill's in the right, Chasehope," he cried.
"Jean o' the Chasehope-fit can manage fine wi' what her gudeman
left her.  We daurna be lovish wi' ither folks' siller."  "I am
overruled," said Chasehope, and spoke no more.



Little news came in those days to Woodilee.  In the open weather
before the storm the pack-horses of the carriers came as usual from
Edinburgh, and the drovers on the road to England brought word of
the doings in the capital.  Johnnie Dow, the packman, went his
rounds till the snow stopped him, but in January, when the weather
cleared, he broke his leg in the Tarrit Moss, and for six weeks
disappeared from the sight of men.  But Johnnie at his best brought
only the clash of the farm-towns and the news of Kirk Aller, and in
the dead of the winter there was no chance of a post, so that David
was buried as deep as if he had been in an isle of the Hebrides.
It was only at Presbytery meetings that he heard tidings of the
outer world, and these, passed through the minds of his excited
brethren, were all of monstrous portents.

The Presbytery meetings in Kirk Aller were at first to David a
welcome break in his quiet life.  The one in November lasted two
days, and he, as the youngest member, opened the exercises and
discoursed with acceptance on a Scripture passage.  The business
was dull, being for the most part remits from the kirk sessions of
contumacious heritors and local scandals and repairs to churches.
The sederunt over, the brethren adjourned to the Cross Keys Inn and
dined off better fare than they were accustomed to in their manses.
It was then that Mr. Muirhead in awful whispers told of news he had
had by special post from Edinburgh.  Malignancy had raised its head
again, this time in their own covenanted land.  Montrose, the
recusant, had made his way north when he was least expected, and
was now leading a host of wild Irish to the slaughter of the godly.
There had been battles fought, some said near Perth, others as far
off as Aberdeen, and the victory had not been to the righteous.
Hideous tales were told of these Irish, led by a left-handed
Macdonald--savage as Amalekites, blind zealots of Rome, burning and
slaughtering, and sparing neither sex nor age.  The trouble, no
doubt, would be short-lived, for Leven's men were marching from
England, but it betokened some backsliding in God's people.  The
Presbytery held a special meeting for prayer, when in lengthy
supplications the Almighty was besought to explain whether the sin
for which this disaster was the punishment lay with Parliament or
Assembly, army or people.

To David the tale was staggering.  Montrose was to him only a name,
the name of a great noble who had at first served the cause of
Christ and then betrayed it.  This Judas had not yet gone to his
account, was still permitted to trouble Israel, and now he had
crowned his misdeeds by leading savages against his own kindly
Scots.  Like all his nation he had a horror of the Irish, whose
barbarity had become a legend, and of Rome, whom he conceived as an
unsleeping Antichrist, given a lease of the world by God till the
cup of her abomination was full.  The news shook him out of his
political supineness, and for the moment made him as ardent a
Covenanter as Mr. Muirhead himself.  Then came the storm, when his
head was filled with other concerns, and it was not till February
that the Presbytery met again.  This time the rumours were still
darker.  That very morning Mr. Muirhead had had a post which spoke
of Montrose ravaging the lands of that light of the Gospel, Argyll--
of his fleeing north, and, at the moment when his doom seemed
assured, turning on the shore of a Highland sea-loch and scattering
the Covenant army.  It was the hour of peril, and the nation must
humble itself before the Lord.  A national fast had been decreed by
Parliament, and it was resolved to set apart a day in each parish
when some stout defender of the faith should call the people to
examination and repentance.  Mr. Proudfoot of Bold was one of the
chosen vessels, and it was agreed that he should take the sermon on
the fast-day in Woodilee in the first week of March.

But David was now in a different mood from that of November.  He
repressed with horror an unregenerate admiration for this Montrose,
who, it seemed, was still young, and with a handful of caterans had
laid an iron hand on the north.  He might be a fine soldier, but he
was beyond doubt a son of Belial.  The trouble with David was the
state of his own parish, compared with which the sorrows of Argyll
seemed dim and far away.

January, after the snows melted, had been mild and open, with the
burns running full and red, and the hills one vast plashing bog.
With Candlemas came a black frost, which lasted the whole of
February and the first half of March.  The worst of the winter
stringency was now approaching.  The cattle in the yards and the
sheep in the paddocks had become woefully lean, the meal in the
girnels was running low, and everybody in the parish, except one or
two of the farmers, had grown thin and pale-faced.  Sickness was
rife, and in one week the kirkyard saw six burials. . . .  It was
the season of births, too, as well as of deaths, and the howdie
[midwife] was never off the road.

Strange stories came to his ears.  One-half of the births were out
of lawful wedlock . . . and most of the children were still-born.
A young man is slow to awake to such a condition, and it was only
the miserable business of the stool of repentance which opened his
eyes.  Haggard girls occupied the stool and did penance for their
sin, but in only one case did the male paramour appear. . . .  He
found his Session in a strange mood, for instead of being eager to
enforce the law of the Kirk, they seemed to desire to hush up the
scandals, as if the thing was an epidemic visitation which might
spoil their own repute.  He interrogated them and got dull replies;
he lost his temper, and they were silent.  Where were the men who
had betrayed these wretched girls?  He repeated the question and
found only sullen faces.  One Sabbath he abandoned his ordinary
routine and preached on the abominations of the heathen with a
passion new to his hearers.  His discourse was appreciated, and he
was congratulated on it by Ephraim Caird; but there was no result,
no confession, such as he had hoped for, from stricken sinners, no
cracking of the wall of blank obstinate silence. . . .  The thing
was never out of his mind by day or night.  What was betokened by
so many infants born dead?  He felt himself surrounded by a mystery
of iniquity.

One night he spoke of it to Isobel, very shamefacedly, for it
seemed an awful topic for a woman, however old.  But Isobel was no
more communicative than the rest.  Even her honest eyes became shy
and secretive.  "Dinna you fash yoursel', sir," she said.  "The
Deil's thrang in this parochine, and ye canna expect to get the
upper hand o' him in sax months.  But ye'll be even wi' him yet,
Mr. Sempill, wi' your graund Gospel preachin'."  And then she added
that on which he pondered many times in the night watches.  "There
will aye be trouble at this time o' year so long as the folk tak'
the Wud at Beltane."

The fast-day came, and Mr. Proudfoot preached a marrowy sermon.
His subject was the everlasting fires of Hell, which awaited those
who set their hand against a covenanted Kirk, and he exhausted
himself in a minute description of the misery of an eternity of
torment.  "They shall be crowded," he said, "like bricks in a fiery
furnace.  O what a bed is there!  No feathers, but fire; no
friends, but furies; no ease, but fetters; no daylight, but
darkness; no clock to pass away the time, but endless eternity;
fire eternal that ever burns and never dies."  He excelled in his
conclusion.  "Oh, my friends," he cried, "I have given you but a
short touch of the torments of Hell.  Think of a barn or some other
great place filled up topfull with grains of corn; and think of a
bird coming every thousand years and fetching away one of those
grains of corn.  In time there might be an end of all and the barn
might be emptied, but the torments of Hell have no end.  Ten
thousand times ten millions of years doth not at all shorten the
miseries of the damned."

There was a hush like death in the crowded kirk.  A woman screamed
in hysterics and was carried out, and many sobbed.  At the close
the elders thronged around Mr. Proudfoot and thanked him for a
discourse so seasonable and inspired.  But David spoke no word, for
his heart had sickened.  What meant these thunders against public
sin when those who rejoiced in them were ready to condone a
flagrant private iniquity?  For a moment he felt that Montrose the
apostate, doing evil with clean steel and shot, was less repugnant
to God than his own Kirk Session.



The frost declined in mid-March, there was a fortnight of weeping
thaw and a week of bitter east winds, and then in a single night
came a south wind and spring blew up the glens.

Isobel chased the minister from his books.

"Awa' to the hill like a man, and rax [stretch] your legs.  Ye've
had a sair winter, and your face is like a dish-clout.  Awa' and
snowk up the caller air."

David went out to the moors, and on the summit of the Hill of Deer
had a prospect of the countryside, the contours sharp in the clear
April light, and colour stealing back after the grey of winter.
The Wood of Melanudrigill seemed to have crowded together again,
and to have regained its darkness, but there was as yet no mystery
in its shadows.  The hill itself was yellow like old velvet, but
green was mantling beside the brimming streams.  The birches were
still only a pale vapour, but there were buds on the saughs and the
hazels.  Remnants of old drifts lay behind the dykes, and on the
Lammerlaw there was a great field of snow, but the breeze blew soft
and the crying of curlews and plovers told of the spring.  Up on
Windyways and at the back of Reiverslaw the heather was burning,
and spirals of blue smoke rose to the pale skies.

The sight was a revelation to a man to whom spring had come
hitherto in the narrow streets of Edinburgh.  He had a fancy that
life was beating furiously under the brown earth, and that he was
in the presence of a miracle.  His youth, long frosted by winter,
seemed to return to him and his whole being to thaw.  Almost
shamefacedly he acknowledged an uplift of spirit.  The smoke from
the moorburn was like the smoke of sacrifice on ancient altars--
innocent sacrifice from kindly altars.

That night in his study he found that he could not bring his mind
to his commentary on the prophet Isaiah.  His thoughts ranged on
other things, and he would fain have opened his Virgil.  But, since
these evening hours were dedicate to theology, he compromised with
Clement of Alexandria, and read again the passage where that father
of the Church becomes a poet and strives to mingle the classic and
the Christian.--"This is the Mountain beloved of God, not a place
of tragedies like Cithron, but consecrate to the dramas of truth,
a mount of temperance shaded with the groves of purity.  And there
revel on it not the Mnads, sisters of Semele the thunderstruck,
initiate in the impure feast of flesh, but God's daughters, fair
Lambs who celebrate the holy rites of the Word, chanting soberly in
chorus."

In these days his sermons changed.  He no longer hammered subtle
chains of doctrine, but forsook his "ordinary," and preached to the
hearts of the people.  Woodilee was in turn mystified, impressed,
and disquieted.  One bright afternoon he discoursed on thankfulness
and the praise due to God.  "Praise Him," he cried, "if you have no
more, for this good day and sunshine to the lambs."

"Heard ye ever the like?" said Mirehope at the kirk door.  "What
concern has Jehovah wi' our lambin'?"

"He's an affectionate preacher," said Chasehope, "but he's no
Boanerges, like Proudfoot o' Bold."

The other agreed, and though the tone of the two men was regretful,
their eyes were content, as if they had no wish for a Boanerges in
Woodilee.



CHAPTER V

THE BLACK WOOD BY DAY


On the 22nd day of April the minister went for a walk on the Hill
of Deer.  He had heard news from Isobel which had awakened his
numbed memory.  All the long dark winter Woodilee had been severed
from the world, and David had also lived in the cage and had had no
thoughts beyond the parish.  Calidon and its people were as little
in his mind as if they had been on another planet.  But as spring
loosened the bonds word of the neighbourhood's doings was coming
in.

"Johnnie Dow's ben the house," Isobel had said as he sat at meat.
"He's come down the water frae Calidon, and it seems there's unco
changes there.  The laird is awa' to the wars again. . . .  Na,
Johnnie didna ken what airt he had ridden.  He gaed off ae mornin'
wi' his man Tam Purves, baith o' them on muckle horses, and that's
the last heard o' them.  It seems that the laird's gude-sister,
Mistress Saintserf frae Embro, cam' oot a fortnight syne to tak'
chairge o' Calidon and the young lassie--there's a lassie bides
there, ye maun ken, sir, though nane o' the Woodilee folk ever cast
een on her--and the puir body was like to be smoored [smothered] in
the Carnwath Moss.  Johnnie says she's an auld wumman, as straucht
as a wand and wi' an unco ill tongue in her heid.  She fleyed
Johnnie awa' frae the door when he was for daffin' wi' the serving
lasses."

It was of Calidon that David thought as he took the hill.  Nicholas
Hawkshaw, lame as he was, had gone back to the wars.  What wars?
Remembering the talk of that autumn night he feared that it could
not be a campaign of which a minister of the Kirk would approve.
Was it possible that he had gone to join Montrose in his evil work?
And the troopers and the groom?  Were they with Leven again under
the Covenant's banner, or were they perilling their souls with the
malignants?  The latter most likely, and to his surprise he felt no
desire to reprobate them.  Spring was loosening other bonds than
those of winter.

It was a bright warm day, which might have been borrowed from June,
and the bursting leaves were stirred by a wandering west wind.
David sat for a little on the crest of the hill, gazing at the high
summits, which, in the April light, were clear in every nook and
yet infinitely distant.  The great Herstane Craig had old
snowdrifts still in its ravines, and he had the fancy that it was
really built of marble which shone in places through the brown
husk.  The Green Dod did not now belie its name; above the screes
and heather of its flanks rose a cone of dazzling greenness.  The
upper Aller glen was filled with pure sunshine, the very
quintessence of light, and the sword-cut of the Rood was for once
free from gloom.  There was no gold in the landscape, for the
shallows, even when they caught the sun, were silver, the bent was
flushing into the palest green, the skies above were an infinity of
colourless light.  And yet the riot of spring was there.  David
felt it in his bones and in his heart.

The herd of Reiverslaw was busy with his late lambs.  The man,
Prentice by name, was a sour fellow whom an accident in childhood
had deprived of a leg.  In spite of his misfortune he could move
about on a single crutch at a good pace, and had a voice and a
tongue which the parish feared.  He was a noted professor, with an
uncanny gift of prayer, and his by-names in Woodilee were "Hirplin'
Rab" and the "One Leggit Prophet."  But to-day even Prentice seemed
mellowed by the spring.  He gave David a friendly good-day.  "The
voice o' the turtle is heard on the yirth," he announced, and as he
hobbled over a patch of old moorburn, sending up clouds of grey
dust, Prentice too became a figure of pastoral.

David had rarely felt a more benignant mood.  The grimness of
winter had gone clean out of his mind, and he had entered on a
large and gracious world.  He walked slowly like an epicure,
drinking in the quintessential air of the hills, marking the strong
blue swirl of the burns, the fresh green of the mosses, the buds on
the hawthorns, the flash of the water-ouzels in the spray of the
little falls.  Curlews and peewits filled the moor with their
crying, and as he began to descend into the Rood glen a lark--the
first he had heard--rose to heaven with a flood of song.

His eyes had been so engaged with the foreground that he had not
looked towards Melanudrigill.  Now he saw it, dark and massy, the
only opaque thing in a translucent world.  But there was nothing
oppressive in its shadows, for oppression could not exist in a
scene so full of air and light and song.  For a moment he had a
mind to go boldly into its coverts by way of Reiverslaw and make
for the lower course of the Woodilee burn.  But the sight of the
wild wood in the Rood glen detained him.  It was a day not for the
pines, but for the hazels and birches, where in open glades a man
would have always a view of the hills and the sky.  So he slanted
to his right through the open coppice, meaning to reach the valley
floor near the foot of the path which led to the Greenshiel.

The coppice was thicker than he had imagined.  This was no hillside
scrub, but a forest, a greenwood, with its own glades and hollows,
its own miniature glens and streams.  He was in the midst of small
birds who made a cheerful twittering from the greening boughs,
cushats too were busy, and the thickets were full of friendly
beasts.  He saw the russet back of a deer as it broke cover, and
the tawny streak of a hill-fox, and there was a perpetual scurrying
of rabbits.  Above all there was a glory of primroses.  The pale
blossoms starred the glades and the sides of the dells, clung to
tree-roots, and climbed into crannies of the grey whinstone rock.
So thick they were, that their paleness became golden, the first
strong colour he had seen that day.  David was young and his heart
was light, so he gathered a great clump of blooms for his manse
table, and set a bouquet in his coat and another in his bonnet.
These latter would have to go before he reached the highway, or the
parish would think that its minister had gone daft.  But here in
the secret greenwood he could forget decorum and bedeck himself
like a child.

Presently he had forgotten the route he had planned.  He found
himself in a shallow glade which ran to the left and away from the
Greenshiel, and down which leaped a burn so entrancing in its
madcap grace that he could not choose but follow it.  Memory
returned to him; this must be the burn which descended near the
mill at Roodfoot; he knew well its lower course, for he had often
guddled trout in its pools, but he had never explored its upper
waters.  Now he felt the excitement of a discoverer. . . .  The
ravine narrowed to a cleft where the stream fell in a white spout
into a cauldron.  David made the passage by slithering down the
adjacent rocks and emerged wet to the knees.  He was as amused as a
boy playing truant from school, and when he found a water-ouzel's
nest in the notch of a tree-root he felt that he had profit of
his truancy.  There came a more level stretch, which was a glory
of primroses and wood-anemones, then another linn, and then a cup
of turf rimmed with hazels, where the water twined in placid
shallows. . . .  He looked up and saw on the opposite bank a
regiment of dark pines.

He had come to the edge of Melanudrigill.  The trees rose like a
cloud above him, and after the open coppice of birch and hazel he
seemed to be looking into deep water where things were seen darkly
as through a dull glass.  There were glades which ran into shadows,
and fantastic rocks, and mounds of dead bracken which looked like
tombs.  Yet the place fascinated him.  It, too, was under the spell
of Spring, and he wondered how Spring walked in its recesses.  He
leapt the stream and scrambled up the bank with an odd feeling of
expectation.  He was called to adventure on this day of days.

The place was not dark, but dim and very green.  The ancient pines
grew more sparsely than he had imagined, and beneath them were
masses of sprouting ferns--primroses too, and violets, which he had
not found among the hazels.  A scent of rooty dampness was about,
of fresh-turned earth, and welling fountains.  In every tree-root
wood-sorrel clustered.  But there were no small birds, only large
things like cushats and hawks, which made a movement in the high
branches.  A little farther and he was in a glade, far more of a
glade than the clearings in the hazels, for it was sharply defined
by the walls of shade.

He stood and gazed, stuck silent by its beauty.  Here in truth was
a dancing-floor for wood nymphs, a playground for the Good Folk.
It seemed strange that the place should be untenanted. . . .  There
was a rustling in the covert, and his heart beat.  He was no longer
the adventurous boy, but a young man with a fancy fed by knowledge.
He felt that the glade was aware and not empty.  Light feet had
lately brushed its sward. . . .  There was a rustling again, and a
gleam of colour.  He stood poised like a runner, his blood
throbbing in a sudden rapture.

There was the gleam again and the rustle.  He thought that at the
far end of the glade behind the red bracken he saw a figure.  In
two steps he was certain.  A green gown fluttered, and at his third
step broke cover.  He saw the form of a girl--nymph, fairy, or
mortal, he knew not which.  He was no more the minister of
Woodilee, but eternal wandering youth, and he gave chase.

The green gown wavered for a moment between two gnarled pines and
then was lost in the dead fern.  He saw it again in the cleft of a
tiny rivulet which came down from a pile of rocks, but he missed it
as he scrambled up the steep.  It seemed that the gown played
tricks with him and led him on, for, as he checked at fault, he had
a glimpse of it lower down, where an aisle in the trees gave a view
of the bald top of a mountain.  David was young and active, but the
gown was swifter than he, for as he went down the slope in great
leaps it vanished into the dusk of the pines.  He had it again,
lost it, found it suddenly high above him--always a glimmer of
green with but a hint of a girl's form behind it. . . .  David
became wary.  Nymph or human, it should not beat him at this sport
of hide-and-seek.  There was a line of low cliffs above, up which
it could not go unless it took wings.  David kept the lower ground,
determined that he would drive that which he followed towards the
cliff line.  He succeeded, for after twice trying to break away,
the gown fluttered into a tiny ravine, with thick scrub on both
sides and the rock wall at the top.  As David panted upward he saw
in a mossy place below the crags a breathless girl trying to master
her tumbling tresses.

He stopped short in a deep embarrassment.  He had been pursuing a
fairy, and had found a mortal--a mortal who looked down on him with
a flushed face and angry eyes.  He was furiously hot, and the pace
and his amazement bereft him of speech.  It was she who spoke
first.

"What does the minister of Woodilee in the Wood--and bedecked with
primroses?"

The voice was familiar, and as he brushed the sweat from his eyes
the face too awoke recollection.  She was far cooler than he, but
her cheeks were flushed, and he had seen before those dark mirthful
eyes.  Mirthful they were, for her anger seemed to have gone, and
she was looking down on him with a shy amusement.  She had
recognized him too, and had spoken his name. . . .  He had it.  It
was the girl who had curtsied to Nicholas Hawkshaw's guests in the
candle-light at Calidon.  His abashment was increased.

"Madam," he stammered, "Madam, I thought you were a fairy."

She laughed out loud with the abandonment of childhood.  "A fairy!
And, pray, sir, is it part of the duties of a gospel minister to
pursue fairies in the woods?"

"I am shamed," he cried.  "You do well to upbraid me.  But on this
spring day I had forgot my sacred calling and dreamed I was a boy
once more."

"I do not upbraid you.  Indeed I am glad that a minister can still
be a boy.  But folks do not come here, and I thought the wood my
own, so when I saw you stumbling among the fern I had a notion to
play a trick on you, and frighten you, as I have frightened
intruders before.  I thought you would run away.  But you were too
bold for me, and now you have discovered my secret.  This wood is
my playground, where I can pick flowers and sing ballads and be
happy with birds and beasts. . . .  You were a man before you were
a minister.  What is your name?"

"They call me David Sempill.  I lived as a child at the Mill of the
Roodfoot."

"Then you have seisin of this land.  You too have played in the
Wood?"

"Nay, madam, the Wood is strange to me.  I have but ridden through
it, and till to-day I have had some dread of it.  This Melanudrigill
is ill reputed."

"Old wives' havers!  It is a blessed and innocent place.  But I do
not like that name--Melanudrigill.  There is dark magic there.
Call it the Wood, and you will love it as I do. . . .  See, I am
coming down.  Make room, please, and then I will take you to
Paradise.  You do not know Paradise?  It is the shrine of this
grove, and none but me can find the road."

This was not the stately lady in the gown of yellow satin and blue
velvet who had abashed him that night in Calidon tower.  It was a
slim laughing girl in green who presently stood beside him, her
feet in stout country shoes, her hair bound only by a silk
fillet and still unruly from the chase.  He suddenly lost his
embarrassment.  His reason told him that this was Katrine Yester of
Calidon, a daughter of a proud and contumacious house that was
looked askance at by the godly, a woman, a beauty--commodities of
which he knew nothing.  But his reason was blinded, and he saw only
a girl on a spring holiday.

She led him down the hill, and as she went she chattered gaily,
like a solitary child who has found a comrade.

"I saw you before you saw me, and I hoped you would follow when I
ran away.  I liked you that night at Calidon.  They told me that
ministers were all sour-faced and old, but you looked kind.  And
you are merry, too, I think--not sad, like most people in
Scotland."

"You have not been long in this land?" he asked.

"Since June of last year.  This is my first Scottish spring, and it
is different from France and England.  In those lands summer comes
with a rush on winter's heels, but here there is a long preparation,
and flowers steal very softly back to the world.  I have lived
mostly in France since my father died."

"That is why your speech is so strange to my ears."

"And yours to mine," she retorted.  "But Aunt Grizel is teaching me
to be a good Scotswoman.  I am made to spin till my arms are weary,
and to make horrid brews of herbs, and to cook your strange dishes.
'Kaatrine, ye daft quean, what for maun ye fill the hoose wi'
floorish and nesty green busses?  D'ye think we're nowt and the
auld tower o' Calidon a byre?'  That is Aunt Grizel.  But she is
like a good dog and barks but does not bite, though the serving-
maids walk in terror.  I play with her at the cartes, and she tells
me tales, but not such good ones as Uncle Nick's.  Heigho!  I wish
the wars were over and he were home again. . . .  Now, sir, what do
you think of this?  It is the gate of Paradise."

She had led him into a part of the wood where the pines ceased and
a green cleft was lined with bursting hazels and rowans and the
tassels of birch.  The place was rather hill than woodland, for the
turf was as fine as on a mountain-side, and in the centre a
bubbling spring sent out a rivulet, which twined among the flowers
till it dropped in a long cascade to a lower shelf.  Primroses,
violets, and anemones made it as bright as a garden.

"I call this Paradise," she said, "because it is hard for mortals
to find.  You would not guess it was here till you stumbled on it."

"It's away from the pines," he said.

She nodded her head.  "I love the dark trees well enough, and on a
day like this I am happy among them.  But they are moody things,
and when there is no sun and the wind blows they make me sad.  Here
I am gay in any weather, for it is a kindly place.  Confess, sir,
that I have chosen well."

"You have chosen well.  It is what the poet wrote of--Deus nobis
hc otia fecit."

"La, la!  That is Latin, and I am not learned.  But I can quote my
own poets."  And in a voice like a bird's she trilled a stanza of
which David comprehended no more than that it was a song of Spring,
and that it was Flora the goddess herself who sang it.


     "O fontaine Bellerie,
      Belle fontaine chrie
      De nos Nymphes, quand ton eau
      Les cache au creux de ta source,
      Fuyantes le Satyreau
      Qui les pourchasse  la course
      Jusqu'au bord de ton ruisseau,
      Tu es la Nymphe ternelle
      De ma terre paternelle--"


Some strange and cataclysmic transformation was going on in David's
mind.  He realized that a film had cleared from his sight, and that
he was looking with new eyes.  This dancing creature had unlocked a
door for him--whether for good or ill he knew not, and did not
care.  He wanted the world to stand still and the scene to remain
fixed for ever--the spring glade and the dark-haired girl singing
among the primroses.  He had the courage now to call her by her
name.

"You have a voice like a linnet, Mistress Katrine.  Can you sing
none of our country songs?"

"I am learning them from the serving-maids.  I know 'The Ewebuchts'
and 'The Yellow-hair'd Laddie' and--ah, this is the one for
Paradise," and she sang:


     "The King's young dochter was sitting in her window,
      Sewing at her silken seam;
      She lookt out o' a bow-window,
      And she saw the leaves growing green,
      My luve;
      And she saw the leaves growing green."


"But Jean, the goose-girl who taught it me, remembered just the one
verse.  I wish I was a poet to make others."

Above the well was one of those circles of green mounds which
country people call fairy-rings.  The girl seated herself in the
centre and began to make posies of the flowers she had picked.
David lay on the turf at her feet, watching the quick movement of
her hands, his garlanded hat removed and the temperate sun warming
his body.  Never had he felt so bathed in happy peace.

The pixie seated above him spared time from her flowers to glance
down at him, and found him regarding her with abstracted eyes.  For
he was trying to fit this bright creature into his scheme of
things.  Did the world of the two of them touch nowhere save in
this woodland?

"Your uncle is the chief heritor in Woodilee parish," he said, "but
you do not come to the kirk."

"I was there no longer back than last Sunday--" she said.

"Sabbath," he corrected.

"Sabbath, if you will have it so.  Calidon is in Cauldshaw parish,
and it was to Cauldshaw kirk we went.  Four weary miles of jogging
on a plough-horse, I riding pillion to Aunt Grizel.  Before that
the drifts were too deep to take the road. . . .  I have heard many
a sermon from Mr. Fordyce."

"He is a good man."

"He is a dull man.  Such a preachment on dismal texts.  'Seventhly,
my brethren, and in parenthesis--'" she mimicked.  "But he is
beyond doubt good, and Aunt Grizel says she has benefited from his
words, and would fain repay him by healing his disorders.  He has
many bodily disorders, the poor man, and Aunt Grizel loves sermons
much, but her simples more."

"You do not love sermons?"

She made a mouth.

"I do not think I follow them.  You are learned theologians, you of
Scotland, and I am still at the horn-book.  But some day I will
come to hear you, for YOUR sermons I think I might understand."

"I could not preach to you," he said.

"And wherefore, sir?  Are your discourses only for wrinkled carls
and old rudas wives?  Is there no place in your kirk for a girl?"

"You are not of our people.  The seed can be sown only in a field
prepared."

"But that is heresy.  Are not all souls alike?"

"True.  But the voice of the preacher is heard only by open ears.
I think you are too happy in your youth, mistress, for my
solemnities."

"You do me injustice," she said, and her face was grave.  "I am
young, and I think I have a cheerful heart, for I can exult in a
spring morning, and I cannot be very long sad.  But I have had
sorrows--a father slain in the wars, a mother dead of grieving, a
bundling about among kinsfolk who were not all gracious.  I have
often had sore need of comfort, sir."

"You have found it--where?"

"In the resolve never to be a faintheart.  That is my creed, though
I fail often in the practice."

To an ear accustomed to a formal piety the confession seemed almost
a blasphemy.  He shook a disapproving head.

"That is but a cold pagan philosophy," he said.

"Yet I learned it from a sermon, and that little more than a year
back."

"Where was it preached?"

"In England, and in no kirk, but at the King's Court."

"Was it by Mr. Henderson?"

"It was by a Presbyterian--but he was no minister.  Listen, and I
will tell you the story.  In March of last year I was taken to
Oxford by my lady Grevel, and was presented by her to the Queen,
and her Majesty deigned to approve of me, so that I became a maid-
of-honour, and was lodged beside her in Merton College.  There all
day long was a coming and going of great men.  There I saw"--she
counted on her fingers--"his grace of Hamilton--him I did not like--
and my lord of Nithsdale, and my lord of Aboyne, and my lord
Ogilvy, and that very grave person Sir Edward Hyde, and my lord
Digby, and the wise Mr. Endymion Porter.  And all day long there
were distracted counsels, and the King's servants plotting in side-
chambers, and treason whispered, and nowhere a clear vision or a
brave heart.  Then there came among us a young man, who spoke
simply.  'If the King's cause go down in England,' he said, 'it may
be saved in Scotland.'  When they asked him what he proposed, he
said--'To raise the North for his Majesty.'  When they asked him by
what means, he said--'By my own resolution.'  All doubted and many
laughed, but that young man was not discouraged.  'The arm of the
Lord is not shortened,' he said, 'and they who trust in Him will
not be dismayed. . . .'  That was the sermon he preached, and there
was silence among the doubters.  Then said Mr. Porter:  'There is a
certain faith that moves mountains, and a certain spirit which may
win against all odds.  My voice is for the venture!' . . .  And
then the Queen, my mistress, kissed the young man, and the King
made him his lieutenant-general. . . .  I watched him ride out of
the city two days later, attended by but one servant, on his
mission to conquer Scotland, and I flung him a nosegay of early
primroses.  He caught it and set it in his breast, and he waved his
hand to me as he passed through the north gate."

"Who was this hero?" David asked eagerly, for the tale had fired
him.

The girl's face was flushed and her eyes glistened.

"That was a year ago," she went on.  "To-day he has done his
purpose.  He has won Scotland for the King."

David gasped.

"Montrose the malignant!" he cried.

"He is as good a Presbyterian as you, sir," she replied gently.
"Do not call him malignant.  He made his way north through his
enemies as if God had sent His angel to guide him.  And he is born
to lead men to triumph.  Did you not feel the compulsion of his
greatness?"

"I?" David stammered.

"They told me that you had spoken with him, and that he liked you
well.  Yon groom at Calidon was the Lord Marquis."



CHAPTER VI

THE BLACK WOOD BY NIGHT


Word came of a great revival in the parish of Bold.  Men called it
a "Work," and spoke of it in hushed voices, attributing it to the
zeal and gifts of Mr. Ebenezer Proudfoot, the minister.  For, after
much preaching on fast-days in the shire, Mr. Ebenezer had fallen
into a rapture and had seen visions, and spoken with strange
voices.  The terror of the unknown fell upon his people, fasting
and prayer became the chief business of the parish, and the most
careless were transformed into penitents.  For a season there were
no shortcomings in Bold; penny-bridals and fiddling and roystering
at the change-houses were forgotten; even swearing and tippling
were forsworn; the Sabbath was more strictly observed than by
Israel in the Wilderness.  To crown the Work, a great field-
preaching was ordained, when thousands assembled on Bold Moor and
the sacrament was dispensed among scenes of wild emotion.  In Bold
there was a lonely field of thistles, known as Guidman's Croft,
which had been held to be dedicate to the Evil One.  The oxen of
all the parish were yoked, and in an hour or two it was ploughed up
and sown with bear for the use of the poor, as at once a
thankoffering and a renunciation.

People in Woodilee talked much of the Work in Bold, and the Session
sighed for a like experience.  "Would but the wind blow frae that
airt on our frostit lands!" was the aspiration of Peter Pennecuik.
But David had no ears for these things, for he was engrossed with
the conflict in his own soul.

Ever since that afternoon in Paradise he had walked like a man half
asleep, his eyes turning inward.  His first exhilaration had been
succeeded by a black darkness of doubt.  He had adventured into the
Wood and found magic there, and the spell was tugging at his
heartstrings. . . .  Was the thing of Heaven or of Hell? . . .
Sometimes, when he remembered the girl's innocence and ardour, he
thought of her as an angel.  Surely no sin could dwell in so bright
a presence. . . .  But he remembered, too, how lightly she had held
the things of the Kirk, how indeed she was vowed to the world
against which the Kirk made war.  Was she not a daughter of Heth, a
fair Moabitish woman, with no part in the commonwealth of Israel?
Her beauty was of the flesh, her graces were not those of the
redeemed.  And always came the conviction that nevertheless she had
stolen his heart.  "Will I too be unregenerate?" he asked himself
with terror.

The more he looked into his soul the more he was perplexed.  He
thought of the groom at Calidon, to whom had gone out from him a
spark of such affection as no other had inspired.  That face was
little out of his memory, and he longed to look on it again as a
lover longs for his mistress. . . .  But the man was Montrose the
recreant, who was even now troubling God's people, and who had been
solemnly excommunicated by the very Kirk he was vowed to serve. . . .
And yet, recreant or no, the man believed in God and had
covenanted himself with the Almighty. . . .  What were God's
purposes, and who were God's people?  Where in all the round earth
should he find a solution of his doubts?

The study, now warm in the pleasant spring gloamings, saw no longer
the preparation of the great work on Isaiah.  It had become a
closet for prayer.  David cast his perplexities on the Lord, and
waited feverishly for a sign.  But no sign came.  A horde of texts
about Canaanitish garments and idol worship crowded into his mind,
but he refused their application.  A young man's face, a girl's
eyes and voice, made folly of such easy formulas. . . .  Yet there
were moments when in sheer torment of soul David was minded to
embrace them--to renounce what had charmed him as the Devil's
temptation, and steel his heart against its glamour.

One day he rode over to Cauldshaw to see Mr. Fordyce.  He was in
the mood for confession, but he found little encouragement.  Mr.
James was sick of a spring fever, and though he was on his feet he
had been better in bed, for his teeth chattered and his hand
trembled.

They spoke of the household at Calidon.  "Mistress Saintserf has
beyond doubt her interest in Christ," said the minister of
Cauldshaw.  "When I have gone to Calidon for the catechizing I have
found her quick to apprehend the doctrines of the faith, and her
life is in all respects an ensample, save that she is something of
a libertine with her tongue.  But the lassie--she's but a young
thing, and has sojourned long in popish and prelatical lands.  Yet
I detect glimmerings of grace, Mr. David, and she has a heart that
may well be attuned to God's work.  My wife pines for the sight of
her like a sick man for the morning.  Maybe I fail in my duty
towards her, for she is lamentably ignorant, but I cannot find it
in me to be harsh to so gracious a bairn."

David returned with his purpose unfulfilled, but a certain comfort
in his soul.  He would rather have Mr. Fordyce's judgment than that
of the Boanerges of Bold or the sleek minister of Kirk Aller.  His
doubts were not resolved, but the very uncertainty gave him ease.
He was not yet called to renunciation, and having reached this
conclusion, he could let the memory of Paradise sweep back into his
mind in a delightful flood.

Yet youth cannot be happy in indecision.  David longed for some
duty which would absorb the strong life that was in him.  Why, oh
why was he not a soldier?  He turned to his parish, and tried to
engross himself in its cares.  It may have been that his perception
was sharpened by his own mental conflicts, but he seemed to detect
a strangeness in Woodilee.

It had been a fine spring, with a dry seed-bed, and the sowing of
crops and the lambing had passed off well.  The lean cattle had
staggered out of byres and closes to the young grass, and their
ribs were now covered again.  Up on the hills lambs no longer
tottered on weak legs.  There was more food in the place, for there
had been feasts of braxy mutton, and the hens were laying again,
and there was milk in the cogies.  The faces of the people had lost
their winter strain; the girls had washed theirs, and fresh cheeks
and bright eyes were to be seen on the roads.  Woodilee had revived
with the spring, but David as he went among the folk saw more than
an increase in bodily well-being. . . .  There was a queer
undercurrent of excitement--or was it expectation?--and the thing
was secret.

Every one did not share this.  There seemed to be an inner circle
in the parish which was linked together by some private bond.  He
began to guess at its membership by the eyes.  Some looked him
frankly in the face, and these were not always the best reputed.
Amos Ritchie, the blacksmith, for instance--he was a profane
swearer, and was sometimes overtaken in drink--and the farmer of
Reiverslaw had, in addition to the latter failing, a violent
temper, which made him feared and hated.  Yet these two faced him
like free men.  But there were others, whose speech was often the
most devout, who seemed to have shutters drawn over their eyes and
to move stealthily on tiptoe.

Woodilee was amazingly well-conducted, and the Poor Box received
the scantiest revenue in penalties.  Apart from the lawless births
in the winter, there were few apparent backslidings.  David rarely
met young lads and lasses at their hoydenish courtings in the
gloamings.  Oaths were never heard, and if there was drunkenness it
was done in secret.  Not often was a Sabbath-breaker before the
Session, and there were no fines for slack attendance at the kirk.
But as David watched the people thronging to service on the
Sabbath, the girls in their clean linen, walking barefoot and only
putting on shoes at the kirkyard gate, the men in decent homespun
and broad bonnets, the old wives in their white mutches--as he
looked down from the pulpit on the shoulders bent with toil, the
heavy features hardened to a stiff decorum, the eyes fixed dully on
his face--he had the sense that he was looking on masks.  The real
life of Woodilee was shut to him.  "Ye are my people," he told
himself bitterly, "and I know ye not."

This was not true of all.  He knew the children, and there were
certain of the older men and women in the parish who had given him
their friendship.  Peter Pennecuik, his principal elder and
session-clerk, he felt that he knew to the bottom--what little
there was to know, for the man was a sanctimonious egotist.  With
Amos Ritchie and Reiverslaw, too, he could stand as man with
man. . . .  But with many of the others he fenced as with aliens;
the farmers, for example, Chasehope and Mirehope and Nether Fennan,
and Spotswood the miller, and various elderly herds and hinds, and
the wives of them.  Above all, he was no nearer the youth of the
parish than when first he came.  The slouching hobbledehoy lads, the
girls, some comely and high-coloured, some waxen white--they were
civil and decent, but impenetrable.  There were moments when he
found himself looking of a Sabbath at his sober respectable folk as
a hostile body, who watched him furtively lest he should learn too
much of them. . . .  Woodilee had an ill name in the shire, Mr.
Fordyce had told him the first day in the manse.  For what?  What
was the life from which he was so resolutely barred--he, their
minister, who should know every secret of their souls?  What was
behind those shuttered eyes?  Was it fear?  He thought that there
might be fear in it, but that more than fear it was a wild and
sinister expectation.

On the last day of April he noted that Isobel was ill at ease.
"Ye'll be for a daunder, sir," she said after the midday meal.
"See and be hame in gude time for your supper--I've a rale guid
yowe-milk kebbuck [cheese] for ye, and a new bakin' o' cakes--and
I'll hae the can'les lichtit in your chamber for you to get to your
books."

He smiled at his housekeeper.  "Why this carefulness?" he said.

She laughed uneasily.  "Naething by ordinar.  But this is the day
they ca' the Rood-Mass and the morn is the Beltane, and it behoves
a' decent bodies to be indoors at the darkenin' on Beltane's Eve.
My faither was a bauld man, but he wadna have stirred a fit over
his ain doorstep on the night o' Rood-Mass for a king's ransom.
There's anither Beltane on the aucht day of May, and till that's by
we maun walk eidently."

"Old wives' tales," he said.

"But they're nane auld wives' tales.  They're the tales o' wise men
and bauld men."

"I thought of walking in the Wood."

"Mercy on us!" she cried.  "Ye'll no gang near the Wud.  No on this
day o' a' days.  It's fou' o' bogles."

Her insistence vexed him, and he spoke to her sharply.  The heavy
preoccupation of his mind had put him out of patience with folly.
"Woman," he cried, "what concern has a servant of God with these
heathen fables?  Think shame to repeat such folly."

But Isobel was not convinced.  She retired in dudgeon to her
kitchen, and watched his movements till he left the house as a
mother watches a defiant child.  "Ye'll be hame in guid time?" she
begged.

"I will be home when I choose," he said, and to show his
independence he put some cheese and bannocks in his pockets.

The afternoon was warm and bright, with a thin haze on the highest
hills.  Spring had now fairly come; the yews in the kirkyard were
russet with young shoots, the blossom was breaking on the hawthorn,
and hazel and oak and ash were in leaf.  His spirit was too laden
to be sensible of the sweet influences of sky and moorland as on
the walk which had first taken him to Paradise.  But there was in
him what had been lacking before--excitement, for he had tasted of
magic and was in the constant expectation of finding it again.
The land was not as it had once been, for it held somewhere
enchantments--a girl's face and a girl's voice.  From the summit of
the Hill of Deer he looked towards Calidon hidden in the fold of
the Rood hills.  Was she there in the stone tower, or among the
meadows whose green showed in the turn of the glen?  Or was she in
her old playground of the Wood?

He had resolved not to go near the place, so he set himself to walk
in the opposite direction along the ridge of hill which made the
northern wall of the Rood valley.  As he strode over the short turf
and scrambled through the patches of peat-bog his spirits rose.  It
was hard not to be light-hearted in that world of essential airs
and fresh odours and nesting birds.  Presently he was in view of
Calidon tower, and then he was past it, and the Rood below him was
creeping nearer to his level as its glen lifted towards its source.
He strode along till he felt the sedentary humours leave his body
and his limbs acquire the lightness which is the reward of the hill
walker.  He seemed, too, to gain a lightness of soul and a
clearness of eye.  In a world which God had made so fair and clean,
there could be no sin in anything that was also fair and innocent.

The sun had set beyond Herstane Craig before he turned his steps.
Now from the hilltops he had Melanudrigill before him, a distant
shadow in the trough of the valley.  Since that afternoon in
Paradise awe of the Wood had left him.  He had been among its pines
and had found Katrine there.  He watched the cloud of trees,
growing nearer at each step, as earlier that day he had watched the
environs of Calidon.  It was her haunt; haply she might now be
there, singing in the scented twilight?

When he stood above Reiverslaw the dusk was purple about him, and
the moon, almost at her full, was climbing the sky.  He longed to
see how Paradise looked in this elfin light, for he had a
premonition that the girl might have lingered there late and that
he would meet her.  There was no duty to take him home--nothing but
Isobel's silly fables.  But in deference to Isobel he took the
omens.  He sent his staff twirling into the air.  If it fell with
the crook towards him, he would go home.  The thing lighted in a
heather bush with the crook at the far end.  So he plunged downhill
among the hazels, making for the glade which slanted eastward
towards the deserted mill.

He found it, and it was very dark in that narrow place.  There was
no light to see the flowers by, and there was no colour in it, only
a dim purple gloom and the white of the falling stream, for the
moon was still too low in the heavens to reach it.

In time he came to the high bank where the pines began.  He was
looking for Paradise, but he could not find it.  It was not among
the pines, he remembered, but among the oaks and hazels, but he had
gone to it through the pines, led by a flitting girl. . . .  He
found the point where he had entered the darker Wood, and resolved
to try to retrace his former tracks.

The place was less murky than he had expected, for the moon was
now well up the sky, so that every glade was a patch of white
light. . . .  This surely was the open space where he had first
caught the glimmer of a green gown. . . .  There were the rocks
where she had stood at bay. . . .  She had led him down the hill and
then at a slant--but was it to right or left?  Right, he thought,
and plunged through a wilderness of fern.  There had been briars,
too, and this was surely the place where a vast uprooted trunk had
forced them to make a detour.

Then he found a little stream which he fancied might be the outflow
of the Paradise well.  So he turned up hill again, and came into a
jungle of scrub and boulder.  There was in most places a dim light
to move by, but a dim light in a broken wood is apt to confuse the
mind.  David had soon lost all sense of direction, save that of the
upward and downward slopes.  He did not know east or west, and he
did not stop to think, for he was beginning to be mesmerized by the
hour and the scene.  Dew was in the air and an overpowering
sweetness of fern and pine and mosses, and through the aisles of
the high trees came a shimmer of palest gold, and in the open
spaces the moon rode in the dusky blue heavens--not the mild moon
of April, but a fiery conquering goddess, driving her chariot among
trampled stars.

It was clear to him that he would not find Paradise except by happy
chance, since he was utterly out of his bearings.  But he was
content to be lost, for the whole place was Paradise.  Never before
had he felt so strong a natural magic.  This woodland, which he had
once shunned, had become a holy place, lit with heavenly lights and
hallowed by some primordial peace.  He had forgotten about the
girl, forgotten his scruples.  In that hour he had acquired a mood
at once serene and gay: he had the light-heartedness of a boy and
the ease of a wise philosopher; his body seemed as light as air,
and, though he had already walked some twenty miles, he felt as if
he had just risen from his bed.  But there was no exuberance in
him, and he had not the impulse to sing which usually attended his
seasons of high spirits. . . .  The silence struck upon him as
something at once miraculous and just.  There was not a sound in
the Wood--not the lightest whisper of wind, though there had been a
breeze on the hilltops at sundown--not the cry of a single bird--
not a rustle in the undergrowth.  The place was dumb--not dead, but
sleeping.

Suddenly he came into a broad glade over which the moonshine flowed
like a tide.  It was all of soft mossy green, without pebble or
bush to break its carpet, and in the centre stood a thing like an
altar.

At first he thought it was only a boulder dropped from the hill.
But as he neared it he saw that it was human handiwork.  Masons
centuries ago had wrought on it, for it was roughly squared, and
firmly founded on a pediment.  Weather had battered it, and one
corner of the top had been broken by some old storm, but it still
stood foursquare to the seasons.  One side was very clear in the
moon, and on it David thought he could detect a half-obliterated
legend.  He knelt down, and though the lower part was obscured
beyond hope, the upper letters stood out plain.  I. O. M.--he read:
"Jovi Optimo Maximo."  This uncouth thing had once been an altar.

He tiptoed away from it with a sudden sense of awe.  Others had
known this wood--mailed Romans clanking up the long roads from the
south, white-robed priests who had once sacrificed here to their
dead gods.  He was scholar enough to feel the magic of this sudden
window opened into the past.  But there was that in the discovery
which disquieted as well as charmed him.  The mysteries of the
heathen had been here, and he felt the simplicity of the woodland
violated and its peace ravished.  Once there had been wild tongues
in the air, and he almost seemed to hear their echo.

He hurried off into the dark undergrowth. . . .  But now his mood
had changed.  He felt fatigue, his eyes were drowsy, and he thought
of the anxious Isobel sitting up for him.  He realized that this
was the night of Rood-Mass--pagan and papistical folly, but his
reason could not altogether curb his fancy.  The old folk said--
folly, no doubt, but still--He had an overpowering desire to be
safe in his bed at the manse.  He would retrace his steps and
strike the road from Reiverslaw.  That would mean going west, and
after a moment's puzzling he started to run in what he thought the
right direction.

The Wood, or his own mind, had changed.  The moonlight was no
longer gracious and kind, but like the dead-fires which the old
folk said burned in the kirkyard.  Confusion on the old folk, for
their tales were making him a bairn again! . . .  But what now
broke the stillness? for it seemed as if there were veritably
tongues in the air--not honest things like birds and winds, but
tongues.  The place was still silent so far as earthly sounds went--
he realized that, when he stopped to listen--but nevertheless he
had an impression of movement everywhere, of rustling--yes, and of
tongues.

Fortune was against him, for he reached a glade and saw that it was
the one which he had left and which he thought he had avoided. . . .
There was a change in it, for the altar in the centre was draped.
At first he thought it only a freak of moonlight, till he forced
himself to go nearer.  Then he saw that it was a coarse white linen
cloth, such as was used in the kirk at the seasons of sacrament.

The discovery affected him with a spasm of blind terror.  All the
tales of the Wood, all the shrinking he had once felt for it,
rushed back on his mind.  For the moment he was an infant again,
lost and fluttering, assailed by the shapeless phantoms of the
dark.  He fled from the place as if from something accursed.

Uphill he ran, for he felt that safety was in the hills and that
soon he might come to the clear spaces of the heather.  But a wall
of crag forced him back, and he ran as he thought westward towards
the oaks and hazels, for there he deemed he would be free of the
magic of the pines.  He did not run wildly, but softly and
furtively, keeping to the moss and the darker places, and avoiding
any crackling of twigs, for he felt as if the Wood were full of
watchers.  At the back of his head was a stinging sense of shame--
that he, a grown man and a minister of God, should be in such a pit
of terror.  But his instinct was stronger than his reason.  He felt
his heart crowding into his throat, and his legs so weak and
uncontrollable that they seemed to be separate from his body.  The
boughs of the undergrowth whipped his face, and he knew that his
cheeks were wet with blood, though he felt no pain.

The trees thinned and he saw light ahead--surely it was the glen
which marked the division between pine and hazel.  He quickened his
speed, and the curtain of his fear lifted ever so little.  He heard
sounds now--was it the wind which he had left on the hilltops?
There was a piping note in it, something high and clear and shrill--
and yet the Wood had been so airless that his body was damp with
sweat.  Now he was very near air and sanctuary.

His heart seemed to stop, and his legs wavered so that he sunk on
his knees.  For he was looking again on the accursed glade.

It was no longer empty.  The draped altar was hidden by figures--
human or infernal--moving round it in a slow dance.  Beyond this
circle sat another who played on some instrument.  The moss stilled
the noise of movement, and the only sound was the high, mad piping.

A film cleared from his eyes, and something lost came back to him--
manhood, conscience, courage.  Awe still held him, but it was being
overmastered by a human repulsion and anger.  For as he watched the
dance he saw that the figures were indeed human, men and women
both--the women half-naked, but the men with strange headpieces
like animals.  What he had taken for demons from the Pit were
masked mortals--one with the snout of a pig, one with a goat's
horns, and the piper a gaping black hound. . . .  As they passed,
the altar was for a moment uncovered, and he saw that food and
drink were set on it for some infernal sacrament.

The dance was slow and curiously arranged, for each woman was held
close from behind by her partner.  And they danced widdershins,
against the sun.  To one accustomed to the open movement of country
jigs and reels the thing seemed the uttermost evil--the grinning
masks, the white tranced female faces, the obscene postures, above
all that witch-music as horrid as a moan of terror.

David, a great anger gathering in his heart, was on his feet now,
and as he rose the piping changed.  Its slow measure became a crazy
lilt, quick and furious.  The piper was capering; the dancers,
still going widdershins, swung round and leaped forward, flinging
their limbs as in some demented reel. . . .  There were old women
there, for he saw grey hair flying.  And now came human cries to
add to the din of the pipe--a crying and a sighing wrung out of
maddened bodies.

To David it seemed a vision of the lost in Hell.  The fury of an
Israelitish prophet came upon him.  He strode into the glade.
Devils or no, he would put an end to this convention of the damned.

"In the name of God," he cried, "I forbid you.  If you are mortal,
I summon you to repent--if you are demons, I command you to return
to him that sent you."

He had a great voice, but in that company there were no ears to
hear.  The pipe screeched and the dance went on.

Then the minister of Woodilee also went mad.  A passion such as he
had never known stiffened every nerve and sinew.  He flung himself
into the throng, into that reek of unclean bestial pelts and
sweating bodies.  He reached the altar, seized the cloth on it, and
swept it and its contents to the ground.  Then he broke out of the
circle and made for the capering piper, who seemed to him the chief
of the orgiasts.

In his flight through the wood David had lost his staff, and had as
weapon but his two hands.  "Aroynt you, Sathanas," he cried,
snatched the pipe from the dog-faced figure, and shivered it on his
masked head.

With the pause in the music the dance stopped suddenly, and in an
instant the whole flock were on him like a weasel pack.  He saw
long-nailed claws stretched towards his face, he saw blank eyes
suddenly fire into a lust of hate.  But he had a second's start of
them, and that second he gave to the piper.  The man--for the thing
was clearly human--had dealt a mighty buffet at his assailant's
face, which missed it, and struck the point of the shoulder.  David
was whirled round, but, being young and nimble, he slipped in under
the other's guard, and had his hands on the hound-mask.  The man
was very powerful, but the minister's knee was in his groin, and he
toppled over, while David tore the covering of wood and skin from
his head.  It crumpled under his violent clutch like a wasps' nest,
and he had a glimpse of red hair and a mottled face.

A glimpse and no more.  For by this time the press was on him and
fingers were at his throat, choking out his senses.



CHAPTER VII

THE FIRST BLAST


Late in the forenoon of the next day David awoke in his own bed in
the manse of Woodilee.  He awoke to a multitude of small aches and
one great one, for his forehead was banded with pain.  The room was
as bright with sunshine as the little window would permit, but it
seemed to him a dusk shot by curious colours, with Isobel's head
bobbing in it like a fish.  Presently the face became clear and he
saw it very near to him--a scared white face with red-rimmed eyes.
Her voice penetrated the confused noises in his ears.

"The Lord be thankit, sir, the Lord be praised, Mr. David, ye're
comin' oot o' your dwam.  Here's a fine het drink for ye.  Get it
doun like a man and syne ye'll maybe sleep.  There's nae banes
broke, and I've dressed your face wi' a sure salve.  Dinna disturb
the clouts, sir.  Your skin's ower clean to beal [fester], and
ye'll mend quick if ye let the clouts bide a wee."

Her arm raised his aching head, and he swallowed the gruel.  It
made him drowsy, and soon he was asleep again, a healthy natural
sleep, so that when he awoke in the evening he was in comparative
ease and his headache had gone.  Gingerly he felt his body.  There
were bruises on his legs, and one huge one on his right thigh.  His
cheeks under the bandages felt raw and scarred, and there was a
tenderness about his throat and the muscles of his neck, as if
angry hands had throttled him.  But apart from his stiffness he
seemed to have suffered no great bodily hurt, and the effects of
the slight concussion had passed.

With this assurance his mind came out of its torpor, and he found
himself in a misery of disquiet.  The events of the night before
returned to him only too clearly.  He remembered his exaltation in
the Wood--the glade, the altar.  He recalled with abasement his
panic and his flight.  The glade again, the piping, the obscene
dance--and at that memory he had almost staggered from his bed.  He
felt again the blind horror and wrath which had hurled him into the
infernal throng.

Isobel's anxious face appeared in the doorway.

"Ye've had a graund sleep, sir.  And now ye'll be for a bite o'
meat?"

"I have slept well, and I am well enough in body.  Sit you down,
Isobel Veitch, for I have much to say to you.  How came I home last
night?"

The woman sat down on the edge of a chair, and even in the twilight
her nervousness was manifest.

"It wasna last nicht.  It was aboot the hour o' three this mornin',
and sic a nicht as I had waitin' on ye!  Oh, sir, what garred ye no
hearken to me and gang to the Wud on Rood-Mass?"

"How do you know I was in the Wood?"

She did not answer.

"Tell me," he said, "how I came home."

"I was ryngin' the hoose like a lost yowe, but I didna daur gang
outbye.  At twal hours I took a look up the road, and again when
the knock was chappin' twa.  Syne I dozed off in my chair, till the
knock waukened me.  That was at three hours, and as I waukened I
heard steps outbye.  I keekit oot o' the windy, but there was
naebody on the road, just the yellow mune.  I prayed to the Lord to
strengthen me, and by-and-by I ventured out, but I fand naething.
Syne I took a thocht to try the back yaird, and my hert gied a
stound, for there was yoursel', Mr. David, lyin' like a cauld corp
aneath the aipple tree.  Blithe I was to find the breath still in
ye, but I had a sair job gettin' ye to your bed, sir, for ye're a
weary wecht for an auld wumman.  The sun was up or I got your
wounds washed and salved, and syne I sat by the bed prayin' to the
Lord that ye suld wauken in your richt mind, for I saw fine that
the wounds o' your body would heal, but I feared that the wits
micht have clean gane frae ye.  And now I am abundantly answered,
for ye're speakin' like yoursel', and your een's as I mind them,
and the blood's back intil your cheeks.  The Lord be thankit!"

But there was no jubilation in Isobel's voice.  Her fingers twined
confusedly, and her eyes wandered.

"Do you know what befell me?" he asked.

"Eh, sirs, how suld I ken?"

"But what do you think?  You find me in the small hours lying
senseless at your door, with my face scarred and my body bruised.
What do you think I had suffered?"

"I think ye were clawed by bogles, whilk a'body kens are gi'en a
free dispensation on Rood-Mass E'en."

"Woman, what is this talk of bogles from lips that have confessed
Christ?  I was assaulted by the Devil, but his emissaries were
flesh and blood.  I tell you it was women's nails that tore my
face, and men's hands that clutched my throat.  I walked in the
Wood, for what has a minister of God to fear from trees and
darkness?  And as I walked I found in an open place a heathen
altar, and that altar was covered with a linen cloth, as if for a
sacrament.  I was afraid--I confess it with shame--but the Lord
used my fear for His own purpose, and led me back in my flight to
that very altar.  And there I saw what may God in His mercy forbid
that I should see again--a dance of devils to the Devil's piping.
In my wrath I rushed among them, and tore the mask from the Devil's
head, and then they overbore me and I lost my senses.  When I
wrestled with them I wrestled with flesh and blood--perishing men
and women rapt in a lust of evil."

He stopped, and Isobel's eyes did not meet his.  "Keep us a'!" she
moaned.

"These men and women were, I firmly believe, my own parishioners."

"It canna be," the old woman croaked.  "Ye werena yoursel', Mr.
David, sir. . . .  Ye were clean fey wi' the blackness o' the Wud
and the mune and the wanchancy hour.  Ye saw ferlies [marvels], but
they werena flesh and bluid, sir. . . ."

"I saw the bodies of men and women in Woodilee who have sold their
souls to damnation.  Isobel Veitch, as your master and your
minister, I charge you, as you will answer before the Judgment
Seat, what know you of the accursed thing in this parish?"

"Me!" she cried.  "Me!  I ken nocht.  Me and my man aye keepit
clear o' the Wud."

"Which is to say that there were others in Woodilee who did not.
Answer me, woman, as you hope for salvation.  The sin of witchcraft
is rampant here, and I will not rest till I have rooted it out.
Who are those in Woodilee who keep tryst with the Devil?"

"How suld I ken?  Oh, sir, I pray ye to speir nae mair questions.
Woodilee has aye been kenned for a queer bit, lappit in the muckle
Wud, but the guilty aye come by an ill end.  There's been mair
witches howkit out o' Woodilee and brunt than in ony ither
parochine on the Water o' Aller.  Trust to your graund Gospel
preachin', Mr. David, to wyse folk a better gait, for if ye start
speirin' about the Wud ye'll stir up a byke that will sting ye
sair.  As my faither used to say, him that spits against the wind
spits in his ain face.  Trust to conviction o' sin bringin'
evildoers to repentance, as honest Mr. Macmichael did afore ye."

"Did Mr. Macmichael know of this wickedness?"

"I canna tell.  Nae doot he had a glimmerin'.  But he was a quiet
body wha keepit to the roads and his ain fireside, and wasna like
yoursel', aye ryngin' the country like a moss-trooper. . . .  Be
content, sir, to let sleepin' tykes lie till ye can catch them
rauvagin'.  Ye've a congregation o' douce eident folk, and I'se
warrant ye'll lead them intil the straucht and narrow way.  Maybe
the warst's no as ill as ye think.  Maybe it's just a sma'
backslidin' in them that's pilgrims to Sion.  They're weel kenned
to be sound in doctrine, and there was mair signed the Covenant--"

"Peace," he cried.  "This is rank blasphemy, and a horrid
hypocrisy.  What care I for lip service when there are professors
who are living a lie?  Who is there I can trust?  The man who is
loudest in his profession may be exulting in secret and dreadful
evil.  He whom I think a saint may be the chief of sinners.  Are
there no true servants of Christ in Woodilee?"

"Plenty," said Isobel.

"But who are they?  I had thought Richie Smail at the Greenshiel a
saint, but am I wrong?"

"Na, na.  Ye're safe wi' Richie."

"And yourself, Isobel?"

Colour came into her strained face.  "I'm but a broken vessel, but
neither my man nor me had ever trokin's wi' the Enemy."

"But there are those to your knowledge who have?  I demand from you
their names."

She pursed her lips.  "Oh, sir, I ken nocht.  What suld a widow-
woman, thrang a' the day in your service, ken o' the doings in
Woodilee?"

"Nevertheless you know something.  You have heard rumours.  Speak,
I command you."

Her face was drawn with fright, but her mouth was obstinate.  "Wha
am I to bring a railin' accusation against onybody, when I have nae
certainty of knowledge?"

"You are afraid.  In God's name, what do you fear?  There is but
the one fear, and that is the vengeance of the Almighty, and your
silence puts you in jeopardy of His wrath."

Nevertheless there was no change in the woman's face.  David saw
that her recalcitrance could not be broken.

"Then listen to me, Isobel Veitch.  I have had my eyes opened, and
I will not rest till I have rooted this evil thing from Woodilee.
I will search out and denounce every malefactor, though he were in
my own Kirk Session.  I will bring against them the terror of God
and the arm of the human law.  I will lay bare the evil mysteries
of the Wood, though I have to hew down every tree with my own hand.
In the strength of the Lord I will thresh this parish as corn is
threshed, till I have separated the grain from the chaff and given
the chaff to the burning.  Make you your market for that, Isobel
Veitch, and mind that he that is not for me is against me, and that
in the day of God's wrath the slack hand and the silent tongue will
not be forgiven."

The woman shivered and put a hand to her eyes.

"Will ye hae your bite o' meat, sir?" she quavered.

"I will not break bread till God has given me clearness," he said
sternly; and Isobel, who was in the habit of spinning out her talks
with her master till she was driven out, slipped from the room like
a discharged prisoner who fears that the Court may change its mind.



David rose next morning after a sleepless night, battered in body,
but with some peace of mind, and indeed a comfort which he scarcely
dared to confess to himself.  He had now a straight course before
him.  There was an evil thing in the place against which he had
declared war, an omnipresent evil, for he did not know who were the
guilty.  The thing was like the Wood itself, an amorphous shadow
clouding the daylight.  Gone were the divided counsels, the
scruples of conscience.  What mattered his doubts about the policy
of the Kirk at large when here before his eyes was a conflict of
God and Belial? . . .  For the first time, too, he could let his
mind dwell without scruples upon the girl in the greenwood.  The
little glen that separated the pines from the oaks and the hazels
had become for him the frontier between darkness and light--on the
one side the innocency of the world which God had made, on the
other the unclean haunts of devilry. . . .  And yet he had first
met Katrine among the pines.  To his horror of the works of
darkness was added a bitter sense of sacrilege--that obscene
revelry should tread the very turf that her feet had trod.

That afternoon he set out for Chasehope.  The matter should be
without delay laid before his chief elder, and the monstrous
suspicion which lurked at the back of his mind dispelled.  He was
aware that his face was a spectacle, but it should not be hidden,
for it was part of his testimony.  But at Chasehope there was no
Ephraim Caird.  The slatternly wife who met him, old before her
time, with a clan of ragged children at her heels, was profuse in
regrets.  She dusted a settle for him, and offered new milk and a
taste of her cheese, but all the time with an obvious discomfort.
To think that Ephraim should be away when the minister came up the
hill! . . .  He had had to ride off that morn to Kirk Aller upon a
matter of a bull that Johnnie Davidson had brought from Carlisle--
an English bull to improve the breed--and he would not be home till
the darkening.  The woman was voluble and hearty, but it seemed to
David that she protested too much. . . .  Was her husband all the
while between the blankets in the press-bed?

On his way back, at the turn of the road from the kirkton, he
encountered Daft Gibbie.  The idiot had throughout the winter been
a satellite of the minister, and had had many a meal in the manse
kitchen.  When they met it was "Eh, my bonny Mr. Sempill," or "my
precious Mr. David," and then an outpouring of grotesque but
complimentary texts.  But now the first news he had of Gibbie was a
small stone that whizzed past his ear, and when he turned he saw a
threatening figure with a face twisted into a demoniac hate.  A
second stone followed, very wide of the mark, and when David
threatened pursuit, the idiot shuffled off, shouting filth over his
shoulder.  A woman came out of a cottage, and said something to
Gibbie which caused him to hold his peace and disappear into a
kailyard. . . .  But the woman did not look towards the minister,
but hurried in again and closed the door.  Was the whole parish,
thought David, banded in a tacit conspiracy?  Was this poor idiot
one of the misbegotten things of the Wood?

The next Sabbath, which was the fifth of May, the kirk of Woodilee
showed a full congregation.  That day, save for infants in arms,
there were few absentees.  Never had the place been more hushed and
expectant.  David preached from the text, "Enter into the rock, and
hide thee in the dust for fear of the Lord," and he delivered his
soul with a freedom hitherto lacking in his carefully prepared
discourses.  Not the Boanerges of Bold could have outdone the fiery
vigour with which he described how Israel went astray after
forbidden gods and how the wrath of the Almighty smote her with
death and exile.  But when he came to the application, which should
have been as a nail fastened in a sure place, he faltered.  The
faces below him, set, composed, awful in their decency, seemed like
a stone wall against which he must beat with feeble hands.

"I have the sure knowledge," he said, "that there are altars set up
to Baal in this very parish, and that this little Israel of ours
has its own groves where it worships the gods of the heathen--ay,
the very devils from the Pit.  Be assured that I will riddle out
this evil mystery and drag it into the light of day, and on the
priests of Baal in Woodilee, be they libertines or professors, I
will call down the terrors of the Most High.  I summon now in this
place all poor deluded sinners to confession and repentance, for in
the strength of the Lord I will go forward, and woe be to those
that harden their hearts."

But his words seemed to be driven back upon him by the steely
silence.  He saw his elders--the heavy white face of Chasehope, the
long sanctimonious jowl of Peter Pennecuik, the impish mouth of
Spotswood the miller now composed in an alien gravity, the dark
sullenness of Mirehope--they relished his vigour, but their eyes
were hard as stones.  And the folk behind them, men and women, old
and young, were attentively apathetic.  There was none of the
crying and weeping and the spasms of conviction which had attended
the fast-day service of the minister of Bold.  Were they a
congregation of innocents to whom his summons had no application?
Or were they so thirled to their evil-doing that his appeals were
no more than an idle wind?

His Session congratulated him on his discourse.

"Ye had a gale on your spirit this day, Mr. Sempill," said
Chasehope.  "Yon was a fine waft o' the Word ye gie'd us, and it's
to be hoped that it will be blessed to many."

As David looked at the pale cheeks and the red hair of the man he
had a sudden assurance.  It was a mild day, but Ephraim Caird wore
a strip of flannel as if he were nursing a cold.  And was there not
a discoloration of the skin around his fleshy jaw and a dark bruise
below his left ear?

Next day David sought out Amos Ritchie, the smith.  He learned that
the man was on a job at Nether Windyways, and he watched for him on
the hill-road as he returned in the evening.  The big loose-limbed
figure of Amos, striding down the twilit slopes with his bag of
tools slung on his shoulder, was a pleasant sight to eyes that
hungered for a friend.  For with the smith David had advanced far
in friendliness since their partnership in the winter snowstorm.
The man was of a high spirit and a complete honesty, and his
professions were well behind his practice.  Rough of tongue and apt
in a quarrel, he had a warmth of heart that did not fail even those
he despised.  He was no purveyor of edifying speech, but the milk
of human kindness ran strong in him.  It was a saying in the
village that there was "mair comfort in an aith from Amos than a
prayer from Peter Pennecuik."

But on this occasion the smith's straightforward friendliness
seemed to have deserted him.  When David appeared before him he
looked as if he would fain have avoided the meeting.  His eyes were
troubled, and he increased the pace of his walk when the minister
fell into step beside him.

"How's the wife?" David asked.

"Fine, sir.  Her kist's stronger, and I'm hopin' the simmer will
pit colour intil her cheek."  But as he spoke his eyes were on a
distant hill.

"I want a word with you, Amos.  You and I are, I believe, true
friends, and I can speak to you as to a brother.  I have become
aware of a horrid evil in this parish.  There is that in the Wood
which tempts men and women to abominations.  With these eyes of
mine I saw it on Beltane's Eve."

There was no answer.

"You were in the kirk yesterday, Amos, and you heard my sermon.
The decision is on Woodilee to choose whom they will serve.  You
are my friend, and, apart from certain backslidings, a man of a
Christian walk and conversation.  I summon you to my aid, and
conjure you by Christ who died for you, to tell me what you know of
this great sin and who are the sinners."

Amos came to a standstill.  He laid down his tools, and looked the
minister in the face.

"Let it alane, sir.  I rede ye, let it alane."

"In the name of God, what folly is this?" David cried.  "Are you,
too, my own familiar friend, entangled in this wickedness?"

The man's face crimsoned.

"Deil a haet!  Na, na, I never could abide thae trokin's wi' the
Wud.  But oh, Mr. Sempill, ye're but a callant, and ye kenna the
wecht o' the principalities and poo'ers that are against ye.  Hae
patience, sir, and gang cannily.  Trust in the Word, whilk it is
your duty to preach, to bring conviction o' sin in the Lord's ain
gude time, for if ye're ettlin' [intending] to use the arm o' flesh
it will fail ye."

It was the counsel which Isobel had given, and David's heart sank.
What was it in Woodilee which made honest men silent and craven in
the face of proved iniquity?

"Man, Amos," he cried, "I never thought to get a coward's counsel
from you.  Am I to reckon you among my enemies, and among God's
enemies?  I tell you I see my duty as clear before me as the Hill
of Deer.  I must unveil this wickedness and blast its practisers
into penitence or I fail in my first duty as the minister of this
parish.  And from you, my friend, I get only silence and contumacy,
and what is worse, the advice of a Laodicean.  Alas! that you who
have fought stoutly in your country's battles should be such a poor
soldier in God's battles."

There was no answer.  The two had resumed their walk, and the smith
strode at a pace which was almost a run, his eyes steadily averted
from his companion.

"This is my last word to you, Amos," said David, as they reached
the turn where the loan ran to the manse.  "Wednesday--the day
after the morn--is the second Beltane, and I fear that that night
there will be further evil in the Wood.  I will go there and
outface the Devil, but the flesh is weak, and I am one against
many, and I would fain have a friend.  Will you not bear me
company?"

The smith stopped again.  "Deil hae me if I gang near the Wud!  Na,
na, I'll no pit my heid intil ony sic wull-cat's hole.  And, Mr.
Sempill, be you guidit by an aulder man and bide at hame."

"You are afraid?"

"Ay.  I'm feared--but mair for you than for mysel'."

"You're like the men of Israel that failed Gideon at the
waterside," David cried angrily as he turned away.

The next two days were spent by the minister in a strange
restlessness.  He walked each afternoon some violent miles on the
hilltops, but for the rest he stayed in the manse, principally in
his study.  Isobel believed him to be at prayer, and indeed he
prayed long and fervently, but he was also busied about other
things.  Among his belongings was a small-sword, for he had won
some skill of fence in Edinburgh, and this he had out and saw to
its point and edge.  Also he read much in books which were not
divinity, for he felt himself a soldier, and would brace his spirit
with martial tales.  With Isobel he exchanged no word save
commonplaces, and the old woman, who had the air of a scolded
child, showed no desire to talk.  His meals were set before him in
silence, and silently the table was cleared.  Amos Ritchie came to
the manse on some small repairing job, and he too seemed to be
anxious to get his work done and leave.  David saw him arrive as he
set out for a walk, and when he returned the shoulders of the smith
were disappearing past the stable end.

Wednesday evening came, an evening of mellow light and a quiet
sunset, and after his early supper David retired to his study to
prepare himself for his task.  He had already written out an
account of what he had seen in the Wood and of what he proposed to
do, and this he signed and directed under cover to Mr. Fordyce at
Cauldshaw.  Whatever mischance befell him, he had left a record.
He had also written a letter to his father, setting forth what, in
the event of his death, was to be the destination of his worldly
goods.  Then on his knees he remained for a while in prayer.

The clock struck nine, and he arose to begin his journey, strapping
the sword to his middle, and taking also a great stick which the
shepherd of the Greenshiel had made for him.  The moon would rise
late, and there was ample time.

But he found that the door of his study would not open.  It had no
lock, and had hung on a light hasp, but now it seemed to have bolts
and bars.  It was a massive thing of oak, and when he shook it it
did not yield.

He shouted for Isobel, but there was no reply.  Then he assaulted
it furiously with knees and feet and shoulder, but it did not give.
There was no hope from the window, which was a small square through
which a child could not have crept.

Further attacks on the door followed, and futile shouting.  By the
time the late light had faded from the little window David had
acknowledged the fact that he was imprisoned, and his first fury
had ebbed from sheer bodily fatigue.  But the clock had struck one
before he attempted to make a bed on the floor, with for pillow a
bag of chaff which Isobel had placed there for a winter footstool,
and the dawn was in the eastern sky before he slept.

He was awakened by Isobel in the doorway.

"Peety on us," she wailed, "that sic a thing suld hae come to this
hoose!  Hae ye spent the nicht in this cauld chamber and no in your
bed?  The wyte's [blame] on me, for I got Amos Ritchie yestereen to
put a bar on the door, for there's walth of guid books here and I
wad like to steek the place when ye're awa' to the hills and me
maybe in the kitchen.  I maun hae steekit it to see if it wad wark,
no kennin' ye were in inside.  And syne I gaed doun to my gude-
brither's to speir after his bairn, and I was late in getting back,
and, thinks I, the minister will be in his bed and I'll awa' to
mine.  Puir man, ye'll be as stiff as a wand, and ye'll maybe hae
got your death o' cauld. . . .  See and I'll get ye a het drink,
and your parritch's on the boil. . . .  Wae's me that I didn' tak'
a thocht . . ."

"Silence, woman, and do not cumber your soul with lies."  David's
white face as he strode from the room did more than his words to
cut short Isobel's laments.



CHAPTER VIII

THE SECOND BLAST


On the following Sabbath the minister's text was, "When the light
within you is darkness, how great is that darkness!"  This time
there was no faltering in the application.  The congregation, men
and women, were arraigned at the bar as sinners by deed or by
connivance, and he had an audience hushed not in the ordinary
Sabbath decorum, but in a fearful apprehension.  Every moment he
seemed to be about to name the sinner, and if he did not single out
persons he made it blindingly clear that it was not for lack of
knowledge.  Never had he preached with greater freedom, never had
passion so trembled in each sentence.  Words seemed to be given
him, stinging, unforgettable words that must flay the souls of the
guilty.  "Blinded self-deceivers," he cried, "you think you can
tamper with devilry and yet keep your interest in Christ.  You are
set up with covenants, public and private, but I tell you that your
covenant is with Death and Hell.  The man who believes he is
elected into salvation, and thinks that thereby he has liberty to
transgress and that his transgressions will be forgiven him, has
sinned against the Holy Ghost--that sin for which there is no
forgiveness."  He declared that till there was a general confession
and repentance there would be no Communion in the parish of
Woodilee, for those who sat down at the Lord's Table would be
eating and drinking damnation to themselves. . . .  But at the end
he broke down.  With tears in his eyes and a sob in his voice he
besought a people whom he loved to abase themselves before the
Mercy Seat.  "You poor folk," he cried, "with your little dark day
of life, with your few years of toil and cold and hunger before the
grave, what have you if you have not Christ?"  He was moved with an
ecstasy of pity, and told them, like the Apostle, that if he could
but save their souls, he was willing that his own should be cast
away.

Not the oldest remembered such a sermon in the kirk of Woodilee,
and the fame of it was soon to go abroad in the countryside.  The
place emptied in a strange silence, as if the congregation went on
tiptoe, and men and women did not look at each other till they were
outside the kirkyard gates.  The elders did not await the minister
in the session-house, and as David walked the hundred yards to the
manse he saw what looked like the back of Peter Pennecuik,
crouching behind a turf dyke to avoid a meeting.

These were days of loneliness and misery for the minister of
Woodilee.  He saw himself solitary among enemies, for even those
whom he thought his friends had failed him.  It was clear that Amos
Ritchie had conspired with Isobel to imprison him in his study on
the eve of the second Beltane, and though their motive was
doubtless affection it but emphasized the hopelessness of his task.
He had to bring conviction of sin into a parish where even the
innocent were ready to cumber his arm.  These honest creatures
feared for him--what?  Anger would choke him at the thought of such
contempt for his sacred mission, and then awe would take its
place, awe at the immensity of the evil with which he fought.
"Principalities and powers," Amos had said--yes, the Powers of the
Air and the Principalities of Darkness.  He had no doubt that the
Devil and his myrmidons were present in the Wood in bodily form,
mingling with the worshippers, and that the tongues which he had
heard were in very truth mutterings of the lost.  There were times
when ordinary human fear loosened his knees, and he longed to flee
from the parish as from a place accursed.  But his courage would
return, and his faith, for he knew that the armies of Heaven were
on his side, and wrath would cast out fear, wrath and horror at the
seducers of his flock.  Nevertheless in these days his nerves were
frayed, he lay awake of nights listening anxiously for noises
without, and he would awake suddenly in the sweat of a nameless
terror.

But his chief burden was that he did not know how to shape his
course.  The pulpit rang with his denunciations, but there was no
response; no stricken Nicodemus came to him by night.  On the roads
and at the house-doors people avoided his eyes.  There were no more
stones from Daft Gibbie--indeed Gibbie had resumed his fawning
friendliness--but none waited to speak a word with him.  Isobel had
recovered her cheerfulness, and sought to atone for past misconduct
by an assiduous attention to his comforts, but Amos Ritchie shunned
him.  And the children, too, who had been his chief allies.
Perhaps their parents had warned them, for a group would scatter
when he came near, and once when, coming up behind him, he laid a
kindly hand on a boy's head, the child burst into tears and fled.
What was the 'fama' of the minister which had been put about in
Woodilee?

The worst of it was that he could contrive no plan of campaign.
Evidence which was overwhelming to his own mind would not convince
the Presbytery or the Sheriff.  He could not bring a reasoned
charge against any man or woman in the parish.  As the days passed
he began to sort out his flock in his mind as the guilty and the
abettors.  Some were innocent enough, save for the sin of apathy;
but others he could believe to have shared in the midnight
debauches--heavy-browed, sensual youths, women with shifty eyes,
girls high-coloured and over-blown, whose sidelong glances seemed
to hint at secrets, old wives, too, whose wild laughter he heard at
cottage doors.  But of one, his first certainty was giving way to
doubt.  Ephraim Caird's white face had got a wholesome tan from the
summer sun, and he alone in the parish seemed to seek out the
minister.  He gave him a cheerful greeting when they met, spoke
wisely of parish matters, had a word of humble commendation for the
Sabbath discourses.  "It's gaun to be a braw year for the aits," he
said, "gin the weather hauds, and the lambs are the best I've yet
seen on Chasehope hill.  Let us hope, sir, that the guid seed ye've
sown will come to as bountiful a hairst."  The words were so simply
spoken that they seemed no hypocrisy.

A plan of campaign!  On that David could get no clearness, and the
anxiety was with him at bed and board.  He shrank from confessing
himself to his brother-ministers, for what could they do to help
him?  Kirk Aller would pooh-pooh the whole thing, since Woodilee
had been so forward in signing the Covenant.  Bold would no doubt
believe, but his remedy would be only a stiffer draught of
doctrine.  Even Mr. Fordyce at Cauldshaw seemed a broken reed, for
Mr. Fordyce was an ailing saint, and this task was for the church
militant.  No, he must fight his battles alone, and trust to God to
send him allies.  He wanted men of violence, who would fight not
with words but with deeds, Israelitish prophets who with their own
hands cut down groves and uprooted altars and hewed Agag in pieces.
And where would he find them in a countryside where the good were
timid as sheep and their pastors like loud voices in a fog?

June was a month of hot suns and clear skies, when the hills were
bone-dry and the deepest flowe-moss could be safely passed.  It was
weather for the high tops, and one afternoon David, walking off his
restlessness on the Rood uplands, stumbled unexpectedly on a
friend.  For at the head of the glen where the drove-road crosses
from Clyde to Aller, he fell in with the farmer of Reiverslaw
leading his horse up a steep patch of screes.

This man, Andrew Shillinglaw, was something of a mystery both to
parish and minister.  He was a long lean fellow of some forty
years, black-haired, black-bearded, whose sullen face was redeemed
by a humorous mouth, so that the impression was of a genial
ferocity.  He was reputed the most skilful farmer in the place, and
some held him a rival in worldly wealth to the miller, but beyond
the fact that he had in Reiverslaw the best of the hill farms,
there was no clue to his prosperity.  He had the only good riding-
horse in Woodilee, and was a notable figure on the roads, for he
travelled the country like a packman.  For weeks on end he would be
away from home, and he was heard of in Galloway and the west and as
far south as the Border, so that speculation about his doings
became a favourite pastime among his neighbours.  He neither sold
nor bought in the parish, and he kept his own counsel, but his
profession was clear enough had there been eyes to see.  For he was
dealer and middleman as well as farmer, and in a day when stock and
produce scarcely moved beyond parish bounds, he sold and bought in
outlying markets.  In a district of home-keepers he was the sole
traveller.

Few liked him, for there was always an undertone of satire in his
speech.  But all feared him, for his temper was on a hair-trigger.
Drink made him quarrelsome, and the spence at Lucky Weir's had seen
some ugly business, since with him blow followed fast on word.
Three years before he had buried his wife, there were no children,
and he lived at Reiverslaw with an aged cousin for housekeeper, who
was half blind and wholly deaf.  His attendance at the kirk was far
from exemplary; in winter there were the drifts and the full bogs
to detain him, and in summer he was as often as not on his travels.
The Session, who did not love him, had talked of citing him to
appear before them, but in the end they seemed to shrink from
belling so formidable a cat.

At the head of the little pass, which in that country is called a
"slack," he halted and let David approach him.

"A guid day to ye, sir," he cried.  "We'll let Bess get her wind,
for it's a lang gait frae Crawfordjohn.  I rade ower yestereen to
see the sma' Cumberland sheep that the Lowther herds are trying on
yon hills.  I hae nae great broo o' them.  They'll maybe dae on yon
green braes where the bite is short, but they're nae use for a
heather country. . . .  Sit ye doun, sir.  What brings ye sae far
ower the tops?  Ye werena ettlin' to gie me a ca' in at
Reiverslaw?"

David gladly stretched himself on the bent beside him.  The man
seemed willing to talk, and of late he had had little speech with
his fellows.

"I came here for the caller air," he said, "and to drive ill
humours from body and mind.  There are whiles when I cannot draw
breath in Woodilee."

"Ay," said the man.  "Ay!  Just so."  He pursed his lips and looked
at the minister under half-shut eyes.

"Were you born in this parish?" David asked.

"Na, na.  Far frae that.  I'm but an incomer, though I've had the
tack o' Reiverslaw for a dizzen years.  My father, honest man, was
frae the Glenkens, and my mither cam' frae the Cairn side.  I was
born at a bit they ca' Dunscore, but I was a stirrin' lad in my
young days and I've traivelled the feck o' the Lawlands, frae the
Forth to the Solway.  But now I've got my hinderlands doun in
Woodilee, and it's like I'll lay my banes here."

The man spoke in a different voice from the people of the place,
and to David he seemed as one detached from the countryside,
sharing neither its interests nor affections.  As he looked at him,
sprawling in the heather bush with one foot on his horse's bridle,
he had a sense of something assured and resolute and not
unfriendly.

"Ye're an incomer like mysel', sir," Reiverslaw said after a pause.
"What think ye o' Woodilee?"

"I think that the Devil has chosen this miserable parish for his
own."

"Ay. . . .  Well, I wadna say ye were wrang.  I jaloused [guessed]
frae your last discourse that ye were perplexed wi' the Enemy.  And
they tell me that ye've stirred up an unco byke against ye."

"Are you one of them?" David asked.

"No me.  If there's fechtin' to be done, I'm on your side.  I aye
likit a bauld man, and it's a question, sir, if ye ken yoursel' how
bauld ye are when ye offer to drive the Deil frae Woodilee."

David had got to his feet, for these were the first words of
sympathy he had had.

"Andrew Shillinglaw, I command you to tell me if you have kept
yourself clean from this mystery of evil which scourges the
parish."

The man still sprawled on the ground, and the face he turned to the
minister was twisted in a grim humour.

"Ay.  I'll swear ony aith ye like.  I'll no deny my backslidin's,
and, as ye may ken, my walk and conversation's no to boast o'.  But
as sure as God made me, I wad burn off my richt hand in the fire
afore I wad file mysel' wi' the Babylonish abominations o' the Wud.
I whiles drink a stoup ower muckle, and I whiles gie a waur straik
than I ettle when my bluid's het, but these are honest stumblin's
whilk I hope the Lord will forgie.  But for yon--" and he spat
viciously.

"Then, if you are yourself clean from this evil, tell me what you
know of it, and who are its chief professors."

"That's easy speirin' [asking], but ill to answer.  How suld I ken
the covens that rampage in the Wud?  I bide cheek by jowl wi' the
muckle black thing, and often I wish it was a field o' strae in a
dry back-end so that I could set fire to it and see it burn frae
Reiverslaw to Windyways, and frae Woodilee to the Aller side.  But
I've never entered the place in mirk or licht, for my wark's wi'
sheep, and the honest beasts will no gang near it."

"But you must have heard . . ."

"I've heard nocht.  I have maybe guessed, but it's no like I wad
hear a cheep.  I never gang near the clachan except to kirk or to
Lucky Weir's, and the Woodilee folk are pawky bodies even when
they're fou, and ony way I'm nae clatter-vengeance to be clypin'
wi' auld wives at the roadside.  But I've my ain notion o' what's
gaun on, and I can tell ye, sir, it's gaun on in mony anither godly
parochine in this kingdom o' Scotland, and it's been gaun on for
hundreds o' years, long afore John Knox dang doun the Pape.  But
it's gotten a braw new tack in these days o' reformed and
covenantit kirks.  What do your Presbytries and Assemblies or your
godly ministers ken o' the things that are done in the mirk? . . .
What do they ken o' the corps in the kirkyairds buried o' their ain
wull wi' their faces downwards? . . .  They set up what they ca'
their discipline, and they lowse the terrors o' Hell on sma' fauts
like an aith, or profane talk on the Sabbath, or giein' the kirk
the go-by, and they hale to the cutty-stool ilka lass that's ower
kind to her joe.  And what's the upshot?  They drive the folk to
their auld ways and turn them intil hypocrites as weel as sinners."

"Hush, man!" said the scandalized David.  "That is impious talk."

"It's true a' the same, though it's maybe no for a minister's lugs.
The Kirk is set against witchcraft, and every wee while a daft auld
wife is brunt.  But, God help us, that's but the froth on the pat.
Na, na, Mr. Sempill.  If you're lookin' to get to grips wi' the
Adversary, it's no the feckless camsteery lad ye maun seek that
likes a randan, or the bit lassie that's ower fond to wait for the
Kirk's blessin', or the grannie that swears she rade to France on a
kail-runt.  It's the dacent body that sits and granes aneath the
pu'pit, and the fosy professor that wags his pow and deplores the
wickedness o' the land.--Yon's the true warlocks.  There's saunts
in Scotland, the Lord kens and I ken mysel', but there's some that
hae the name o' saunts that wad make the Deil spew."

Reiverslaw had risen, and in his face was such a flame of fierce
honesty that David's heart kindled.  He had found an ally.

"Give me names," he cried.  "I will denounce the sinner, though he
were one of my own elders."

"I speak nae names.  I have nae proof.  But ye've seen yoursel'.
They tell me ye broke in on the coven at their wark."

"I had but a glisk of them, before they beat the senses out of me.
But I intend to go back to the Wood, and this time I shall not
fail."

"Ay.  Ye've a stout heart, Mr. Sempill."

"But I must have help.  Out of the mouths of witnesses I must
establish the truth, and the innocent in Woodilee are very fearful.
I have nowhere to look but to you.  Will you come with me when I
return to the Wood?"

"I'll no say that, for there's maybe better ways o' guidin' it.
But this I will say--I'll stand by ye; for may the Deil flee awa'
wi' me or I see a guid man beat.  There's my hand on't. . . .  And
now I maun be takin' the road again.  Come na near the Reiverslaw,
sir, for that would set the bodies talkin'.  If ye want word wi'
me, tell Richie Smail at the Greenshiel."



The knowledge that he had found a friend lightened David's heavy
preoccupation of mind.  Athanasius now was not alone against the
world, and his path was not towards martyrdom but to victory.  He
walked with a more assured step and turned a bolder face to the
furtive hostility of the parish.  When he met Amos Ritchie he
looked on him not in reproach but in defiance.  His sermons were
now less appeals than challenges, as of one whose course was
proclaimed and whose loins were girded.

To his consternation he found that he now sat very loose in his
devotion to the Kirk.  The profession of religion was not the same
thing as godliness, and he was coming to doubt whether the
insistence upon minute conformities of outward conduct and the
hair-splitting doctrines were not devices of Satan to entangle
souls.  The phrases of piety, unctuously delivered, made him
shudder as at a blasphemy.  The fact that his only supporter was
one looked askance at by strict professors confirmed his shrinking.
Had not Christ set the publican and the sinner above the Pharisee?

One consequence of his new mood was that his thoughts turned again
to the girl in Paradise.  In his season of desolation he had not
dared to think of her; she belonged to a world of light, and had no
part in his perplexities.  To let her image fill his memory seemed
sacrilege, when that memory held so many foul shadows.  But as the
skies cleared for him her figure appeared again in the sunlight and
he did not banish it, for it was she who was the extreme opposite
of the horror of the Wood--she and her bright domain of oaks and
hazels.  He would go again to Paradise for his soul's comfort.

He chose a day when he was certain she would be there.  There was a
week of fiery weather--moist heat and heavy skies and flying
thunderstorms, and after it came a spell of long bright days, when
the sunshine had a dry tonic in it, and the afternoons were mellow
and golden.  On one such afternoon he crossed the Hill of Deer and
entered the glen which divided the pines from the hazels.

Midsummer had changed the place.  The burn-side turf was all thyme
and eyebright and milkwort, with the stars of the grass of
Parnassus in the wet places.  The water was clear and small, and
the cascades fell in a tinkling silver.  He had no doubts as to his
road now.  Paradise was among the hazels, but one could find it
only by descending the glen to where the pines of the Wood began
and then turning to the right towards the Greenshiel.

Presently the pines in a sombre regiment rose on the steep to the
left.  He looked at the beginning of the Wood with an awe which had
now no fear in it.  The place was hateful, but it could not daunt
him.  It was the battleground to which he was called. . . .  On the
edge of the trees was a great mass of dark foxgloves, the colour of
blood, and they seemed to make a blood-trail from the sunlight into
the gloom.

He turned up the right bank, and through hazel copses and glades,
breast-high with bracken, he made his way as if by instinct.  He
found the shallow cup lined with birches and the blossoming rowans,
and as he brushed through the covert he saw the girl sitting on the
greensward by the well.

Motionless he watched her for a little, while his heart played
strange pranks.  She had a basket beside her full of flowers, and
she was reading in a book. . . .  She laid down the book, and shook
her curls and dabbled her fingers in the water.  She sang as she
dabbled, low and clear in snatches, a song which he was to remember
to his dying day:


     "There's comfort for the comfortless,
      And honey for the bee,
      And there's nane for me but you, my love,
      And there's nane for you but me."


She crooned the verse twice, broke off to watch a ring-ouzel, and
then sang again:


     "It's love for love that I have got,
      And love for love again,
      So turn your high horse heid about
      And we will ride for hame, my love,
      And we will ride for hame."


He would fain have lingered and watched her, but he felt like an
eavesdropper on her privacy.  So "Mistress Katrine!" he cried
softly, and "Mistress Katrine" a second time.

She sprang to the alert like a bird.  Her face, when she saw him,
showed no welcome.

"I give you good-day, sir," she said.  "Have you maybe lost your
road?"

"I am seeking Paradise," he replied.

"It is the quest of all mortals, they tell me.  But the ministers
say it is not to be found on earth."

"I was seeking the earthly one to which you yourself first led me."

"You entered then by my invitation, but I do not think I bade you
come again."

"Then I beg for admission, mistress, for indeed I have sore need of
Paradise."

She looked at him curiously.  "You look older--and sadder.  I have
not been to your kirk, but they tell me that you are scorching the
souls of your folk with your terrors."

"Would to God I could scorch them into salvation! . . .  I have
been in dire straits, Mistress Katrine.  For I came again to find
Paradise and I found it not, but stumbled into Hell."

The girl looked at him with compassionate eyes.

"You may sit down in Paradise," she said.  "I permit you.  And I
will give you some of my wild strawberries.  Tell me what has
troubled you."

He told her of the doings of Beltane Eve, stumblingly, with many
omissions.  He told her of his strife with his parishioners, of his
loneliness, of the mission to which he was vowed.  "I am resolved,"
he said, "that though I go on alone I will not fail in courage.
Your Montrose's comfort is mine--that the arm of the Lord is not
shortened."

The girl brooded.

"Did you come here to find me?"

"I had a conviction that you would be in Paradise.  This is no tale
for a maid's ear, but I came here to warn you, mistress.  The long
glen that runs down to the Rood Mill is a frontier-line, which if
you pass you are in the land of darkness.  I found you first among
the pines, and I beseech you go not again among them, though it
were at high noon, for yon Wood is accursed."

She nodded.  "I felt it too.  When spring was passing I felt a
gloom come over me as I walked there, and one day a terror seized
me and I ran and ran till I was among the hazels.  I cannot bear
even to be in sight of the dark trees.  You say that there is
witchcraft there."  She lowered her voice and her eyes were solemn.
"What is this witchcraft?"

"I cannot tell, save that it is the nethermost works of darkness,
and that it has seduced the hearts of my unhappy people. . . .  God
help me, but I have seen with my eyes what I cannot forget. . . .
There is no smooth ministry for me, for now I am a soldier of
Christ and must be fighting till I have got the victory."

"And you are alone?"

"I have one who will stand by me."  And he told her of Reiverslaw.

"Nay, you have another," she cried.  "You have me for a friend, and
you have this greenwood for a sanctuary.  If I cannot fight by your
side, you will know that I am here and that I am wishing you well.
See, I make you free of Paradise.  It is yours now, as well as
mine."  She held out her hand.

He took off his hat.

"You were singing," he said, "and your song was true, for here's
'comfort for the comfortless.'  You have put steel into my bones,
Mistress Katrine.  If I can come here and speak with you at times,
it will be like the water beside the gate of Bethlehem to King
David. . . .  I will know when you are here without your sending me
word."

"Then there is witchcraft in the greenwood," she said, smiling
gravely, "for I, too, knew that you were coming to-day before you
came."



CHAPTER IX

BEFORE LAMMAS


One day in July David saddled his horse and rode to Kirk Aller for
a Presbytery meeting.  He found a bewildered brotherhood.  The
usual "exercises" were omitted, there was no prelection on a set
doctrinal theme for the benefit of the younger ministers, the
sittings in the kirk were occupied mainly with prayers for a
humbled Sion and a distracted country, and the dinner thereafter in
the Cross Keys was not notable for good fellowship.  But it was a
crowded gathering, and among the lay members in the kirk was
Ephraim Caird.

At the meal Mr. Mungo Muirhead, primed with letters from Edinburgh,
gave ill news of the war in the North.  Montrose the recusant
continued to win battles, and was even now marching southward with
his savage Irishry to strike at the citadel.  "What for does Davie
Leslie no hasten," he cried, "and what profits it to have a
covenanted State and a purified Kirk if a mailed Amalekite can hunt
our sodgers from Dan to Beersheba?  I tell you, sirs, this war
which has hitherto been fought among Hieland glens will soon be at
our ain doorcheeks, and our puir folk will be called to testify,
not with voice and word and the scart of a pen, but with sufferings
and revilings and bloody murderings.  Forth and Aller may yet run
red, and the hand of death be on the Lowdon fields.  Are we
prepared, I ask, and I ask it yet again?  Whatna gifts will we
bring to the altar in the coming day of sacrifice?"

His fears had given dignity to the minister of Kirk Aller.  The man
was a fighter, for his mouth shut tight, and there was a spark of
fire in his heavy eyes.  Nor was Mr. Proudfoot of Bold less ready
for the fray.  He had got himself a pair of great boots, and looked
a very Ironside as he expanded his big chest and groaned assent to
his leader's warning.

"Let us see that there is no Canaanitish thing in our midst," Mr.
Proudfoot cried, "for the purge of the Lord is nigh.  And let
Israel dwell in unity, for a house divided shall not stand.  These
are the twin counsels for this day of wrath, a pure cause and a
brotherly people.  These, I say, are the dams with which to stem
the tide of the heathen's rage."

"And that's a word in season for you, Mr. Sempill," said Mr.
Muirhead.  "I hear ye've set the haill parish of Woodilee by the
lugs with wanton accusations.  You'll admit none to the Table, says
you, till there is public confession of some unkenned iniquity.  I
applaud zeal in a young minister, but it seems you've fair got your
leg ower the trams, and the serious folk of Woodilee are troubled
to ken what ye mean.  Have a care, Mr. Sempill, lest this zeal of
yours be but human impatience.  This is no time to sow confusion
among God's people."

The minister of Kirk Aller had lost his air of rough good-humour.
It was a hard face and an inquisitorial eye that he bent on David.

"I take my stand on the first of Mr. Proudfoot's counsels," said
the latter.  "If the day of trial is coming, our cause must be
pure, and there must be no Canaanitish thing in our midst.  When I
am clear about the sins of Woodilee, the Presbytery will have
further news of me."

The young man's speech was too assured to please Mr. Muirhead.  He
drew down his eyebrows till they formed a straight line bisecting
his huge expanse of face.

"Have a care, have a care, I counsel you," he said crossly.  "I can
tell you that there's many an auld exercised professor in Woodilee
that's sore concerned about your doings."

Mr. Proudfoot added his reproof.  "When I mind on the precious work
I witnessed in that very parish in the month of March, I will not
believe that the Devil has got the master hand.  Examine yourself,
I rede you, Mr. Sempill, and see if the beam be not in your own
eye."

David rode away from Kirk Aller in the company of Mr. Fordyce of
Cauldshaw, but they had not ridden a mile before there was a
clatter of hoofs behind them, and the minister of Bold joined
himself to their company.  His beast was fractious, having had an
unaccustomed feed of  oats in the Cross Keys stable, and Mr.
Proudfoot, since he was an awkward horseman, had to spend much of
his energy in keeping it to the road.  But what time he could spare
from his task he devoted to catechizing David, and for the three
miles during which their course lay together his tongue never
stopped.

"There's an ill 'fama' of you gone abroad, Mr. Sempill, and it is
my duty as your elder in the Lord's service to satisfy myself
thereanent.  It is reported that you pervert the doctrine of
election into grace, maintaining that this blessed estate may be
forfeit by a failure in good works, as if the filthy rags of man's
righteousness were mair than the bite of a flea in face of the
eternal purposes of God."

"I say that a man who believes that his redemption through Christ
gives him a licence to sin is more doubly damned than if he had
never had a glimpse of grace."

"But ye maun distinguish.  The point is far finer than that, sir.
I will construe your words, for there is an interpretation of them
which is rank heresy."

The task of construing and distinguishing did not fare well, for
every few minutes the teeth of Mr. Proudfoot were shaken in his
head by his horse's vagaries.  He had just reached a point of
inordinate subtlety, when the track to Bold branched off, and his
animal, recognizing at last the road home, darted down it at a
rough gallop.  The last seen of the minister of Bold was a massive
figure swaying like a ship in a gale, and still, if one might trust
the echoes the wind brought back, distinguishing and construing.

Even Mr. Fordyce's grave face smiled as he watched the fleeing
Boanerges.

"He is a wilful man, and he has a wilful beast.  But what is this
rumour in the countryside, Mr. David?  I fear that you are finding
Woodilee a dour rig to plough."

"What do they say in Cauldshaw?"

"I have been little about of late, for these last weeks I've been
sore troubled with my bowels.  I'm like the Psalmist--the Lord
trieth my reins in the night watches--and I've never made out my
visit to you to have a read of Cardanus.  But I cannot but hear
orra bits of news from the next parish, and the speak in the
countryside is that you have uncovered the nakedness of Woodilee
and preach siccan sermons that the een of the folk turn inward in
their heads.  What's the truth of it, Mr. David?  My heart yearns
over you as if you were my own mother's son."

"I have uncovered a great wickedness--but not yet all.  I wait and
watch, and when I have fuller knowledge I will know better how to
act.  You told me the first day we met that Woodilee had an ill
reputation, and, sorrow on me!  I have proved the justice of your
words.  And I greatly fear that it is the loudest professors that
are deepest in the mire."

"Man, David, that is a grievous business.  Is it the Wood?"

"It is the Wood, and the blackest kind of witchcraft.  Some old
devilry of the heathen has lingered in that place, and the soul of
my miserable parish is thirled to it.  You will not find in
Scotland a doucer bit, for there are no public sins and
shortcomings.  Man, there's times when Woodilee seems as quiet and
dead as a kirkyard.  But there's a mad life in its members, and at
certain seasons it finds vent.  In the deeps of night and in the
heart of the Wood there are things done of which it is shameful
even to speak."

"What witness have you?"

"My own eyes.  I stumbled upon one of their hellish Sabbaths."

"God be kind to us!  I have heard tell of siccan things, and I have
read of them in old books, but I never experienced them.  I'm
positive they're not in Cauldshaw, for the place is ower bare and
bright and the wind blows ower clean on our braes.  There's no
cover for the abominations which must be done in darkness.  But I
have aye had a scunner of yon Wood. . . .  It's a queer thing the
heart of man, Mr. David, and there's that in my own that whiles
terrifies me.  The work of redemption is done in an instant, but
the job of regeneration is a lifetime's; and the holiest saint on
his death-bed is but a bag of rottenness compared to the purity to
which he shall yet attain.  And at times I'm tempted to think that
our way and the Kirk's way is not God's way, for we're apt to treat
the natural man as altogether corrupt, and put him under over-
strict pains and penalties, whereas there's matter in him that
might be shaped to the purposes of grace.  If there's original sin,
there's likewise original innocence.  When I hear the lassie
Katrine Yester singing about the door at Calidon, I have an
assurance of God's goodness as sharp as I ever got in prayer.  If
you ban this innocent joy it will curdle and sour, and the end will
be sin.  If young life may not caper on a spring morn to the glory
of God, it will dance in the mirk wood to the Devil's piping."

Mr. Fordyce stopped short with a rueful face.  "That's for your own
ear, Mr. David.  If the bruit of what I have said came to the manse
of Bold, Mr. Ebenezer would be for delating me to the Presbytery.
But if it's not orthodox it's good sense."

"I doubt orthodoxy is no salve against sin," said David.  "The
devils, it is written, believe and tremble, and it's my surmise
that the leader of the witches' coven in Woodilee could stand his
ground with Bold himself on matters of doctrine."

"You have formidable foes."

"I have a whole parish, for even those who are free of guilt are
too timid to lift a hand.  Likewise I have my Kirk Session."

Mr. Fordyce exclaimed.

"And it looks like I will have the Presbytery.  I'm in ill odour
with Mr. Muirhead for dividing Israel, and to Mr. Proudfoot I smack
of heresy."

"You've aye gotten me on your side," said Mr. Fordyce.  "No that
I'm much of a fighter, for my bowels melt and my speech sticks in
my throat and I sit like a dumb ox, and syne mourn on my bed in the
night watches that I have been found wanting.  But my heart is with
you, Mr. David, and what voice my infirmities permit me, and you'll
be never out of my prayers. . . .  Come to Cauldshaw whenever ye
long for speech with a friend.  I can aye give you sympathy if I
canna give you counsel."

But when David three days later turned his horse in the direction
of Cauldshaw, it was not to the manse he went, but to the tower of
Calidon.  For Katrine Yester had become for him the only light on
his path.  She personified the cause for which he fought, the fair
world that stood in contrast to the obscene shades, and since their
last meeting in Paradise she was no longer a flitting wood-nymph,
but a woman of flesh and blood and heart.  He longed to see her in
the house where she dwelt and among her own people.

But there was no Katrine in Calidon that afternoon, for she had
gone to the greenwood.  It was a still day of July in which no
cloud tempered the heat of the sun, but the great upper chamber in
the tower was cool and dusky.  He asked for Mistress Saintserf, and
was received by that grim lady in state, for she kept him waiting
while she donned a new toy and kerchief for the occasion.  She
spoke a Scots as broad as any shepherd's wife, but the sharp vowels
of Edinburgh took the place of the softer Border tones.  Large and
gaunt and domineering, her high-nosed face and prim mouth were
mellowed by an audacious humour.  Katrine had clearly never spoken
of him (at which he was glad), but she knew him by repute and by
his connection with the miller of the Roodfoot.  She entertained
him with shortcake of her own baking and elder wine of her own
brewing, and her tone mingled the deference of a good woman towards
a spiritual guide and the freedom of an old woman towards a young
man.

"That gilpie o' mine suld have been here, but she's awa' to the
hill.  As weel try to keep a young juke frae the water as Katrine
frae stravaigin' the countryside.  And her bred denty in France and
England whaur there are nae hills!  If she had a joe [sweetheart] I
wad say nocht, but she has nae joe but the whaups."

He asked concerning Nicholas Hawkshaw.

"And that's speirin'!" she cried.  "He's fechtin' and him a
lameter, but whaur he's fechtin' and in what cause the Lord alone
kens!  Since he gaed off wi' Tam Purves three months syne sorrow a
word has come frae him.  He's maybe in England and maybe in France,
and maybe ryngin' with Montrose, and I'll wager, wherever he is,
him and his swird and Tam and his firelock are in the het o't.
Ye'll no fetter a Hawkshaw, and they can nae mair bide in the ae
place than a puddock on a brae, as my puir sister that was married
on him kenned ower weel.  And the same bluid's in Katrine, wha suld
hae been a laddie, and a tinkler laddie, for it's no her that will
mind her seam or watch the pot when the sun's shinin'.  She's a
fine lassie for a' that, but by ordinar' forgetfu'.  I wish I saw
her wed."

Of Woodilee she had many questions to ask.

"It's a' Hawkshaw land, but I never likit the folk.  There's a
wheen fosy bodies yonder, wha pray mair with their tongues than
their hearts, and they're as keen at a niffer [bargain] as a
Musselburgh wabster--aye wi' the puir face and the greetin' word
when it comes to payin' siller.  Auld Dobbie in Murchison's Close--
he's our doer [man of business], ye maun ken, as his father was
afore him--he has had mony a sair tuilzie for our bits o' rents.
Now that Nicholas is at the wars it's my shouther that has to carry
the burden, and there's never a post frae Embro but brings me
Dobbie's scribin'.  Ye'll ken that the mailin' o' Crossbasket is to
let, and whaur am I to get a guid tenant wi' the land in siccan a
steer?"

David told her the news he had heard at Kirk Aller.

"Keep us a'!" she cried.  "God send Nicholas binna wi' Montrose, or
we'll hae him and Tam Purves here rauvagin' his ain lands, and if
Argyll gets the upper hand they'll be glorifyin' God at the end o'
a tow in the Grassmarket.  Hech, sir, we're surely faun on the
latter days when, it is written, confusion will be on the people.
I'm for the Kirk, but they tell me Montrose is likewise for the
Kirk as he conceives it, and between her twa well-wishers it's like
our auld Sion will get uncoly mishandled.  But I hae nae broo o'
poalitics.  My poalitics is just an auld wife's poalitics that
wants to be left in peace by her fireside. . . .  But ye say
Montrose is mairchin' south?  He'll be for England, and that means
the road by Aller Water.  I'll hae to kilt my coats and pit the
tower o' Calidon in a state of defence against Nicholas or ony
ither, for if I let the laird intil his ain house we'll hae to
answer for't before the Privy Council."

It was plain that Mistress Saintserf was not ill-pleased with
David, for she talked freely and would hardly let him go.

"Ye're ower young for the sacred callin'," she told him when at
last he took his leave.  "And ye're ower wise-like a man for a
minister.  Saunts suld hae weak stomachs, like our ain Mr. Fordyce;
it gars them sit loose to earthly affections."

"I would put up with his affliction if I could get one-half of his
goodness," said David.

"'Deed that's weel spoken.  I'm sure o' Heaven if I can get haud o'
the strings of Mr. James's cloak.  Never heed an auld wife's
clavers.  Come back and prie our grosarts when they're ripe, and if
ye see that lass o' mine on the hill tell her I'm waitin' for her
wi' a besom."

On his way home David had no sight of Katrine, but the next
afternoon he met her in Paradise.  She came to him smiling and
friendly as a boy.

"You have been to Calidon and seen Aunt Grizel.  I congratulate you
on your conquest, sir, for my aunt is now your devout partisan and
you have won another friend in this countryside.  But what is this
news of the Lord Marquis?"

They whiled away the summer afternoon with talk, rambling sometimes
through the oak glades, but always returning to the nook by the
spring, while David kept a jealous eye on the declining sun.  The
girl must be well on her way to Calidon before the first dusk
began.  When he came again they did not talk of his troubles, nor
even of Montrose, but of little things--her childhood in France,
her kin, the tales of the glen, his own youth at Edinburgh College.
For she was not an ally so much as a refuge.  When he was with her
he was conscious that the world was still large and sunlit, the
oppression lifted from his spirit, he saw himself not only victor
in the quarrel, but a messenger of God with a new gospel to
perplexed mankind.

One evening, when he had seen the girl descend through the hazels
to the Rood vale, and had turned back towards the shoulder of the
Hill of Deer, he saw a man's figure slanting across the hill as if
coming from Melanudrigill.  It was Reiverslaw, but though their
paths all but intersected the farmer did not stop to talk.  He
waved a hand in greeting.  "Ye suld gie a look in at the
Greenshiel," he shouted.  "They tell me Richie Smail is in need of
consolation."

David took the hint, passed word to Richie, and the next evening
met Reiverslaw in the herd's cottage.  "Tak' a look round the
faulds, Richie," said the master.  "Me and the minister has
something to say to ither," and the two were left alone in the dim
sheiling.

"I've been spyin' oot the land," said Reiverslaw, "like the lads
that Joshua sent afore him into Canaan.  I canna say I likit the
job, but I've been through the Wud east and west, and I've found
the bit whaur the coven meets aside the auld altar.  I think I
could find the road till't on the blackest nicht.  And I've been
speirin' judeeciously in Woodilee."

"But surely they did not answer?"

The dark face of the farmer had a crooked grin.

"Trust me, I was discreet.  But I've a name for takin' a stoup ower
muckle, and when the folk thocht I was fou, my lugs were as gleg as
a maukin's.  They're preparin' for another Sabbath, and it fa's on
the Lammas Eve.  On that nicht you and me maun tak' the Wud."

David shivered, and the man saw it.

"The flesh is weak," he said, "and I'm feelin' like that mysel'.
But you an' me are no the anes to pit our hand to the plew-stilts
and turn back.  Mr. Sempill, are ye young enough to speel a tree?"

"I was a great climber as a laddie."

"Weel, ye'll hae to be a laddie aince again.  And I'll tell ye
mair.  Ye'll hae to leave this place afore the Lammas-tide.  Is
there ony bit ye can bide at, not abune twenty miles frae
Woodilee?"

"There is my cousin at Newbiggin."

"Weel, to Newbiggin ye gang, and your departure maun be public.
Crack about it for days afore.  Tell the auld wife at the manse and
deave her wi' your preparations.  For, if you're no oot o' the
parish in guid time, ye'll be lockit in your chamber, as ye were on
the second Beltane.  And ye maun be in the Wud that nicht as a
witness, for there's just us twasome, you and me, and we maun be
witnesses that the Presbytery and the Sheriff and the Lords in
Embro cannot deny."

"I see that.  But have you found out nothing more in Woodilee?"

"I've gotten a hantle o' suspeecions.  Man, ye'd wonder to see how
chief me and Chasehope are these days.  I've been ower to see his
English bull, and I've ta'en his advice about sheep, and I've
sell't him a score o' gimmers at a price that made me voamit.  He
thinks I'm a dacent, saft, through-ither body, wi' his wits sair
fuddled by strong drink, and has nae back-thochts o' ane that's
just clay in his hands. . . .  Ay, and I've been payin' muckle
attention to his hen-house.  His wife, ye maun ken, is a notable
hen-wife, and she has a red cock that there's no the like o' in the
countryside.  I took Rab Prentice up wi' me to Chasehope toun, and
I bade Rab tak' special note o' the red cock."

"But I do not see the purpose . . ."

"Ye needna--yet.  Ye'll be tell't in guid time.  I'm thinkin' o'
the process afore the Presbytery, and it's witnesses I'm seekin'.
I hae twa honest men, my herds Richie Smail and Rab Prentice, but
Richie's ower auld to tak' the Wud and Hirplin' Rab wad dee afore
he would pit his neb inside it.  So there's just you and me for the
chief job, though the ither twa will hae their uses."

The imminence of the trial made David's heart sick, for he had now
brooded for three months on the mysteries of the Wood, whereas at
Beltane he had stumbled upon them in hot blood unwittingly.  He was
confident in his cause, but he believed most firmly that the Devil
in person would be his antagonist, and the cool tones of Reiverslaw
struck him with admiration and awe.

"Man, you speak as calm as if you were making ready for a clipping.
Is it that you do not believe in the power of Satan?"

"I believe in God," said the man, "and I've seen ower muckle o' the
world no to believe in the Deil.  But I'll no be feared o' a Deil
that misguides auld wives and tak's up wi' rotten peats like
Chasehope, and though he comes in a brimstane lowe I'll hae a nick
at him."

Then began for David a time of doubt and heart-searching.  He could
not share the robust confidence of Reiverslaw, for his memory of
Beltane was too clear and he had lived too long under its shadows.
His imagination, always quick and easily kindled, ran riot, and he
saw the Wood as an abode of horrid mysteries, which spread into
subtle ramifications of evil the more he pondered them.  His
secular learning was so much fuel to this fire.  Courage did not
fail him, but brightness died out of his world, and he knew himself
condemned to tread a dark winepress alone.

It was the thought of Katrine that most disquieted him.  The Wood,
the whole parish, the very mission on which he was engaged, seemed
to him one vast pollution, to be kept hidden for ever from youth
and innocence.  The girl must not be allowed to come within sight
of the skirts of it.  There could be no friendship between them,
and it was his first duty to warn her.

So when they met in Paradise it was a shamefaced young man that
stood before her, a young man with a white face who kept his eyes
on the ground and spoke terrible things.  Words came unreadily, but
his broken speech was more moving than eloquence.  He bade her keep
to the clean precincts of Calidon and come not even near the
greenwood.  God's curse was on the parish, and in the judgment
preparing innocent might share with guilty.  As for himself, he was
no friend for such as she.

"I am too heavily burdened," he stammered.  "I must touch pitch,
and my hands will be defiled.  I will blight your youth with my
dark duties. . . .  I will never come again to this place, and I
plead with you to come no more, for it is too near the Enemy's
country. . . .  Go now, I beg of you, and forget that you have
ever seen me and called me friend.  You will torture me if you
bide. . . ."

There was more of the same sort, and then David stopped, confident
that he had done his purpose, and that no proud girl would linger
in the face of such a warning.  He waited, very cold and lonely at
heart, and he thought he heard her departing feet on the grass.

But when he raised his eyes she had not moved, and her face was
smiling.



CHAPTER X

WHAT THE MOON SAW


There was great heat at the end of July--sultry, thunderous
weather, when the hills drowsed under a haze and the sun's beams
seemed to be the more torrid for the screen of vapour through which
they fell.  The heavens were banking up for the Lammas rains.  But
each evening the skies cleared, and the night was an amethyst dome
sprinkled with stars.

David made a great to-do about his visit to Newbiggin.  On the
Monday morning he announced it to Isobel, and in an hour the word
had gone through the village.  His housekeeper seemed to receive
the news with relief.  "Blithe I am to hear it, sir.  Folk suld
whiles change their ground like bestial, and ye've been ower lang
tethered to this parochine.  Newbiggin will be a caller bit in this
lown weather, and while ye're awa' I'll get your chamber cleaned
and the stairs washed doun.  Dinna haste to come back, for I'll no
look for ye or Setterday."

He set off on the Tuesday after midday, and there were many eyes in
Woodilee to mark his going.  That night he duly slept at Newbiggin,
but the next day, which was Lammas Eve, he left his cousin's house
and rode up Clyde water into the farthest moors.  It was a wide
circuit, which brought him in the afternoon to the uplands which
separate Rood from Annan.  All day he had been out of sight of
human dwelling, and the first he saw was in the dusk, when he
descended upon the tower of Calidon by the glen of the Calidon
burn.  At Calidon he left his horse with the grieve, promising to
return for it on the morrow, and, with one look at the lit windows
of the tower, he set out on foot to ford the Rood.  About nine
o'clock in the mulberry gloaming he reached the cottage of the
Greenshiel.

Three figures greeted him there.  One was the herd of the outer
hirsel, Richie Smail; another was Rab Prentice, the herd of the
home hirsel, who sat on the turf deas at the cottage-end with his
crutch beside him; the third was Reiverslaw himself, who was also
seated, smoking a pipe of tobacco.

"Ye're in braw time, Mr. Sempill," said the last.  "Did ye pass ony
folk on the road?"

"I have seen no man since the morning, except the Calidon grieve
half an hour syne."

"And that's just as weel.  Richie, kindle the cruisie, for our job
is better done indoors."

The feeble light in the hut revealed a curious assembly.  The two
shepherds had faces of portentous gravity, and their twitching
mouths and restless eyes were proof of an extreme discomfort.
Reiverslaw wore his usual frieze small-clothes and boot-hose, but
he had no coat, though he had slung on his arm what might have been
that garment.  He flung this on the settle.  "It's ower het to wear
that muckle maud till the time comes.  We maun get to business, Mr.
Sempill, for you should be on the road afore the moon rises.  We're
here to get our plan strauchtit oot and there's jimp [scarcely]
time.  Rab Prentice, ye've been twice wi' me to Chasehope in the
last se'en days.  Ye mind the braw red cock the wife has gotten?"

"Fine," said the shepherd.

"There's no sic another fowl in the countryside?"

"That I'll engage."

"Therefore if I show ye the morn a pluckin' o' red feathers, ye'll
jalouse it's the Chasehope cock?"

"Ay.  But I'm no gaun intil the Wud . . . not even in braid
daylicht."

"If I bid ye, ye'll gang, Rab Prentice, though I suld carry ye
myself. . . .  Now, secondly, as the ministers say.  Do ye see this
bottle?  Smell it, a' three of ye.  That's a smell ye never fand
afore?  It's what they call oil of hennyseed, and I got it frae a
horse-doctor at Carlisle.  I'll wager there's no anither phial o'
the same between here and Embro.  It's a smell ye'll no sune
forget.  Pit a dab on yer sleeves to remind ye o't.  If the three
o' us gangs to Chasehope the morn and finds Chasehope's breeks and
Chasehope's sark stinkin' o' this oil, ye'll be able to swear to
it, and to swear that I showed it you this verra nicht and that ye
kenned the smell when ye fand it again."

The two men agreed, sniffing the drop on their sleeve.

"Thirdly," said Reiverslaw, "I'm gaun to turn mysel' intil a
guisyard."

He picked up the thing he had been carrying, and revealed it as a
cloak of deerskins which fitted like a loose jerkin.  Over his head
he drew a cap of skins with slits for his eyes, a roughly-shaped
nozzle like a deer's, and on the top the horns of a goat.

"Save us a'!" Richie cried, as he saw his master stand up, his
lean, active body surmounted by a beast's head.  "Save us a', ye're
no gaun to tamper wi' the accursed thing?"

"That's what I ettle, but the intention is guid, and it's by our
intentions we'll be judged, as Mr. Sempill will tell ye.  Look at
me, ye daft auld fules, for there's naething to be feared o'.  I'm
for the Wud the nicht, and it's my purpose to bide in cover till
the folk are half dementit, and syne, when their een are blind, to
join them.  I've a notion that there will be some wark wi' the red
cock, and I'd like a feather or twa as a keepsake.  And I've a sort
of notion that my auld friend Chasehope will be there; so as a
token o' friendship I'll pit saut on his tail--whilk means that if
I get the chance I'll anoint his dowp wi' the hennyseed.  Now, you
twa, take tent and listen to me.  Ye will swear that I telled ye
what I have telled ye, and that ye saw me at the Greenshiel dressed
up like a merry-andrew.  The horns suld hae been a stag's, but I
was feared o' hankin' them in the busses, so the puir auld
Reiverslaw billy-goat had to dee."

He was a crazy sight with the goat's head on him, and a formidable
sight without it, for as he stood in that dusk beside two men bent
with labour, the one maimed and the other past the allotted span of
human years, David had an impression of something desperate and
fearless and light-hearted.  The shepherds were clearly torn
between loyalty and terror, and he himself, while firm enough in
his resolve, had to keep his thoughts battened down to prevent his
knees knocking.  But Reiverslaw seemed to have no fears.  He had
set about the thing as cannily as if he were selling sheep at
Lockerbie fair, and now, with a venture before him which not two
other men in Scotland would have contemplated, he was notably the
least embarrassed of the party.

"I saw three pyets [magpies] flee intil the Wud this morning," said
Prentice, "and but ane cam' back.  That's an unco freit [omen] for
the beginnin' o't!"

"Haud your tongue, ye auld wife," said Reiverslaw.  "Freits fa' to
them that fear them, and I'm no gaun to fash my heid about twa
jauds o' birds. . . ."

"I had a vision yestereen," Richie put in.  "I saw the haill land
o' Scotland like a field o' aits, white until the harvest, the
haill land frae John o' Groats to Galloway, a' but the parish o'
Woodilee, whilk was unplewed and rough wi' briars and thrissles.
An' says I to mysel', 'Whatever place is yon?' and says a voice to
me, 'That's what we ca' the Deil's Baulk in the gospel field o'
Scotland.'"

"And a very true observe, for Deil's Baulk is just what the Wud is,
and it's for us to pit a plew intill't and mak' a fire o' the
wastry.  Set bite and sup afore the minister, Richie."

The shepherd produced some oatcakes, of which David ate only a
mouthful, for though he had had no food since morning, his throat
was dry and his tongue like a stick.  He drank, however, a pint of
buttermilk.

"Kirn-milk for you?" the host asked of Reiverslaw.  "I hae nae
yill, but Rab has brocht a flask o' aquavitty ye gied him at the
lambin'."

"I'll hae spring water.  Nae strong drink for me, for this nicht
I'm like Jonadab the son of Rechab. . . .  Are ye ready, Mr.
Sempill?  Ye maun start first, for ye've a tree to speel.  There's
nae hurry for me till the Deil begins his pipin'."

"You are either strong in the faith, or of a very stout heart,"
said David admiringly.

"No as strong as I might be," was the answer.  "Afore we part, wad
it no be weel for you to pit up a prayer?"

The minister prayed--and it was as if he confessed alone to his God
in his closet.  He himself was strengthened by it, and the comfort
of Richie and Rab was visibly enlarged.  But Reiverslaw stood
through the devotions in no very devout position, and from him came
none of the responses which flowed from the others.  Before the
"Amen" he had his goat-cap on, and was peering at the rising moon.
He made his staff sing as he whirled it.

David took his strange confederate's hand, and his own shook.
Reiverslaw noted his trepidation.

"Fear nocht, sir.  It'll gang ill wi' the wirriecow gin we meet
him.  But what brocht a man o' peace like you into this tuilzie?"

"Jealousy for the honour of my God.  And you?  For it is less your
quarrel than mine."

The man grinned.  "Write it down that Andra Shillinglaw couldna see
an honest man beat, and that he didna like kail-worms."



David had many times gone over in his mind the route to the glade
of the altar, and had compared notes with Reiverslaw that very
night.  The distance was less than three miles, and he had a couple
of hours to reach the place and still be in position well before
midnight.  As on all the nights of the past week, the oppressive
haze of the day had lifted, and the sky rose to an infinite height,
thick studded with stars, for the moon was only new risen.  David
made his way to the dividing glen between the pines and the hazels
in a miserable disquiet.  He had lost the first fierce anger which
had stiffened him for his frustrated expedition on the eve of the
second Beltane, and his tacit ostracism all summer by the folk of
Woodilee had engendered a profound self-distrust.  Even the thought
of Katrine Yester did not nerve him; she belonged to a world
separated by impassable gulfs from that black necromancy which he
warred against.  Nor did the fact that he had an ally comfort him,
for Reiverslaw, he greatly feared, fought in his own strength and
not in that of the Lord, and in such a strife the arm of flesh
could not avail them.  As he stumbled through the dark undergrowth
David's lips moved in anxious prayers.

He entered the pines, and, shaping his course by the low line of
cliffs, came to the place where he had first met Katrine.  Thus far
he felt that he was not wholly outside the pale of kindly things.
But after that he was in enemy country, and the moon was still too
low to give him help.  He wasted half an hour in the thickets, till
by a strong effort of will he forced himself to take his bearings
and remember Reiverslaw's instructions.  He scrambled up hill again
till he was in touch with the outcrop of rock, and then suddenly
found himself looking down on the glade where stood the altar.

It was very dark, and the stone was only a ghostly blur.  But the
darkness was a blessing, for the place was not as he had seen it
before, and the sight of it did not revive the terrors he had
feared.  It looked no more than a woodland glade, and the fact that
a rabbit scurried from under his feet seemed a friendly omen.  On
the far side the trees grew thick, and he selected a gnarled Scots
fir as his perch for the night.  Its trunk, branchless for sixty
feet, was too thick to climb, but he found a younger and slimmer
tree, up which he could squirm and from its upper branches traverse
to the other.  He had not tried the game since he was a boy, and at
first his legs and arms seemed too feeble; but the exercise warmed
him, and after twice sliding back to the ground, he at last reached
the umbrella-like spread of the crest.  To gain the other tree
proved more difficult than he had thought, and he was compelled to
let his body swing and make a long stretch with his right arm.  But
the task was accomplished in the end, and he found himself on a
platform of crooked fir boughs, hidden from everything but the
stars, and with a view through the gaps of the branches to the
glade below him.

He had now a clear sight of the sky.  The moon was three-quarters
up, and the whole of Melanudrigill, with its slopes and valleys,
was washed in silver.  He was in it and yet above it and outside
it, like a man on a hillside looking into a cleft.  He made his
body comfortable in a crutch of the tree, and looked down on the
stage beneath him.  It was now lighting up, and the altar was
whitened by a stray moonbeam.  For the first time that night he
felt his spirits returning.  The oppression of the Wood was not
realized on this outer shell of it, for here only winged things
dwelt, and the unclean things of the dark had no wings.

In this happier mood his eyes sought the whereabouts of Calidon.
It was hidden by a ridge, the ridge to the west where lay Paradise.
The thought gave him an unreasoning pleasure.  He was not cut off
from the world of light, for, whatever befell on the earth beneath
him, he had but to lift up his eyes and they rested on a happier
country.

As the moon rose, the multitudinous little noises of a wood at
night were hushed.  There was a sleepy muttering of cushats to the
south of him, and then, with a clatter which made him jump, the
birds rose in a flock and flew across the valley.  After that there
was no sound until the music began.

There was no fixed moment for its beginning, for it seemed to steal
insensibly into the air.  And it was scarcely music, but rather a
delicate babble of tongues which made a crooning like the low notes
of a pipe.  The sound was all beneath him near the ground, and
gathering from different quarters to one centre.  Suddenly, in the
midst of it came a sharp liquid note, several times repeated, a
note with authority in it like a trumpet, and yet ineffably faint
and distant as if it were the echo of an echo.  It did not flutter
David's heart, for there was no threat in it, but it had a strange
effect upon his mind.  For it seemed familiar, and there was that
in him which answered it.  He felt a boy again, for in the call
there was the happy riot and the far horizons of childhood, and the
noise of hill winds and burns, and the scent of heather and thyme,
and all the unforgotten things of memory.

The silver trumpet did not speak again, but the soft babble was
creeping nearer, and suddenly just beneath him it broadened and
deepened into the sound of pipes.  He looked down and saw that the
dance had begun.  As before, the piper with his hound mask sat
cross-legged beyond the altar, and the dancers revolved widdershins
around him. . . .

To his amazement he found himself looking on not in terror, but in
curiosity.  It was a graver dance than that of Beltane, not the mad
riot of the bursting life of spring, but the more sober march of
summer and the hot suns bringing on the harvest. . . .  Seen from
above, the figures were only puppets, moving at the bidding of a
lilt that rose and fell like a lost wind.  The passion of wrath
with which he had watched the former Sabbath had utterly gone from
him.  He felt a curious pity and friendliness, for there was
innocence here, misguided innocence.

"Will this be the way God looks down upon the follies of the
world?" he asked himself.  What was it that Reiverslaw had said?--
If the Kirk confines human nature too strictly, it will break out
in secret ways, for men and women are born into a terrestrial
world, though they have hopes of Heaven. . . .  That was blasphemy,
and he knew it, but he did not shudder at it.

How long these gentle dances continued he did not know, for he was
in a dream and under the spell of the piping. . . .  Then suddenly
there came a change.  The dancing-floor became dark, and he saw
that clouds were coming over the moon.  A chill had crept into the
air.  Lights sprang up out of nowhere, and though the wind had
begun to sigh through the trees, he noted that these lights did not
flicker. . . .  The music stopped, and the dancers crowded together
around the altar.

The hound-faced leader stood above them with something in his hand.
The mysterious light seemed to burn redly, and he saw that the
thing was a bird--a cock which was as scarlet as blood.  The altar
top was bare, and something bright spurted into the hollow of the
stone.  From the watchers came a cry which chilled David's marrow,
and he saw that they were on their knees.

The leader was speaking in a high shrill voice like a sleepwalker's,
and David caught but the one word often repeated--Abiron.  Every
time it was uttered the man dabbled his finger in the blood on the
altar and marked a forehead, and as each received the mark he or she
fell prostrate on the ground. . . .

There was no innocence now in that spectacle of obscene abasement.
Terror entered into David's soul, and his chief terror was that he
had not been afraid before.  He had come very near falling himself
under the spell.

There followed what seemed to be a roll-call.  The leader read
names out of a book, and the prostrate figures answered.  The names
seemed like an idiot's muttering, not good Scots words, but uncouth
gutturals.  And always like an undercurrent came the word Abiron.

Then with an unholy cry the whole coven was on its feet.  The pipes
began again, and music other than pipes, which seemed to soak out
of the ground and the adjacent coverts.  Gone was every trace of
gentleness and innocency.  It was witch-music made by the Devil
himself on the red-hot chanter-reeds of Hell, and the assembly
capered as if their feet were on the lake of burning marl.  The
Israelitish prophet in David awoke, and he saw it all with clear
eyes and horror-stricken soul.

If the Beltane dance had been hideous, this was the very heart of
bestial lust.  Round and round it swept, a fury and yet an ordered
fury, in which madness and obscenity were mingled.  He recognized
the faces of women, old and young, who sat devoutly beneath him in
kirk of a Sabbath.  The men were all masked, but he knew that if he
could tear off the beast coverings he would see features which were
normally composed into a pious decency.  Figure would clasp figure
and then fling apart, but in each circuit he noted that the dancers
kissed some part of the leader's body, nozzling him like dogs on
the roadside.

Up in his tree-top the minister had now an undivided mind.  He had
the names of several of the females of the coven firm in his
memory, and for the men he must trust to Reiverslaw.  There were
some of the dancers with goat-horns, but as the rout swung round it
seemed to him that a new goat-mask had appeared, a taller, wilder
figure, who was specially devout in his obeisance before Hound-
face.  Was it Reiverslaw with his aniseed?

The night had become very dark, and the only light in the glade
came from the candles which burned in its hidden hollows.  And then
suddenly a colder wind blew, and like the burst of a dam came a
deluge of rain.  The Lammas floods had broken, stealing upon the
world, as is their fashion, out of a fair sky.



It seemed to David--and he held it part of the infernal miracle--
that the torrent did not quench the lights.  In a trice he himself
was soaked to the skin, but the candles still burned, though
the rain beat on the floor of the glade with a sound like a
whip-lash. . . .  But it ended the dance.  The silver pipe sounded
again, and as the wind rose higher and the falling water slanted
under it to search out even the bield of the trees, he saw figures
moving hurriedly off.  The next time he looked down through the
spears of rain--for the hidden moon still made a dim brightness
in the world--the glade was empty.  Above the noise of the storm
he thought he heard the strange babble of tongues, but now it was
departing to the far corners of the Wood.

He waited for a little and then tried to descend.  But he found it
harder to get down than to get up, for he could not find the branch
by which he had swung himself from the lesser tree, and in the end
had to drop a good twenty feet into the bracken, whence he rolled
into the empty glade. . . .  He scrambled to his feet and made
haste to get out of it, but not before he had sniffed the odour of
unclean pelts.--And yes--surely that was the stink of Reiverslaw's
aniseed.

He had no difficulty about his homeward course.  Most of the way he
ran, but fear had completely left his heart.  The rain in his face
seemed to cleanse and invigorate him.  He had looked upon great
wickedness, but he had looked down on it, like the Almighty, from
above, and it seemed a frail and pitiful thing--a canker to be
rooted out, but a thing with no terror for a servant of God.  The
Devil was but a botcher after all.  And then he remembered how the
first notes of the music had melted him, and he felt humbled.

Reiverslaw had arrived at the Greenshiel before him.  The place was
filled with the reek of burning hides, and David saw that the goat-
mask and cloak had been laid on the peats.  His ally, a weird
dripping figure, sat on a stool sipping the aqua vit which Rab
Prentice had brought with him.  He, who had started the night's
venture with such notable sang-froid, was now in a sweat of fright.

"Be thankit ye're safe," he stuttered, while the spirits spilled
over his beard.  "I never thocht to see ye mair, for I never thocht
to win out o' yon awesome place.  My legs are a' gashed and
scartit, for I cam' here through stane and briar like a dementit
staig [young horse].  Oh, sir, siccan a sicht for mortal een!"

"Saw ye the Foul Thief?" asked the awed Prentice.

"I saw ane in his image, and I got a drap o' the red cock's bluid,
and I loupit like the lave, but it wasna wi' their unholy glee.
Sir, I was fair wud wi' terror--me that am no gien to fear muckle--
for I got a cauld grue in my banes and my een turned back in their
sockets.  I tell ye, I forgot the errand I had come on, I forgot my
name and my honest upbringing, and I was like a wean forwandered
among bogles. . . .  I've burnt thae skins, and when I get name
I'll burn every stitch o' cleading, for the reek o' the Pit is on
it."

"Did you recognize many?" David asked.

"No me.  I had nae een to see wi'.  I spun round like a teetotum,
and I wadna say but I let out skellochs wi' the best--may God
forgie me!"

"But the oil--the aniseed?"

Reiverslaw held up something which David saw was an empty bottle.

"I didna fail ye there.  For the ae man I kenned in the coven was
him that piped.  When I cam' near him I felt a stound o' black
hate, and there's but the ae man on God's earth that can gar me
scunner like yon.  So when it was my turn to bow down afore him, he
gat mair frae me than a kiss.  Unless he burns his breeks this very
nicht there'll be a queer savour aboot the toun o' Chasehope the
morn."



CHAPTER XI

THE MINISTER GIRDS UP HIS LOINS


Next day David returned to the manse in time for the noontide meal.
He was greeted by Isobel with a hospitable bustle, in which was
apparent a certain relief.  She had known of the Lammas festival;
she guessed, no doubt, that David too was aware of it, and she
evidently took his visit to Newbiggin as a sign that he had at last
taken her prudent counsel.  But from her master she got no
response.  When questioned as to the welfare of his kin at
Newbiggin he answered in civil monosyllables, ate his dinner in
silence, and thereafter secluded himself in his study.

That evening he walked to the Greenshiel, where Reiverslaw and
Prentice met him.  The former was in an excited state and had
clearly been drinking--to the scandal of the two shepherds, who
wore portentous faces.  Richie Smail had the air of an honest man
compelled to walk in abhorred paths; he had been reading his Bible
before their arrival, and sat with a finger in the leaves, saying
nothing, but now and then lifting puzzled eyes to his master.
Prentice's hard jaw was set, and he swung his crutch as if it had
been a pikestaff.

"We were at Chasehope by eleven hours this mornin'," Reiverslaw
announced.  "I took Richie and Rab, as I forewarned Ephraim, to
have a look at his new tups.  But I needna tell you there was nae
word of Ephraim.  The wife said he was awa' to Kirk Aller, but she
was like a hen on a het girdle a' the time, and I think we wad hae
found him if we had ripit the press-beds.  If he was lurking there
he maun hae gotten a sair fricht, for I spak' that loud ye could
hae heard me on the tap o' Chasehope hill."

"Did you find what you sought?" David asked.

"I fand eneuch."  He drew from a pocket a bunch of feathers.  "I
got these last nicht in the Wud.  Doubtless there'll be mair in the
same place, if they havena been soopit up.  But there's nae red
cock the day in the toun o' Chasehope.  I admired the wife's hens
and speired what had become o' the cock, and was telled that it was
deid--chokit last nicht on a grosart.  I ken the kind o' grosart
that ended the puir beast."

"And the aniseed?"

Reiverslaw laughed tipsily.

"We were just in time, sir.  The wife had a fire lowin' in the
yaird.  'What's burnin', mistress?' says I.  'Just some auld
clouts,' says she.  'There was a gangrel body sleepit ae nicht in
the loft,' says she, 'and he left some duds ahint him, as fu' o'
fleas as a cadger's bonnet.  I'm haein' them brunt,' says she, 'for
fear o' the weans.'  Weel, me and Richie and Rab stood aside the
fire, and it loupit as if an oil can had been skailed on it, and
the reek that rase frae it was just the reek o' my wee bottle.
Mair nor that, there was a queer smell ayont the hallin--Richie and
Rab fand it as weel as me.  What name wad ye gie it, Rab?"

"It was the stink o' the stuff ye showed us in this house last
nicht," said Prentice solemnly.

"Sae muckle for that," said Reiverslaw.  "We've proof that the lad
in the dowg's cap was nae ither than him we ken o'.  Na, na, I
never let on to the wife.  I was jokesome and daffin' wi' her, and
made a great crack o' the tups, and praised a' I saw about the
toun, and Rab and Richie were as wise as judges.  I had a dram
inside me, and was just my canty ordinar'.  But my een and my
nostrils werena idle, and I saw what I've telled ye. . . .  My heid
was in sic a thraw last nicht that I canna sweir wi' ony certainty
to ither faces, though I hae my suspeecions about the weemen.  But
you, sir, sittin' aloft on the tree-tap, ye maun hae had a graund
view, for there was licht eneuch to read prent."

"I recognized certain women, to whom I can swear on my oath.  About
some I dare not be positive, but there were five of whom I have no
doubt.  There were Jean Morison and her daughter Jess."

"The folk o' the Chasehope-fit," Reiverslaw cried.  "Ay, they wad
be there.  They've aye been ill-regarded."

"And old Alison Geddie in the kirkton."

"A daft auld wife, that skellochs like a sea-maw!"

"And Eppie Lauder from Mirehope road-end."

Richie Smail groaned.  "The widow of a tried Christian, Mr.
Sempill.  A dacenter body than Wattie Lauder never walked the
roads.  It's terrible to think o' the Deil's grip on the household
o' faith."

"And Bessie Tod from the Mains."

"Peety on us, but I sat neist her at the March fast-day when Mr.
Proudfoot preached, and she was granin' and greetin' like a bairn.
Ye surely maun be in error, sir.  Bessie was never verra strong in
the heid, and she hasna the wits for the Deil's wark!"

"Nevertheless she was there.  I am as certain of it as that I was
myself in the tree-top.  Of others I have suspicions, but of these
five I have certainty."

Reiverslaw rubbed his great hands.  "Our business gangs cannily
forward.  We've gotten the names o' six o' the coven and can guess
at ithers.  Man, we'll hae a riddlin' in Woodilee that will learn
the folk no to be ill bairns.  Ye'll be for namin' them frae the
pu'pit, sir?"

"I must first bring the matter before the Presbytery.  I will
prepare my dittay, and bring it before Mr. Muirhead of Kirk Aller
as the Presbytery's moderator, and I must be guided by him as to
the next step.  It is a matter for the courts of the Kirk and
presently for the secular law."

Reiverslaw cried out.  "What for maun ye gang near the Presbytery?
If ye stir up yon byke ye'll hae commissioners of justiciary and
prickers and the haill clamjamphrie, and in the lang end an auld
kimmer or twa will suffer, and the big malefactors will gang scot
free.  Chasehope's ower near the lug o' the law to tak' ony scaith,
and yon's the kail-worm I wad be at.  Be guidit by me, Mr. Sempill,
and keep the thing inside the pairish.  As the auld saying gangs,
bleach your warst hanks in your ain yaird, for I tell ye if the
Kirk and the Law hae the redding o't it's little justice will be
done.  Name and upbraid and denounce a' and sindry, but dinna
delate to the Presbytery.  A man may like the kirk weel eneuch, and
no be aye ridin' on the riggin' o't. . . .  I'll tell ye my way
o't.  Now that we ken some o' the coven, the four o' us can keep
our een open, and watch them as a dowg watches a ratton; and at
their next Sabbath, as they ca' it, we'll be ready for them.  I can
get a wheen Moffat drovers that fear neither man nor deil, and
aiblins some o' Laird Hawkshaw's folk frae Calidon, and we'll break
in on their coven and tear the masks frae the men, and rub their
nebs in their ain mire, and dook the lot in the Water o' Aller.
I'll wager that's the way to get rid o' witchcraft frae the
parochine, for we'll mak' it an unco painfu' business to tak' the
Wud.  A witch or a warlock is a fearsome thing to the mind o' man,
but they're bye wi't gin we mak' them gowks and laughing-stocks."

The two shepherds stared at the speaker with upbraiding eyes, and
David's face looked as if a blasphemy had been spoken.

"You would fight the Devil in your own carnal strength," he said
sadly.  "It's little you would make of it.  You talk as if this
wickedness of the Wood were but a natural human prank, when it is
black sin that can only be combated by the spirit of God and such
weapons as God has expressly ordained.  Man, man, Reiverslaw,
you've but a poor notion of the power of the Adversary.  I tell you
last night I was trembling like a weaned child before yon blast
that blew out of Hell, and you yourself were no better when I found
you here.  I durstna have entered the Wood except as a soldier of
the Lord."

Reiverslaw laughed.

"I was sair fleyed [frightened], I'll no deny, but I got a juster
view o' things wi' the daylicht."

"It would appear that you got courage also from Lucky Weir."

"True.  I had my mornin' and my meridian and an orra stoup or twa
sinsyne.  I'm a man that's aye been used wi' a guid allowance o'
liquor.  But the drink, if so be ye're no fou, whiles gi'es ye a
great clearness, and I counsel ye, sir, to keep wide o' the law,
whether it be of the Kirk or the State.  It's a kittle thing, and
him that invokes it is like to get the redder's straik [the
peacemaker's blow].  It's like a horse that flings its heels when
ye mount and dings out the rider's teeth. . . .  But hae your ain
way o't, and dinna blame me if it's a fashious way.  There's me and
Rab Prentice and Richie Smail waitin' to sweir to what's in our
knowledge, and if there's mair speirin' to be done in the Wud, I'll
no fail ye.  But keep in mind, Mr. Sempill, that I'm a thrang body,
and maun be drawin' my crocks and sellin' my hog-lambs afore the
back-end, and it's like I'll hae to traivel to Dumfries, and maybe
to Carlisle.  Richie will aye hae word o' my doings, and if ye want
me it wad be wise to tell Richie a week afore."

That night on his return David summoned Isobel to his presence.
The housekeeper appeared with a more cheerful countenance than she
had worn for weeks, but the minister's first words solemnized her.

"Isobel Veitch, I asked you a question after Beltane and you
refused me an answer.  I, your minister, besought your aid as a
confessing Christian, and you denied it me.  I told you that I
would not rest until I had rooted the idolatry of the Wood from
this parish.  Since then I have not been idle, and I have found men
who did not fail me.  Three days back I rode to Newbiggin, as I
told you, but I returned on Lammas Eve, and on Lammas Eve I was a
witness a second time to the abominations of the heathen.  Not only
myself, but another with me, so that the thing is established out
of the mouths of two witnesses, while Robert Prentice and Richard
Smail can speak in part to confirm me.  Now I have got my tale
complete, and it is to the Presbytery that I shall tell it.  Will
you implement it with such knowledge as you possess, or do you
continue stiff in your recusancy?"

The old woman's eyes opened like an owl's.

"Wha went with you--wha was sae left to himsel'?" she gasped.

"Andrew Shillinglaw in Reiverslaw. . . .  One man and five women
stand arraigned on our witness.  I will speak their names, and I
care not if you put it through the parish, for soon the names will
be thundered from the pulpit.  The man was Ephraim Caird."

"I'll no believe it," she cried.  "Chasehope's aye been a polished
shaft in Christ's kirk. . . .  He's o' your ain Session. . . .  He
cam' here, ye mind, when ye first broke bread in this house.  Ay,
and he was here when ye were awa' at Newbiggin.  I was seilin' the
milk when I heard his voice at the door--cam' here wi' ane o' his
wife's skim-milk kebbucks that she kens weel how to mak', for she's
frae the Wastlands--spoke sae kind and neeborlike, and was speirin'
after the health o' the gude man my maister. . .  Tak' it back,
sir, for ye maun be mistook.  Ephraim's weel kenned for a fair
Nathaniel."

There was no doubt about her honesty, for the mention of Chasehope
had staggered her.

"Nevertheless he is a whited sepulchre, painted without, but inside
full of bones and rottenness."

"Oh, sir, bethink ye afore ye mak' this fearsome accusation.  Your
een may have played ye fause.  And wha in their senses wad lippen
to Reiverslaw?  A muckle, black-avised, grippy incomer that nae man
kens the get o' . . . sweirs like a dragoon when the maut's abune
the meat.  Ye'll never gang to the Presbytery in siccan company wi'
siccan a tale!  And Hirplin' Rab is a thrawn deevil, though I'll no
deny he hae a gift o' prayer--and Richie Smail is sair failed in
body and mind since last back-end when Mirren dee'd."

"There are also five women," David went on.  "There are Jean and
Jess Morison from Chasehope-foot."

"Sae that's where ye get your ill-will at Chasehope--because he's
ower kind to turn twa randies intil the road!  I hae nothing to say
for the Morisons.  They come oot o' a dirty nest, and they may ride
on a saugh ilka nicht to Norroway for a' I ken."

"There is Eppie Lauder at Mirehope."

"Tut, man, as dacent a body as ever boiled sowens.  And her man,
Wattie, that dee'd in Aprile o' the year thretty-nine, was weel
thocht o' by a'body.  Ye've come till a frem'd toun wi' Eppie."

"And Alison Geddie."

"A tongue like a bell-clapper, but ettles nae hairm."

"Likewise Bessie Tod of the Mains."

"She's weak in her mind, sir.  Lang syne she had a bairn to a
sodger and it dee'd, and she never got ower it.  Ye'll no convince
me that there's ony ill in Bessie forbye the want o' sense."

"I have evidence of ill.  I accuse, I do not condemn.  It is for
others to do the judging."

Isobel's timidity, which had been notable during the Beltane
interview, seemed now to have left her.  There was a sincere
emotion in her voice.

"I plead wi' ye, sir, to halt while yet there's time, and if needs
be content yoursel' wi' private examination.  It's verra weel for
Andra Shillinglaw, that's but an incomer, and rakes the country
gettin' as he gangs, like a cadger's powny.  But you're the
minister o' Woodilee, and the fair fame o' the parochine suld be as
dear to you as your ain.  If ye tak' the gait ye speak o', ye'll
mak' it a hissing and a reproach in a' the water of Aller.  It's a
quiet bien bit, wi' douce folk weel agreed, and ye wad mak' it a
desolation, and a' because some daft lads and a wheen hellicat
lassies dance their twasomes in the Wud.  It's no as if they did
ill things like garrin' the kye rin dry and the weans dwine."

"Then you admit knowledge of the sin?"

"I admit nocht, for I ken nocht.  Young folk will be young folk,
peety though it be. . . .  But for Chasehope and my auld gossip,
Eppie Lauder, the man's gyte that wad chairge them wi' idolatry--
and you can tell that to your drucken Reiverslaw."

For the first time since he had known her Isobel flung out of the
room in a temper.

Next day he sought out Chasehope, and found him alone on the hill.
The man greeted him with effusion.

"The Lammas rains is weel-timed this year, Mr. Sempill, nae ragin'
flood, but just eneuch to slocken the ground.  I start cuttin' the
bog hay the morn.  I heard ye were at Newbiggin, sir, and I trust
ye found your friends in guid health.  A blaw on the hills yonder
is fine for a body after the lown air o' Woodilee."

"I returned home on the Lammas Eve.  I ask you, Ephraim Caird, as
you will answer to your God, where were you in the mirk of that
night?"

The heavy face, now brick-red with summer suns, did not change.

"Where suld I be but in my bed?  I gaed till't early, for I had a
lang day wi' the hog-lambs."

"You know that that is a lie.  You were in the Wood, as you were in
the Wood at Beltane, dancing away your miserable soul to the
Devil's piping.  With my own eyes I saw you."

The astonishment of Chasehope was admirably simulated.

"Are ye daft, sir?  Are ye gane clean gyte?  Ye're no weel, Mr.
Sempill.  Sit ye doun, and I'll fetch you some water in my bonnet.
Ye've got a blaff o' the sun."

"I am not mad nor am I sick.  I have preached throughout the summer
at the sin, and the time has now come to get to grips with the
sinner.  This is your last chance, Ephraim Caird.  Will you confess
to me, who have been set in spiritual authority over you, or must
confession be wrung from you by other means?"

It was a warning which David felt bound to give, but he was silent
as to the rest of his purpose, for he had decided that the time had
not yet come to show his hand.  He looked sternly at Chasehope, and
under his gaze the man's face seemed to whiten, and his odd
greenish eyes to waver.  But it might be in innocent amazement.

"I kenna what ye speak o'," he stammered.  "What concern have I
wi' the Wud?  Ask the wife, and she'll tell you that I sleepit
the Lammas nicht in my bed.  But oh--the thing fair coups the
crans! . . . and me an elder thae ten year!  Ye're no weel, or
ye're dementit, to speak sic words to a man like me.  Awa' hame,
sir, and humble yoursel' on your knees and pray that ye may be
forgiven. . . .  I may cry out in the words of the Psalmist, 'They
opened their mouth wide against me, and said Aha, our eye hath
seen it.'"

David's hand clenched on his staff.  "Before God," he cried, "I
will strike you down if you utter another blasphemous word.  You
neglect my warning?  Then your punishment be on your own guilty
head."

He turned and strode away.  Once he looked back and saw Chasehope
still staring, the very image of virtuous dismay.

There was no sermon in the kirk the next two Sabbaths.  Robb the
bellman had orders not to ring the bell, but few came to the
kirkyard gate, for the rumour had spread that the minister would
conduct no ordinances until he had taken counsel with the
Presbytery.  David waited, hoping for he knew not what--some thaw
to melt this icy impenitence.  At last, on the sixteenth day of
August, he rode to Kirk Aller to visit Mr. Muirhead.

He found the Moderator in his parlour in the little stone manse,
which stood below the kirk on the knowe at the west gate above the
brig of Aller.  The room had few books, but a mass of papers, for
Mr. Muirhead was an active ecclesiastic and noted for his conduct
of church business.  Also, as if to meet the disturbed times in
which he lived, a pair of spurred boots, still with the mud on
them, stood beside the table, on it lay a brace of ancient pistols,
and from the peg of the door hung a great horseman's cloak.

Mr. Muirhead bent a preoccupied brow on David as he entered, but
his face was well content.  There were open letters before him, and
it seemed that he had just been the recipient of welcome news.

"Come awa' in, Mr. David," he cried.  He saw his visitor's eye
stray to the pistols.  "Ay, I've got me to the auld weapons.  I had
them with me at the memorable assembly in Glasgow in '38, when we
dang down the Bishops. . . .  I have a crow to pyke with you, but
first I have some braw tidings for your ear.  At the last
Presbytery we met under the shadow of calamity, but the Lord has
mercifully turned again the captivity of Sion.  Yon devil's spawn,
Montrose--alas that he should take his name from a burgh of which
worthy Mr. Saunders Linklater was so long the faithful minister!--
yon Montrose, I say, approaches the end of his tether.  It has been
a long tether, and he has ravened like a hungry hound, but he will
soon be back on his haunches with the rope tightening at his
thrapple.  The Almighty has wysed him with a sure hand intil the
snare that was prepared for him."

"Has he been defeated?" David asked.

"By this time there is good hope that he has been scattered to the
four airts of Heaven.  After his savageries in the north he marches
south to rend the fair fields of Stirling and the Lennox, and
summon the towns of Glasgow and Embro, whilk are the citadels of
our faith.  Like Jeshurun he has waxed fat and kicked, but his
pride will have a fearful fall; for long ere he wins to Clyde the
trap will be sprung.  He is bye Perth, and at this moment, I trow,
at the skirts of the Ochils.  Before him lie Argyll and Baillie
with horse and foot, which are to his heathen hirelings as four men
to one.  The faithful folk of Fife are marching cannily against his
left flank, and mustering from the Glasgow airt against his right
are the braw lads of the West, led by those well-disposed noblemen,
the Earl of Eglinton, the Earl of Cassilis, and the Earl of
Glencairn.  More--all the gentry of Clydesdale are on the road,
commanded by the Earl of Lanark, and him and his Hamiltons are
waiting to soop up the remnants of that which Argyll will shatter.
Isna that a bonny tale, Mr. Sempill?  Isna that a joyful recalling
of our bondage, even as streams of water in the south?"

David assented, but to his surprise his interest was faint.  He had
more pressing problems than the public captivity of Israel.

"And now for other matters," said Mr. Muirhead, setting his mouth
again in severe lines.  "I have word of grave mishandling at
Woodilee.  You have created a stramash in the doucest and most God-
regarding parish in the presbytery of Aller.  You are sinning away
your mercies, sir."

"It is of that I came to speak," said David.  "I have to submit to
you, and through you to the Presbytery, proofs of a dreadful
wickedness among professing Christians in that unhappy place.  Will
you be pleased to run your eye over these papers?  You will see
certain names subscribed as witnesses."

Mr. Muirhead began to read the depositions carelessly, as if he
knew what to expect from them.  Then his attention deepened, and he
wrinkled his forehead.

"Hoots!  What's this?" he cried.  "Ye were in the Wood?  Ye saw
this and that?  Mr. Sempill, ye're not exempt from the charge of
tampering with unlawful things."

"I went there as God's servant."

"Nevertheless--"  He read on, and his brows darkened.  He finished,
flung the bundle on the table, and looked at David with a troubled
and uncertain eye.

"Here's a bonny browst o' yill!  You charge your chief elder with
the sin of witchcraft--a man of noted godliness, as I myself can
testify--and you conjoin in the libel five women who are unknown to
me.  What is your evidence, I ask?  Your ain een, at a time when
you were in no condition to see clear, and forbye you were on the
top of a tree, and it was in the mid of the night.  You have no
corroboration.  But I pretermit the women, and come to Chasehope.
You have cherished a suspicion of him since Beltane, says you, when
you were present in the Wood.  And what, I ask, did you there at
that season, Mr. Sempill?  I opine that your ain conduct wants some
explanation."

"That I can give," said David.

"You have further the evidence of the man Andrew Shillinglaw, and
the plot you prepared against Chasehope.  Man, I see nothing in
your red cock's feathers or your hennyseed, as you call it.  The
well is tainted, so how can you look for pure water?  Your
Reiverslaw is notoriously a wine-bibber and a ruffler and a
despiser of ordinances.  What hinders that he should be also a
leear?  The cock's feathers may all the time have been in his
pouch, and he may have played some prank at Chasehope with the
stinkin' oil.  You have the witness of the herds, says you, but
it's easy enough to begowk two landward simpletons.  Your case will
not hold water, sir, before any competent court, and Reiverslaw,
your principal abettor, stands suspect.  As the old owercome has
it, he suld bide still that has riven breeks."

Mr. Muirhead spoke with a weighty assurance, and as David looked at
his shrewd coarse face he felt a sudden helplessness.  It would be
hard to convince a tribunal so prejudiced--in whose ears, perhaps,
Chasehope had already spoken.

"My advice to you," the voice went on, "is to get you home and let
the steer settle.  There's nothing in these papers that calls for
action by the Presbytery--just hearsay and idle 'fama', the visions
of an excited young man and the lees of a drucken reprobate.  No
doubt you mean well, but I will homologate no course which fastens
evil on a man whose righteousness has been abundantly proven.  Have
mind of the virtue of charity, sir, which thinketh no evil.  I
opine that you're ower ready to think evil.  Bring before me wise-
like evidence and I will be prompt to act, but not these havers."

So far he had spoken with a kind of rough good-humour, but now his
voice became harsh.

"They tell me you have conducted no public worship these last two
Sabbaths," he said fiercely.

"I will not lead my folk into deeper hypocrisy," said David.  "I
will not preach or pray in the kirk till I also denounce the
sinners, and that I purpose to do on the next Lord's day."

"You will do no such thing," said Mr. Muirhead sternly.  "I, your
elder, and father in God, forbid you."

"I must follow my own conscience," said David.  "I am as convinced
of the abominations of the Wood and of the persons that partake in
them as that I am sitting with you here in Kirk Aller this August
morning."

"You would add contumacy to your folly," the other roared.  "You
would sow dissension in the Kirk when it is necessary to set a
stout front against the Kirk's oppressors."

"That," said David firmly, "is mere carnal policy.  In the name of
God, whose purity is a flame of fire, would you let gross
wickedness go unchecked because it may knock a splinter off the
Kirk?  I tell you it were better that the Kirk should be broken to
dust and trampled underfoot than that it should be made a cloak for
sin.  I refuse to obey you, Mr. Muirhead.  Next Sabbath I will make
every wall in Woodilee dirl under my accusation."

The two men were on their feet, David white with wrath, and the
face of the other mottled with a like passion.  "You rebellious
schismatic," the minister of Kirk Aller cried, when a knock at the
door called both to a sense of the proprieties.

It was the minister's man, who entered with a letter held
reverently with the tips of his fingers.

"A dispatch, sir, from Embro.  Brocht this moment by a mounted
messenger, wha wouldna stay for meat, but maun post off doun the
water."

When the man retired, Mr. Muirhead, still standing and puffing
heavily, broke the seal.  He seemed to have trouble with the
contents, for he moved his spectacles, took them off and rubbed
them, and then re-read the missive.  His eyes stared, his face
paled, and then at the last perusal reddened again.  He turned to
David in a flame of temper.

"The Kirk must suffer for you and your like," he cried.  "The Lord
had prepared an abundant mercy, whilk has been denied us because of
the hardness of our hearts.  Wae's me, wae's me for the puir sheep
that have sic faithless shepherds!  The auld and the bauld and the
leal-hearted must go down because of conceited halflings like you
that are Achans in the camp."

"You speak in riddles, sir," said David, whose sudden anger had
gone at the spectacle of this strange transformation.

"It's a riddle you'll read or you're a month older in letters of
blood and fire. . . .  Riddle, says you?  The riddle is why the
Almighty should give our covenanted Kirk sic a back-cast of His
hand, and to that you maybe ken the answer.  Our deliverance has
most lamentably miscarried, and our bondage is waxed more grievous.
Get out of my sight, for I must be about the Lord's business, and
there will be no rest for Mungo Muirhead this many a day.  You have
defied me, but wait on and see if you can defy your Creator."

"You have had bad tidings?"

"Bad, says you?  Ay, bad for God's people and God's Kirk, but
they're maybe blithe tidings for a schismatic like yourself.
You'll maybe get Left-handed Coll and his Irishry to purge your
parish and burn the honest folk with whilk you are unworthily
blessed.  Awa' to Montrose, man, for yon's the lad for you!"

"Montrose!"

"Ay, Montrose.  Know that yesterday, at Kilsyth, yon whelp of Satan
was permitted to lay low the Covenant's banner, and rout the godly.
This word I have gotten is a scribe from Argyll, on his road to
Berwick, written from a boat at the Queen's Ferry.  This very day
it's like that Antichrist will be hammering on the gates of
Glasgow."



CHAPTER XII

THE MAN WITH THE SQUINT


The sermon which was to indict by name the sinners was not preached
in the kirk of Woodilee the next Sabbath.

For the day after his return from Kirk Aller a post reached the
manse from the Pleasance of Edinburgh which in an hour set David on
his horse riding hard for the capital.  There was plague in the
city, and his father was sick of it.  It was the plague in a new
form, for death did not come quickly; the patient lay for days in a
high fever, afflicted with violent headaches and shiverings, and a
contraction of muscles and nerves, and then, in nine cases out of
ten, passed into a rigor which meant death.  There was no eruption
on the bodies, and the physicians were at a loss in the matter of
treatment.  But it was scarcely less deadly than the older
visitations, and the dead-bell rang hourly, and the dead-cart
rumbled day and night on the cobbles.

David found the old man conscious, but very clear that he was near
his end.  The family doctor had bled him copiously, applied leeches
to his head, and brought a horrid regiment of drugs and vomitories.
The son pled with his father to receive them patiently.  "God works
by means," he told him, "as Christ cured the blind man with clay
and spittle, and what remedy could be more rude than these?"

"Aye, but it was the Lord that laid them on, Davie," said the
patient, "and no an auld wife like McGlashan."  So he sent the
physician packing, and engaged a new one, a certain young Crosbie
from the Monk's Vennel, who had studied in France and had at least
the merit of letting a sick man die in peace.  Instead of
smothering the patient under bedclothes, he kept him lightly
covered, ordered the window to be open day and night, and let him
drench his system with small ale.  It is likely that under any
treatment the old man would have died, for he was in his seventy-
fourth year and had long been ailing, and the plague only speeded
the decay of age.  But under the new regimen his last days were
less of a martyrdom.  His head remained clear and he could speak
with his son--chiefly of his mother and his childhood.

David lodged not in the city, but in the village of Liberton, and
walked in daily to his father's bedside.  He read the Scriptures to
him and prayed with him, as his duty demanded, but he felt a
certain shyness at inquiring into his father's state towards God.
Nor was the old man communicative.  "I've made my peace lang syne,"
he said, "and I read my title clear, so there's no need of death-
bed wark for me."  But he was full of anxiety for his son.  "You've
chosen a holy calling, Davie lad, and I'm blithe to think you've
got a downsetting in our calf-country.  Man, there were Sempills in
the mill o' the Roodfoot since the days of Robert Bruce.  But the
ministry in these days is a kittle job, for the preachers are ower
crouse, and the Kirk has got its heid ower high. . . .  What's come
o' this Montrose they crack about? . . .  Keep you humble before
the Lord, my son, for Heaven's yett is a laigh yett."

He died peacefully on the third day of September, and David had a
busy week settling his affairs--the sale of the business and the
household effects and the payment of bequests to servants and
distant kin.  Hour after hour he sat with the lawyers, for there
was a considerable estate, and to his surprise he found himself
with worldly endowments such as few ministers of the Kirk
possessed.  There was money at the goldsmith's, and in his lawyer's
boxes deeds and sasines and bonds on heritable property, and there
would be more to come.  His doer, a little old snuffy attorney of
the name of Macphail, grew sententious as the business drew to its
close.  "You've both the treasure on earth, Mr. David, and the
treasure in Heaven, and it's a pleasing thought that they're alike
well-guided.  Anent the latter, moth cannot corrupt, saith the
Word, nor thieves break through and steal, and anent the former a
moth will no do muckle ill to a wheen teugh sheepskins, and it
would be a clever thief that got inside Georgie Gight's strong-room
in the Canongate, where your bonds are deposited.  So you can keep
an easy mind, Mr. David, while you wrastle for souls in Woodilee."

Those were strange days both for death in a bed and for conducting
business, for the stricken city was the prey of wild fears.
Scarcely a traveller entered her infected precincts, but rumour was
as busy as the east wind in May.  The battle of Kilsyth had worked
a revolution in Scotland.  Glasgow had surrendered and welcomed the
conqueror, with enthusiasm for his person and largesse for his
soldiers.  The shires and the burghs were falling over each other
in their haste to make submission.  Edinburgh had been summoned,
and a delegation of the town council had gone out beyond
Corstorphine to capitulate to the young Master of Napier.  The
imprisoned Lords went free from the Tolbooth; David saw the sight--
pallid men shivering with prison ague; only the Castle still held
for the Covenant.  Word came that the King had made Montrose
Captain-general of all Scotland, and that soon the victorious army
would move towards the Border; already, on the haugh of Bothwell by
Clyde side, Sir Archibald Primrose had read the royal commission to
the troops.  A summons had gone out for a Parliament to be held
presently in Glasgow--"for settling religion and peace," said the
proclamation, "and freeing the oppressed subjects of those
insufferable burdens they have groaned under this time bygone."

The ministers who walked the Edinburgh causeway wore gloomy faces.
David had a sight of Mr. Muirhead, who sternly inquired of him what
he did in the city.  "I have come to bury my father," he replied.
"If he died in the hope and the promise," was the answer, "he has
gotten a happy deliverance, for the vials of wrath are opened
against this miserable land."  It was a phrase repeated like a
password by others of his ministerial brethren, and he replied with
a becoming gravity, but he could not in his heart feel any great
sorrow.  For he remembered the face of the groom at Calidon, and he
wondered how that face looked as a conqueror.  Pride, he was
assured, would not be in it. . . .  News came that Montrose was at
Cranstoun and moving by Gala Water to the Border.  For a moment
David had a crazy desire to follow him, to be in his presence, for
he had a notion that if he could but have speech again with that
young man the shadows and perplexities might lighten from his mind.

At last he set off homeward, and under the rowans at Carlops brig
he read a printed paper which had been circulated in the Edinburgh
streets--torn across and cast away by many, but by others cherished
and pondered.  It was a manifesto of Montrose from the camp at
Bothwell, and it set out his purpose.  In it were the very words
used by the groom that night at Calidon.  The nobles had destroyed
"lawful authority and the liberty of the subject," the Kirk had
coerced men into a blind obedience worse than Popery.  He took up
arms, he said, for pure religion, "the restoration of that which
our first reformers had;" for the King, and the establishment of a
central authority; for the plain people and the "vindication of our
nation, from the base servitude of subjects."  He confuted the
timorous souls "who can commit nothing to God."  He repudiated the
charge of blood-guiltiness, for he had never "shed the blood of any
but of such as were sent forth to shed our blood and to take our
lives."  And he concluded by pointing to the miracles that faith
had wrought:  "What is done in the land, it may sensibly seem to be
the Lord's doing, in making a handful to overthrow multitudes."
The words came to David with a remembered sound, like the echo of a
speaking voice.  Could this man be the bloody Amalekite of the
Kirk's denouncing?  On which side, he asked his perplexed soul, did
the God of Israel fight, for this man's faith was not less
confident than that of the minister of Kirk Aller?

Isobel received him with the reverential gloom which the Scots
peasantry wear on an occasion of death.

"So it's a' bye, sir.  We got the word from the Embro carrier, but
I wasna looking for ye yet awhile, for we heard ye were like to be
thrang wi' the lawyer bodies. . . .  He just slippit awa', for how
could an auld man stand out against yon wanchancy pestilence?  It's
a gait we maun a' gang, and he would be weel prepared Godward, and
at ease in his mind about warldly things, for they tell me he was
brawly set up wi' gear.  And there's just yoursel' to heir it, Mr.
David? . . .  But shame fa' me to speak o' gear in this sorrowful
dispensation, for a faither is a faither though he live ayont the
three score and ten years whilk is our allotted span."

"He died as he lived, Isobel, a humble but confident Christian.  I
think he was pleased to know that I was settled in his forebears'
countryside."

"He wad be that, honest man.  Fine I mind o' your gudesire, and
mony a nievefu' o' meal I gat from him when I was a bairn.  But I'm
concerned for yoursel', Mr. David, and fearfu' lest ye have got a
smittal o' the pestilence.  Ye're fine and ruddy, but there's maybe
fever in your veins.  Drink off this wersh brew, sir--it was my
mither's way to caller the blood--just kirnmilk boiled wi'
soorocks."

David asked concerning the parish.

"Woodilee!" Isobel cried.  "If Embro's a stricken bit, it's nae
waur than this parochine.  For the last se'en days it's been
naething but wars and rumours o' war.  Ye'll hae heard o' how
Montrose has guidit our auld Sion, and now we've Antichrist himsel'
on our waterside.  Ay, he's no twenty miles across the hills,
campin' with his Edomites somewhere on Yarrow, as welcome as snaw
in hairst.  The lads and lasses are a' fleyed out o' the sheilin's,
for the Yerl o' Douglas--weary fa' him!--and his proud horsemen are
drovin' ower frae Clyde like craws in the back-end.  We canna move
man nor bestial, and folk winna ride the roads except in a pack,
and they tell me that Amos Ritchie wi' his auld firelock was sent
for to convoy the minister o' Bold to Kirk Aller.  The weans daurna
keek past the doorstane, and Johnnie Dow winna gang his rounds, and
he's been lyin' fou at Lucky Weir's thae three days.  There's nae
wark done in a' Woodilee, nor like to be done--it's a dowg's life
we've gotten, muckle ease and muckle hunger."

"But the place has suffered no harm?"

"No yet, forbye a wedder o' Richie Smail's that Douglas's dragoons
brandered and ate yestreen at the Red Swire.  But ony moment a vial
may be opened.--What hinders Montrose to come rauvagin' this airt?
for if it's meat and drink he's seeking for his sodgers, Woodilee
is a bien bit aside yon bare Yarrow hills.  Forbye Calidon's no
that far, and they tell me that our auld hirplin' laird, wha suld
rather be thinkin' o' his latter end, is high in the command o' the
ungodly, and him and yon sweirin' Tam Purves will be rampin' like
lions in their pride.  Hech, sir, our kindly folk are in the het o'
the furnace, in whilk they will either be brunt to an ass, or come
out purified as fine gowd. . . .  But what am I claverin' here for,
when ye're wantin' your denner?  It's little I hae for ye, for our
meal ark is nigh toom, and there's no a kain hen left on the
baulks."

That night David sat long in his study.  It was now the sixteenth
day of September, and the sultry weather, which had fostered the
plague, was sharpening towards autumn.  He had returned from his
father's death-bed in something of the mood in which he had first
entered the manse.  The confusion in the State was to him only a
far-off rumour; he was not greatly concerned whether Covenant or
King was a-top, for he had no assurance as to which had the right
on its side.  But he longed for peace, that he might be about his
proper business, for the charge of Woodilee lay heavy on his soul.
The wickedness against which he had raged seemed now to him as
pitiful as it was terrible, a cruel seduction of Satan's against
which he must contend, not without pity for the seduced.  Charity
filled him, and with his new tenderness came hope.  He could not
fail in the struggle before him--God would not permit his little
ones to be destroyed.

Had he not forgotten the minister in the crusader?  His books
caught his eye--he had touched them little during the summer.  What
had become of that great work, Sempill on Isaiah?  He pulled out
his manuscript notes and for a little was happy in their
contemplation. . . .  The day's ride had been long and the sun had
been hot.  His head nodded, then dropped on his arm, and he fell
asleep.

He awoke to a sound below the window.  The manse stood at the
extreme southern end of the kirkton, beyond the kirk, a long
bowshot from the nearest dwelling, which was Robb the bellman's.
To the west of it lay the broomy slopes of the Hill of Deer, to the
east the glen of the burn and Windyways hill, and to the south the
rough meadows through which the road dipped to the Wood.  It was a
lonely spot, as Isobel often testified, and after nightfall no soul
came near it; even a traveller on the highway did not pass within
half a mile.

His study window opened on the garden, and the sound seemed to come
from some one knocking gently on the back door.  David, still
confused with sleep, took his candle and descended the stairs.
Isobel had heard nothing--for the muffled sound of her snores came
from the press-bed behind the kitchen. . . .  Again the soft
knocking came, this time with a more insistent sound.  In some
trepidation David unbolted the door, telling himself that it might
be a summons to attend a dying parishioner.

There was little moon and a thick autumn haze covered the ground.
Rising out of it, like ships out of the water, were huge figures,
and he saw that they were mounted men.  One of them sat his horse
and held the other beasts; one was on his feet and supported a
third, who seemed very weary.

David raised his candle, and saw the figure of the standing man.
The face was dark with sun, but darker under the eyes with fatigue;
the dress, once rich and splendid, was both mired and torn; and one
hand was wrapped in a blood-stained kerchief.

"Do I speak with the minister of Woodilee?" the man asked, and at
the first word David knew him.  That voice had been echoing all the
year in his chamber of memory.

"I am the minister," was his reply.  "In what can I serve my Lord
Marquis?"

The face relaxed into a smile, which made it for the moment gay in
spite of the heavy eyes.

"You have not forgotten me?  Nor have I forgotten you, and
therefore I come to you in sore need to beg a charity.  I do not
doubt but you are of the opposite faction, but I know also that you
are a faithful minister of Christ, whose custom was to do good to
His enemies.  Will you give shelter to this wounded comrade of
mine, and thereby save the life of one whom you consorted with a
year back in Calidon?"

"But this is but a poor manse, my lord.  Why do you come here when
Calidon is so nigh?"

"Alas!  Calidon is no port for me or mine in this storm.  Know,
sir, that this day my army has been beaten on the Yarrow haughs and
utterly scattered.  Before morning Leslie's troopers will be
knocking at Calidon door.  I myself am a fugitive, and there is no
safety till I cross the Highland line.  But this comrade of mine
has a broken leg, besides other hurts, and it is impossible that he
should ride farther.  If he does, he will impede us and we shall be
taken.  But where can I leave him, for I am in an unfriendly
country, and if he is captured it will be the gallows for an honest
fellow?  I bethought me that you were minister of this parish, and
that your heart was not likely to be steeled to common humanity,
and a manse is the one place that the pursuit will miss.  Will you
take him and let him lie hid till the hunt passes?  After that he
will fend for himself, for he is an old soldier of the German
wars."

"He has done no evil . . . ?"

"None save what I have done myself.  He has drawn the sword in a
brave cause which this day has sorely miscarried.  But, sir, it is
not of politics I speak, but of charity.  For the sake of Christ's
mercy, I beseech you not to refuse."

"It is a heavy charge, my lord, but I cannot say you nay."

Montrose shifted the burden of the wounded man to David's arm.
"Farewell, Mark," he whispered.  "The good cause is down but not
dead, old friend.  You know where to get news of me."  Then he
kissed his cheek and gave his hand to David.

"May God bless and reward you, sir.  I dare not linger.  We will
take the third horse with us, for it would be too kenspeckle in
your stable.  Think kindly of me, whatever my fate, as I think
tenderly of you, and pray for a lonely man whose feet are set on a
long road."

The next moment the riders had disappeared in the fog.  David stood
in a dream, for he would have given worlds to recall the speaker.
His voice, the sight of his face, had brought back tenfold the
longing to be with him which had haunted him after the Calidon
meeting.  The man had been a conqueror and was now a fugitive, but
earthly fortunes had no meaning for such an one.  Those calm eyes
would look on triumph and disaster alike unperturbed.

He was roused by the wounded man going limp in his arms, and he saw
that he had fainted.  He carried him up the steep stairs--Isobel's
snoring still making a chorus in the background--and laid him on
the bedstead in the guest-room.  The bed was not made up, and it
was clear that he must wake Isobel.  As the man's head drooped on
the bolster David turned his candle on it.  The face was grimed and
blood-stained, but there was no mistaking the features: it was the
tall trooper with the squint whom he had once guided to Calidon.

David sought the kitchen and hammered at the door of the press-bed.
The snoring ceased, and presently a scared and muffled voice
demanded what was the trouble.

"Get up, woman," David ordered.  "There's a sick man here that has
need of you."

Three minutes later Isobel appeared, shawled and nightcapped.
"Keep us, Mr. David, is't yoursel' that's seeck?" she wailed.  "I
didna like the look o' ye the day and--"

He cut her short.

"A friend of mine has had a mischance.  His leg is broken, and I
think there is other trouble.  Listen, Isobel. . . .  The man is
one of Montrose's soldiers, and Montrose's army has suffered
defeat.  If he is found here by the pursuing troops, he will die.
He is my friend, and I would save him.  You and I must nurse him
between us, and no word of his presence here must pass these
doors."

"Mercy on us!  A malignant!" the old woman exclaimed.

"And my friend," said David curtly.  "If I think it consistent with
Christian duty to save his life, so well may you.  You and I have
no quarrel with stricken men.  I appeal to the kind heart that is
in you and your regard for me, and I do not think I will appeal in
vain."

"Your wull be done," said Isobel.  "Whaur is the body?  See and
I'll get blankets and pillows, for the bed hasna been made up this
sax months."

The sight of the figure on the bedstead, his quilted and brocaded
coat, his light cuirass, his long untanned boots much scratched and
frayed, his feathered hat beside him on the floor, caused Isobel to
shrink.

"A rampin' Edomite," she said.  "Look at the long hair and the
murderin' sword, stained, nae doot, with the bluid of the saints.
Your friend, says you, sir?  Weel, he's been walkin' ither than
Gospel roads, I can see brawly, and gin he hadna been amang the
craws he wadna hae been shot. . . .  But the puir chield's in a
dwam!  Haste ye, sir, and help me off wi' thae Babylonish garments,
and that weskit o' airn--what for suld folk gang to the smith for
cleading and no to a wabster?  And stap his swird aneath the bed,
for I'm feared to look on't."

The man half recovered consciousness as they stripped off his coat
and cuirass, and when it came to the breeches he groaned aloud.  So
they left them on him and slit the boot on the broken leg.  It was
a clean break of the shin, and Isobel, who showed some skill in the
business, set the leg, and bound it in firm splints made of the
staves of an old cask.  Then they searched for further damage, and
found that he was suffering from little except an extreme fatigue.
There was a pike wound in his shoulder, which Isobel bathed and
bandaged, and a pistol-ball had been turned by the mail he wore and
had left a bruised rib.  By the time the grime and blood were
washed from his face, he had got his senses sufficiently back to
find his voice.

"You are the minister?" he asked.  "I am crippled, as you see, sir--
an accursed fail-dyke on Minchmoor did it--and you'll not be
wanting this kind of merchandise long on your hands.  A drink and
six hours' sleep will set me up, and I'll make shift to take the
road.  Let me bide here till the morn's night, and you'll be rid of
me."

"You'll not be fit to move for a week.  You can sleep here
securely.  You're in a friend's charge."

The sick man was an old soldier who took life as it came.  After he
had drunk a bowl of gruel laced with usquebagh, he turned on his
side and fell asleep.  David and Isobel went down to the kitchen
and, with the candle between them, looked at each other with
something like consternation.

"We must burn those clothes," said David.

"Na, na.  I'll make a bundle o' them and hide them in the cupples.
It's braw raiment, gin it were cleaned.  But oh, sir, this is a
bonny kettle of fish!  Who wad hae thocht to see such wark in the
manse of Woodilee?"

"It is a work of mercy."

"There's some wad call it by anither name.  There's some wad say it
was turnin' back from the gude fight, and a faintin' and a
backslidin' on the road.  I'd be feared to think what yon thrawn
minister o' Bold wad call it, but it wadna be mercy.  He'd be for
savin' the puir lad as Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite saved
Sisera."

"I will be party to no such wickedness, which would be an offence
against human charity as well as against the law of Christ."

"Ay, charity.  I'm blithe to hear ye speak the word, sir."
Isobel's eyes had an inclination to twinkle.

"I must follow the guiding of my own conscience.  But I would not
constrain you.  If the thing offends you, I will even now, before
it is light, carry the man to the Greenshiel . . ."

"A bonny gait that wad be.  The avenger of blood will be chappin'
ony hour at Richie's door, and there's nae space at the Greenshiel
to hide a mouse.  Na, na, I'm no denyin' your duty, Mr. David.
There never was woman yet, young or auld, that was ill-set to a
sodger, forbye yon randy Jael, wha maun hae been an unco trial to
her man.  And the lad upbye seems a decent body, though he skellies
[squints] sair wi' his left ee.  I'se do your bidding, sir, and I
hope it winna be accounted to me for sin."

"Can we keep him here without any one knowing of it?"

"Brawly.  The folk o' Woodilee are sweir to come near the manse
thae days.  They're feared o' the glower they micht get from you."

"But if Leslie's troopers arrive and offer to search--?"

"I'll search them!  I'se warrant I'd be doun on them with my ten
fingers like a gled on poutry.  Isobel Veitch will learn the
godless loons to mak' free with the house o' a man o' God.  And
mind, sir, if onybody speirs, ye maun brazen like a packman.
Bleeze awa' about the needcessity o' speed in the guid cause and
send them on their ways to Clyde, and maybe ye'll be spared the sin
o' actual leein'."

"If need be I will not shrink from the false word, which will be
forgiven in the cause of mercy."

"Fine, sir."  Isobel grinned appreciatively on him; for this
confederacy seemed to have ended the estrangement between servant
and master.  "There's a man ahint the minister in you, whilk is
mair than ye can say for the feck o' the Presbytery."

"And, meantime, I must be up and doing."

"Ye'll awa' to your bed and sleep out your sleep.  What's the
need o' hurry when the body's leg is still to set.  As my auld
mither used to say, naething suld be done in haste but grippin'
a flea. . . .  But I'll look out some of your auld garments, for
our friend will hae to cast his braw coat and put on homespun or
he wins forth o' Woodilee."



CHAPTER XIII

WHITE MAGIC


The man upstairs slept for a round of the clock, and then awoke and
clamoured for food.  Isobel reported that he was cured of his
weakness, and that the pike wound in his shoulder was no more than
a scratch.  "Forbye his leg, he's as weel as you or me, and he has
the hunger o' a cadger's powny.  It was an awesome sicht to see him
rivin' my bannocks.  He's speirin' to see ye, for nae doubt he has
muckle on his mind."  The old woman was in the best of tempers, and
her wizened face was puckered in a secret smile, for she and her
master were now restored to friendship as partners in conspiracy.

David found his guest clad in one of his own bedgowns, the hue of
health once more on his unshaven cheeks.  His first request was for
a razor and for shears, and when Isobel had shorn his hair, and he
had got rid of a three days' beard, it was a head of a notable
power and dignity that rested on the pillow.  The high-boned,
weather-beaten face, the aquiline nose, the long pointed chin were
no common trooper's, and the lines about mouth and eyes were like
the pages of a book wherein the most casual could read of ripe
experience.  The brown eyes were dancing and mirthful, and the cast
in the left one did not so much mar the expression as make it
fantastically bold and daring.  Here was one who had lived in
strange places and was not used to fear.

"It's a sore burden I've brought on you, Mr. Sempill," he cried,
"and it's you that's the good Samaritan.  It was my lord's notion
that I should throw myself on your compassion, for it's a queer
thing, I own, for a cavalier to be seeking a hiding-place in a
manse, though Mark Kerr has had some unco ports in his day.  I mind
in Silesia--But there's no time for soldiers' tales.  You'll be
wanting me out of this as soon as I can put foot to ground, and
it's blithe I'll be to humour you.  My leg is setting brawly, says
that auld wife who is my chirurgeon, and in less than a week I'll
be fit to go hirpling on my road."

"That will be to walk into the fire," said David.  "If Montrose's
army is scattered throughout the hills, there will be such a hunt
cried as will leave no sheiling unsearched."

"Just so.  I'll not deny that this countryside is unhealthy for
folk like me.  You'll be well advised to bury or burn the clothes I
had on last night, and if you can lend me a pair of grey breeks and
an auld coat, I'll depart with a lighter mind."

"You'll be for the sea and the abroad?"

"No me.  It's at the coast that they'll be seeking me, and a wise
man that's in trouble will go where he's no expected.  I think I'll
just bide hereaways.  Put me in a frieze jacket and I'll defy Davie
Leslie himself to see Mark Kerr, the gentleman-cavalier of
Mackay's, in the douce landward body that cracks of sheep and black
nowt.  You'll maybe have me in your congregation, Mr. Sempill.  I'm
thinking of taking a tack of Crossbasket."

David stared.  "Are you mad?" he asked.

"Not so--only politic, as is the way of us soldiers of the Low
Germany.  One of my profession must think well into the future if
he's to keep his craig unraxed.  I've had some such escapado in
mind ever since I travelled north a year syne, and I've had a word
on the matter with Nicholas Hawkshaw, so when the glee'd
[squinting] auld farmer body from Teviotside seeks the tack of
Crossbasket, the lawyer folk in Edinburgh will be prepared for him.
Nicholas was like me--he kenned fine that our triumph in the North
was fairy gold that is braw dollars one day and the next a nieve-
full of bracken."

"Where is the laird of Calidon?"

"By a merciful dispensation we left him sick at Linlithgow, and
Nicholas, being an eident soul, had a boat trysted at the
Borrowstounness, and by this time doubtless will be beating down
the Forth on his way to a kinder country.  He'll be put to the
horn, like many another honest gentleman, and his braw estates may
be roupit.  Thank the Lord, I have nothing to lose, for I'm a
younger son that heired little but a sword."

"A month ago," said David, "Montrose was lord of all Scotland.  You
tell me that everything has been lost in one battle, and that you
and others were confident of its loss.  Man, how did he succeed
with such a rabble of the half-hearted behind him?"

"I wouldna just call it half-hearted.  We won because James Graham
is the greatest captain since Gustavus went to God at Lutzen, and
because he has a spirit that burns like a pure flame.  But he did
not ken this land of Scotland as me and Nicholas kenned it.  He had
a year of miracles, for that happened which was clean beyond all
sense and prevision, but miracles have an ugly trick of stopping
just when they are sorest needed. . . .  A year syne there were
three men on Tayside--Montrose and Inchbrakie and me--and that was
the King's army.  By the mercy of Providence we fell in with
Alasdair Macdonald on the Atholl braes, and got a kind of muster at
our back. . . .  There's no Hieland blood in you, Mr. Sempill?  No?
Well, it's a very good kind of blood in its way, but it's like the
Hieland burns--either dry as the causeway or a roaring spate.  It's
grand in a battle, but mortal uncertain in a campaign, if you
follow me--and that James should have held it in leash till he had
routed Argyll and Baillie and Hurry, and brought the Kirk and
Estates to their knees, is a proof of genius for war that Gustavus
never bettered.  But for conquering Scotland, and keeping the
conquest fixed--na, na!  Hielands will never hold down Lowlands for
long, and that Lowland support we reckoned on was but a rotten
willow wand.  My lord deceived himself, and it was not for me to
enlighten him, me that had witnessed so many portents.  So we kept
our own thoughts--Nicholas and me--and indeed we had half a hope
that a faith which had already set the hills louping might
perchance remove the muckle mountains.  But I tell you, sir, when
we marched for the Borders I had a presage of calamity on me as
black as a thundercloud."

"But you had the army that won Kilsyth?"

"Not a third of it.  Yonder on Bothwell haughs it melted away like
a snow-wreath.  Macdonald--he is Sir Alasdair now and a Captain-
general, and proud of it as an auld gander--must march off with the
feck of his Irishry to Argyll to settle some private scores with
Clan Diarmaid.  The Gordons took the dorts [sulks]--a plague on
their thrawn heids--and Aboyne and his horse went off in a
tirrivee.  James looked for a Lowland rising, for, says he, the
poor folk for whom I fight are weary of the tyranny of greedy
lairds and presumptuous ministers.  If so, they are ower weary to
show it.  What can be done with lads that grovel before a Kirk that
claims the keys of Heaven and Hell? . . .  If that sounds
blasphemy, sir, you'll forgive a broken man that is unlocking his
heart and cannot wale [pick] his words. . . .  Forbye, the Irish
were like a millstone round our necks, for what profit was it to
plead that Munro used them in Ireland for an honest cause?  To the
Lowland herds and cotters they were murdering savages, and the man
that had them on his side was condemned from the beginning.  The
sons of Zeruiah were too strong for us."

"Is it true that they fight barbarously?" David asked.

"So, so.  I'll not deny that they're wild folk, but they havena
your Kirk's taste for murder in cold blood.  There were waur things
done in Methven Wood than were done at Aberdeen, and it's like that
Davie Leslie is now giving shorter shrift to the poor creatures
than ever they gave to the Campbells in Lorne and Lochaber. . . .
We'll let that be, for there was never an army that did not accuse
its enemies of barbarity, and the mere bruit of it on our side was
enough to keep the Lowlands behind steekit doors.  There were some
of the nobles that we counted on--my Lord Home, and my cousin
Roxburghe, and the sly tod Traquair.  James was in good heart at
their promises, but I mistrusted the gentry, and I was most
lamentably justified, for when we were on Teviotside, where were my
lords but in Leslie's camp?--prisoners, they said--but willing
refugees, as I kenned braw and well."

"And the battle?"

A spasm of pain passed over the other's face.

"It was not, properly speaking, a battle, but more in the nature of
a surprise and a rout.  We were encamped on Yarrow at the gate of
the hills, for the coming of Davie Leslie had altered our plans,
and we were about to march westward to the Douglas lands.  We were
deceived by false intelligence--it was Traquair's doing, for which
some day he will get my steel in his wame--but I bitterly blame
myself that an old soldier of the German wars was so readily
outwitted and so remiss in the matter of outposts. . . .  In the
fog of the morning Davie was on us, and Douglas's plough-lads
scattered like peesweeps.  There were five hundred of O'Keen's
Irish, and five score of Ogilvy's horse, and for three hours we
held Davie's six thousand.  These are odds that are just a wee bit
beyond my liking, forbye that we had no meat in our bellies.
Brawly they fought, the poor lads, fought as I never saw men fight
in the big wars--but what would you have? . . .  It's no tale for
me to tell, though it will be in my mind till my last breath."

He sighed, and for a moment his face was worn and old.

"Well and on, sir," he continued.  "The upshot is that the bravest
of Scottish hearts is now, by God's grace, somewhere on the road to
the Hielands, and the great venture is bye and done with, and here
am I, a lameter, seeking sanctuary of a merciful opponent.  If to
shelter me does violence to your conscience, sir, say the word and
I'll hirple off as soon as the night falls.  You've given me bite
and sup, like a good Christian, and suffered me to get my sleep,
and you've no call to do more for a broken malignant."

"My conscience is at ease anent succouring the wounded and saving a
man's life.  And I have no clearness about this quarrel of Montrose
and the Kirk, and would therefore give it the go-by.  But I will
exact the promise that, if you come off safe, you will fight no
more in Scotland.  In that much I am bound to serve my calling."

"You shall have the promise.  Mark Kerr is for beating his sword
into a ploughshare.  What says the Word?  'His speech shall be of
cattle'--though, now I come to think of it, that's from what you
gentry call the Apocryphal books and think little of. . . .  I'm
one that has no great love for idleness on the broad of his back.
Have you no a book to while away the hours?  Anything but divinity--
I've lost conceit of divinity these last months when I've been
doing battle with the divines."

David furnished his guest with reading which was approved, and then
went forth into Woodilee.  The village made holiday, and every wife
was at her doorstep.  A batch of troopers were drinking a tankard
at Lucky Weir's, and saluted him as he passed.  The people he met
had an air of relief and good temper, and looked with a friendly
eye on the minister, forgetting apparently the Lammas controversies
and the shut kirk, for he was a representative of the winning
cause.

Peter Pennecuik, sitting on a big stone outside the smithy, was the
chief dispenser of tidings.  His cheeks were swollen and his voice
faltered with pride.

"What for do ye bide in your tent, Mr. Sempill, in this hour of our
deliverance?  They tell me that Mr. Ebenezer of Bold has mounted
his beast and ridden wi' the horsemen to harry the ungodly's
retreat.  Ay, and baith Chasehope and Mirehope have ta'en the road,
for the haill land is fou' o' the wreckage of the wicked, as the
sands o' the Red Sea were strewed wi' the chariots o' Pharaoh.  Our
General Leslie is no ane to weaken in the guid cause, for there's
word that his musketeers hae shot the Irish in rows on the Yarrow
haughs, ilk ane aside his howkit grave, and there's orders that
their women and bairns, whilk are now fleein' to the hills, are to
be seized by such as meet wi' them, as daughters of Heth and spawn
of Babylon, and be delivered up to instant judgment.  Eh, sir, but
the Lord has been exceeding gracious us-ward, and our griefs are
maist marvellously avenged. . . .  Nae doot ye'll be proclaimin' a
solemn fast for praise and prayer."

David ate his dinner with a perturbed mind, for if the countryside
was being scoured for fugitives on this scale, it was unlikely that
the manse would remain long inviolate.  But Isobel reassured him.
"They wad never daur ripe the house, and for the lave I can speak
them fair in the gate."  In the afternoon he set out to walk to the
Greenshiel, since the road would give him a far-away glimpse of
Calidon.  Autumn was already chilling the air, and the horizon was
a smoky purple, the heather was faded, the bracken yellowing, the
rowan trees plumed with scarlet, the corn in the valley already
more gold than green.  To David, in whose ear was still the
gloating voice of Peter Pennecuik, the place seemed to smell of
death.

At the Greenshiel he found death in bodily form.  On the plot of
turf outside the cottage half a dozen troopers stared from their
saddles at something that lay on the ground.  The men were mostly a
little drunk, and had the air of a pack of terriers who have chased
a cat and found it at bay--an air that was puzzled, angry, and
irresolute.  David strode towards them, and they gave place to him,
somewhat shamefacedly.  On the turf lay a wretched draggle-tailed
woman, her clothes almost torn off her back, her hair in elf-locks,
her bare feet raw and bloody.  Her face was emaciated and of an
extreme pallor, her shrunken breast heaved convulsively, and there
was blood on her neck.  Richie Smail was on his knees attempting to
force some milk between her teeth.  But her lips shut and unshut
with her panting, and the milk was spilled.  Then her mouth closed
in that rigor from which there is no unloosing.

Richie lifted his head and saw the minister.

"She's bye wi't," he said.  "Puir thing, puir thing!  She ran in
here like a hunted maukin."  Then to the soldiers:  "Ye had surely
little to dae, lads, to mishandle a starvin' lassie."

There was no sign of compunction on the coarse faces of the
troopers.

"An Irish b-bitch," one hiccoughed.  "What's the steer for a bawbee
joe?"

"Tam Porteous kittled her wi' his sword point," said another.
"Just in the way o' daffin, ye ken.  She let out a skelloch and ran
like the wund."  The man put his hands to his sides and guffawed at
the memory of it.

He did not laugh long, for David was on him like a tempest.  The
fuddled troopers heard a denunciation which did something to sober
them by chilling their marrow.  As men, as soldiers, as Christians,
he left them no rag to cover them.  "You that fight in God's
cause," he cried, "and are worse than brute beasts!  Get back to
your styes, you swine, and know that for every misdeed the Lord
will exact punishment a thousandfold."  He was carried out of
himself in his wrath.  "I see each one of you writhing on a coming
field of battle, waiting to change the torments of the flesh for
the eternal agonies of Hell.  You are the brave ones--your big odds
gave you a chance victory over one that for a year hunted you and
your like round the compass--and you purge your manhood by
murdering frail women."

It was not a discreet speech, and a sentence or two of it pierced
through their befuddlement, but it sent them packing.  They were
too conscious of the power of a black gown in Leslie's army to dare
to outface a minister.  David marched homeward with his heart in a
storm, to find an anxious Isobel.

"These are dreidfu' days," she moaned.  "We were telled that
Montrose's sodgers were sons of Belial, but if they were waur than
yon Leslie's they maun be the black Deil himsel'.  Wae's me, bluid
is rinnin' like water on Aller side.  There's awfu' tales comin'
doun from the muirs o' wild riders and deid lasses--ay, and deid
bairns--a' the puir clamjamphry that followed the Irish.  It canna
be richt, sir, to meet ae blood-guiltiness wi' anither and a waur.
And yon thrawn ettercap frae Bold ridin' wi' the sodgers and
praisin' the Lord when anither waefu' creature perishes!  And
Chasehope, they tell me--black be his fa'--guidin' the sodgers to
the landward buts-and-bens like a dowg after rattons!  Catch yon
lad frontin' an armed man, but he's like Jehu the son of Nimshi
afore defenceless women."

David asked if any one had been near the manse.

"That's what fickles [puzzles] me.  There's been naebody at the
door, but there's been plenty snowkin' round.  There's a gey guid
watch keepit.  And waur than that, there's sodgers in the clachan--
ten men and ane they ca' a sairgent at Lucky Weir's.  I heard
routin' as I gaed by the kirkton, and, judging by the aiths,
there's sma' differ between them that fechts for Montrose and them
that uphauds the Covenant."

Next day the uneasiness of both increased.  The place was thronged
with troopers, among them the men whom David had denounced at the
Greenshiel.  It is probable that his hasty words had been reported,
for dark looks followed him as he passed the ale-house.  Moreover,
Isobel had news in the village that Leslie's main forces were even
now moving towards Woodilee, and that the triumphant general
himself would lodge in the village.  Where would such lodging be
found except in the manse?  At any moment the guest-room and its
contents might lie bare to hostile eyes.

By the afternoon David had come to a decision.  The wounded man
must at all costs be moved.  But where?  Calidon would be as public
as the street, and besides he had heard that a picket had been
stationed there in case its laird came looking for shelter. . . .
The hills were too open and bare, Reiverslaw would be suspect--in
any case its tenant babbled in his cups. . . .  Then he had an
inspiration.  Why not Melanudrigill, for its repute would at
ordinary times make it the perfect sanctuary?  He would be a bold
man, it was true, who sought a lair in its haunted recesses, but
this Mark Kerr did not lack for stoutness of heart.  He found him
yawning and extracting indifferent entertainment from a folio of
Thuanus.

Kerr only grinned when he heard of the danger.

"I might have guessed that the place would soon be hotching with
Davie's troops.  And maybe I'm to have Davie in bed aside me?
Faith, I fear we wouldna agree, though I'll no deny that the man
has a very respectable gift in war. . . .  I must shift, you say,
and indeed that is the truth of it, but hostelries are no that
plenty in this countryside for one like me that's so highly thought
of by his unfriends."

Melanudrigill was set before him, and he approved.

"The big wood.  Tales of it have come down the water, but I've
never paid much attention to clavering auld wives. . . .  There's
black witchcraft, you say--you've seen it yourself?  I care not a
doit.  There's just the one kind of warlock that frichts me, and
that's a file of Davie Leslie's men.  Find me a bed in a hidy-hole
and some means of getting bite and sup till I can fend for myself,
and I'll sit snug in Melanudrigill though every witch coven in
Scotland sat girning round me with the Deil playing the bagpipes."

David was clear that he must be moved that night, but he was far
from clear as to how it was to be done.  He did not dare to take
any other into the secret, not even Reiverslaw or Amos Ritchie, for
hatred of Montrose was universal among the Lowland country folk.
He and Isobel might make shift to get him to the Wood, for Isobel
was a muscular old woman, but there was much to do besides that--a
bed to be found, food transported, some plan made for a daily
visit.  There was no help to be found in Woodilee.

And then he remembered Katrine Yester.

For a long time he would not admit the thought.  He would not have
the girl enter a place of such defilements.  The notion sickened
him and he put it angrily from him. . . .  But he found that a new
idea was growing in his mind.  The Wood had been a nursery of evil,
but might it not be purified and its sorceries annulled if it were
used for an honest purpose?  The thought of Mark Kerr, with his
hard wholesome face and his mirthful eye, eating and sleeping in
what had been consecrated to midnight infamies, seemed to strip
from the place its malign aura. . . .  To his surprise, when he
thought of Mark in the wood, he found that he could think of
Katrine there also, without a consciousness of sacrilege.  The man
was her uncle's comrade-in-arms--he was of the cause to which she
herself was vowed--she was a woman and merciful--she was his only
refuge. . . .  Before the dusk fell he was on the road to Calidon.

He had expected to find a house garrisoned and dragooned, and had
invented an errand of ministerial duty to explain his presence.  He
found instead a normal Calidon--the evening bustle about the gates,
an open door, and Katrine herself taking the air in the pleasance
beside the dovecot.  She came towards him with bright inquiring
eyes.

"You have soldiers here?" he asked breathlessly.

She nodded to a corner of the house, which had been the shell of
the old peel tower.

"They are there--three of them--since last night.  They arrived
drunk--with two wretched women tied to their stirrups. . . .  We
were most courteous to them, and they were not courteous to us.  So
Jock Dodds wiled them into the place we call the Howlet's Nest and
gave them usquebagh and strong ale till they dropped on the floor.
They are prisoners and woke up an hour ago, but they may roar long
and loud before a cheep is heard outside the Howlet's Nest, and the
door is stout enough to defy an army."

"But Leslie himself will be here.  Other soldiers will come, and
how will you explain your prisoners?"

The girl laughed merrily.  "Trust Aunt Grizel.  Two lone women--
violent and drunken banditti--locking them up the only way--and
then a spate of texts and a fine passage about soldiers of the good
cause setting an ensample.  I will wager my best hawk that Aunt
Grizel will talk down General Leslie and every minister in his
train. . . .  The women are safe in the garret, less hurt than
frightened.  The poor things talk only the Erse, and there's none
about the town to crack with them."

He told her of the midnight visit to the manse and the lame man
left on his hands.

"You saw him?" she whispered.  "You saw the Lord Marquis.  How did
he look?  Was he very weary and sorrowful?"

"He was weary enough, but yon face does not show sorrow.  There's
an ardour in it that burns up all weakness.  He would continue to
hope manfully though his neck were on the block."

"Indeed that is true, and that is why I will not despair.  When I
heard the news of disaster I did not shed a single tear. . . .
Whom did he leave behind?"

"The tall man--Mark Kerr is his name--who was in this house of
yours a year back.  Him that has a cast in his eye."

"But that is the Lord Marquis's most familiar friend," she cried.
"The occasion must be desperate which parts them."

"The occasion grows more desperate," he said, and told her of the
need for instant removal.

When he spoke of the Wood she showed no surprise.

"Where else so secret?" she said.

"Dare you go into it?" he asked.  "For unless I have your help the
business is like to prove too hard for me.  I will confess that it
sticks in my throat to stir one step myself into the gloom of the
pines, when I ken what has been transacted there, and it sticks
sorer to have you in that unholy place.  But if this Kerr is to be
saved, there's need of us both.  The man will have to be fed, and
that would be done more easily from Calidon than from the manse."

"Why, so it must be.  I have been pining for some stirring task,
and here it is to my hand.  I will be your fellow-labourer, Mr.
David, and we begin this very night.  For a mercy there is a small
moon. . . .  No, Aunt Grizel shall not hear of it.  I have the keys
and can leave and enter the house as I choose.  When the dusk comes
and our guests in the Howlet's Nest are quiet from hoarseness, I
will bid Jock Dodds carry certain plenishing to Paradise."

A little before midnight, when even the clamour of Lucky Weir's was
still, three figures stole from the manse, after David by many
reconnaissances had assured himself that the coast was clear.
Montrose's erstwhile captain was dressed like a small farmer, in
David's breeches and a coat that had once belonged to Isobel's
goodman.  He had a rude crutch, with which he managed to keep up a
good pace, having learnt the art, he said, during an escape from a
patrol of Wallenstein's, which for greater security had manacled
the prisoners in pairs leg to leg.  Isobel prospected the road
before him like a faithful dog, while David steadied him with his
arm.  In such fashion they crossed the Hill of Deer, and in a
darkness lit only by the stars came to the glade called Paradise.
There they found awaiting them a glimmering girl, at the sight of
whom Isobel's fears broke loose, for she prayed in words not
sanctioned by any Kirk, and her prayer was for mercy from the Good
Folk.

Kerr made an attempt at a bow.  "Mistress Yester, it is not the
first time I have come for succour to women of your house.  They
say I must take to the shaws like Robin Hood, but the wildwood will
be a palace if you are among its visitors."

"Yester," Isobel muttered to herself.  "The young leddy o' Calidon!
Wha wad have thocht that the minister was acquaint there?  Certes,
she's the bonny ane," and she bobbed curtsies.

Katrine was the general.  "These bundles are bedding and food.  Up
with them, sir, and I will guide Captain Kerr.  I have also brought
a covered lantern, which will light us through the pines better
than your candle, Mr. David.  La, this is a merry venture."

The sense of company, the presence of Katrine and the soldier, the
nature of the errand, above all the preposterous figure of Isobel,
whose terrors of the Wood were scarcely outweighed by her loyalty
to her master and her curiosity about the girl, took from the
occasion for David all sense of awe, and even endowed it with a
spice of fun and holiday.  The mood lasted till they had crossed
the boundary glen and entered the pines; it endured even when,
feeling their way along the foot of the low cliffs, they looked
downward and saw by the lantern light an eerie white stone in a dim
glade.  The girl guided them to a dry hollow where an arch of rock
made a kind of roof and where a yard off a spring bubbled among the
stones.  It was she, and not Isobel, who made a couch of branches
and fir boughs on which she laid the deerskins and plaids she had
brought.  It was she, and not David, who gathered dry sticks
against the morning fire and saw that Kerr had flint and steel and
tinder.  It was she, too, who made a larder of a shelf in the rock,
where she stored the food, and fixed certain hours of the day for
further provisioning, and enjoined a variation of routes to prevent
suspicion.  It was she finally who presented Kerr with a pistol,
shot, and powder--belonging, it is to be feared, to one of the
imprisoned troopers--and who saw him to bed like a nurse with a
child.

"I'm as snug here as a winter badger," said Kerr contentedly.  "I
lack nought but a pipe of tobacco, and that I must whistle for,
seeing that I left my spleuchan at Philiphaugh. . . .  Mistress,
you've the knack of an old campaigner.  You might have been at the
wars."

"The men of my race have always been at the wars, and the women
have always dreamed of them," she said, and on his forehead she
kissed him good-night.



David Leslie came to Woodilee in the morning, but did not halt,
pushing on to Lanark in the afternoon.  His army was in less of a
hurry, and three troop-captains made their beds in the manse, while
the minister slept on his study floor.  They were civil enough,
cadets of small houses in Fife, who had had their training in arms
abroad, and cared as little for the cause they fought for as any
mercenary of Tilly's.  Within two days the neighbourhood was clear
of soldiery, save for the garrisons left as earth-stoppers at
houses like Calidon, which might be the refuge of malignants.

For a week Mark Kerr lay in the recesses of Melanudrigill, and for
David the days passed like a seraphic vision.  Every night after
the darkening he met Katrine in Paradise, and the two carried to
the refugee his daily provender--eggs and milk, ale from the
Calidon buttery, cakes which were Mistress Grizel's, cheese which
was Isobel's.  For David the spell of the Wood had gone.  He looked
on it now as a man does at his familiar bedroom when he wakes from
a nightmare, unable to reconstruct the scene of his terrors.  His
crusading fury, too, had sensibly abated, for part of his wrath
against witchcraft had been due to his own awe of the Wood and his
disgust at such awe.  Now the place was a shelter for a friend, and
a meeting-ground with one he loved, and the cloud which had weighed
on him since he first saw it from the Hill of Deer gave place to
clear sky.  Men might frequent Melanudrigill for hideous purposes,
but the place itself was innocent, and he wondered with shame how
he came ever to think that honest wood and water and stone could
have intrinsic evil.

Nightly, in the light mists of the late September, when pine trees
stood up out of vapour like mountains, and the smell of woodland
ripeness was not yet tinged with decay, David and Katrine threaded
the aisles and clambered among the long bracken, till a pinpoint of
light showed from beside a rock and was presently revealed as
Kerr's bivouac.  They would sit late with him, listening to his
tales and giving him the news of the glens, while owls hooted in
the boughs and from the higher levels came the faint crying of
curlews.  There was much business to be done between Mark and
Calidon--business of Nicholas Hawkshaw's, who had been duly put to
the horn, and over whose goods, by the intrigues of Mistress
Grizel, a friendly curator had been appointed, and business of his
own anent the tack of Crossbasket--and Katrine carried daily
messages by letter and by word of mouth.  When his leg was healed
there was a certain polish to be given to his appearance, and the
ladies of Calidon were busy with their needles.  When he left his
lair at last it was just before dawn--on foot, with a blue coat
instead of the hodden grey of Isobel's goodman, and four miles on
the Edinburgh road Jock Dodds from Calidon waited with a horse for
him.

David would fain have had the leg prove troublesome, that the time
of hiding in the Wood might be prolonged, for that season passed
for him with the speed of a too happy dream.  To be with Katrine
was at all times bliss, but to be her partner on these dark
journeys and in these midnight conclaves was a rapture of
happiness.  If he had lost his awe of the Wood, he had lost also
the sense that in letting his heart dwell on the girl he was
falling away from duty.  The standards of the Kirk meant the
less to him since he was in declared controversy with its
representatives, and a succourer by stealth of its enemies.  His
canons of conduct were dissolving, and in their confusion he was
willing to surrender himself to more ancient instincts.  The
minister was being forgotten in the man and the lover.

The lover--though no word of love was spoken between the two.  They
were comrades only, truant children, boy and girl on a Saturday
holiday.  It was a close companionship, yet as unembarrassed as
that of sister and brother.  In her presence David caught her mood,
and laughed with it, but when absent from her he was in a passion
of worship.  The slim green-gowned figure danced through his waking
hours and haunted his dreams.  He made no plans, forecast no
future; he was in that happy first stage of love which is content
to live with a horizon bounded by the next meeting.

In such a frame of mind he may have grown careless, for he did not
see what Isobel saw.  His housekeeper, brisk with the consciousness
of a partnership with her master in things unlawful and perilous,
and under the glamour of Katrine's gentrice and beauty, was as
unquiet as a hen with a brood of young ducks on the pond's edge.
She clucked and fussed, and waited for David's return in an anxious
tempest.  "There's queer ongaein's in this bit," she told him.
"When I hearken in the sma' hours I hear feet trailin' as saft as a
tod's [fox], and whiles a hoast [cough] or a gant [yawn] which
never cam' frae a tod's mouth.  And yestreen when ye set out, sir,
there was something slipped atween the birks and the wa' and
followed.  I wish it mayna be your deid wraith."  He pooh-poohed
her fears, but on the last night, when he parted from Katrine in
Paradise, and according to his custom watched her figure as, faint
in the moonlight, it crossed a field of bracken above Rood, he saw
something move parallel to her in the fern.  On his way home, too,
as he passed the kirkton road in the first light, there was a
rustling among the elders, and a divot fell mysteriously from the
turf dyke.



CHAPTER XIV

THE COUNTERBLAST


He dreamed that night that he was being spied upon, and next day--
with no more meetings with Katrine before him to fire his fancy--
his cold reason justified the fear.  The conviction was presently
confirmed by a discovery of Isobel's.  Mark Kerr's cast clothes had
been hidden at first in the gloom of the rafters in David's
camceiled bedroom, but the coming of Leslie's troops compelled her
to change this place of disposal to the stable, where, in the space
between the wall and the thatch, she bestowed them, wrapped stoutly
in sacking.  She kept an eye on the bundle, and one morning it had
disappeared.  More, it had clearly been stolen and hurriedly
opened, for the sacking and a tarry rope which bound it were found
among the nettles beyond the kirkyard wall.  Compromising goods
indeed to come forth of a minister's house!

That same day Isobel returned from a visit to her cousin with a
queer tale.

"Something's gotten out, sir.  The wives in the kirkton are
clatterin' like daws.  'What's this they tell me, gossip,' says
one, 'about Babylonish garments found in the manse?'  'Faith, I
kenna,' says I.  'They're nane o' my findin', but wi' roarin'
sodgers quartered in ilka chamber ye'll no surprise me if some unco
gear were left behind.'  'But it's nae honest gear o' Davie
Leslie's lads,' she says, 'but the laced coats and plumit hats o'
the malignants.  And there's a report that ithers hae sleepit in
the manse this past se'nnight than our ain Covenant sodgers.'  'Wha
tell't ye that, my wumman,' I says, 'was a black leear, and a thief
forbye.  I'd like brawly to ken wha has been snowkin' round our
doors and carryin' awa' leein' tales and maybe some o' our
plenishin'.  Tell me the names, and, man or wumman, I'll hae my
fingers at their lugs.'  It was Jean of the Chasehope-fit that
spoke to me, and she got mair frae me than she expeckit.  There
wasna ane o' her auld misdaein's I didna fling in her teeth."

The name of the woman disquieted David, and he asked what she had
answered.

"Her!  She took my flytin' wi' downcast een, and that angered me
sae that I had muckle ado to keep my hands frae her face.  Syne she
says, quietlike, 'Ye needna get in a steer, Isobel Veitch.  If Mr.
Sempill's an honest man, he'll get his chance to redd up the
"fama".'  "Fama", says she, whatever yon may mean--there's a reek
o' Chasehope about the word.  And she went on wi' her saft een and
her mim mou'.--'There's waur nor that, Isobel wumman,' she says.
'Our minister, that's sae fierce against warlocks, has been walkin'
a queer gait.  There's them that hae seen him in the Wud, and wha
do you think he met wi' there?  It's no a name that I daur speak,
but folk hae brunt for less than sic a randyvoo.'  Ye may fancy,
sir, what a stound I got, but I just spoke the kimmer civil, and
speired for mair.  She wasna laith to tell.  'There's them,' says
she, 'that saw the green gown o' the Queen of Elfhame, and the mune
shinin' through her hair, and saw her gie a kiss to the minister.'
Ye never kissed the leddy, sir?"

"God forbid," cried David, startled as if at an impiety.

"I thocht ye werena just as far forrit as that. . . .  Weel, that's
the tale they've gotten, and may it stick in their thrapples!  I'm
no feared for their blethers about fairies, but we'll need some
stench lees to get the sodger's claes blawn over.  I wish I kenned
wha was the thief.  I'll threip that they were left by Leslie's
folk and that ye kenned nocht about them."

"Por me," said David, "I shall tell the plain truth, save in the
mentioning of names.  I command you, Isobel, to do likewise.  The
man is by now out of danger, and a falsehood, which may be pardoned
if it is to save another, is black sin if used by a coward to save
himself."

Isobel looked at him uneasily.  "There will be an awfu' speak in
the parish, sir.  Bethink ye, is it wise to gie sic a handle to
them that wad bring ye doun? . . .  But I see your mind is made up,
and nae words o' mine will turn ye.  We maun hope that the question
will never be speired, and I daur ony man or wumman in the place to
get sae far wi' ME as the speirin'."

During David's absence in Edinburgh Mr. Fordyce, by the command of
the Presbytery, had preached in the afternoon in the Woodilee kirk--
to but scanty audiences, for the news of Montrose's advance had
inclined the people to keep inside their doors.  On the first
Sabbath after his return, when there were still troops in the
place, the pulpit had been occupied by one of Leslie's chaplains, a
stalwart member of the Church militant, who hailed from the Mearns,
and whose speech was consequently understood with difficulty in the
Border parish.  But on the next, when Mark Kerr had gone from his
refuge in the Wood, David changed his mind, and himself filled the
pulpit.  At the news a great congregation assembled, for in that
joyous day of delivery it was believed that the sins of the parish
would be left on one side, and that the service, as in the other
kirks in the land, would be one of thanksgiving and exultation.  To
the surprise of most of his hearers--and to the satisfaction of the
suspicious--there was no word of the recent crowning mercies, save
a perfunctory mention in the opening prayer.

David, as befitted one who had just buried his father, discoursed
on death.  He was in a mood which puzzled himself, for gentleness
seemed to have come upon him and driven out his jealous wrath.  He
had seen the righteous die, the man who had begot him, the last
near kin he possessed, and memories of childhood and something of
the wistfulness of the child had flooded in on his soul.  He had
seen, too, the downfall of human pride, the descent of greatness to
dust, and yet in that dust a more compelling greatness.  Above all,
his love for Katrine had mellowed and lit the world for him; it had
revealed depths of joy and beauty which he had never known, but the
beauty and joy were solemn things, and of a terrible fragility.  He
felt anew the dependence of all things upon God, and the need of
walking humbly in His sight.  So he preached not like an Old
Testament prophet, confident in his cause and eager to gather the
spoil, but as one who saw from a high mountain the littleness of
life against the vast background of eternity.  He spoke of the
futility of mortal hopes, the fallibility of man, the certainty of
death.  In a passion of tenderness he pled for charity and holiness
as the only candles to light the short dark day of life--candles
which, lit by a heavenly hand, would some day wax into the bright
everlasting day of the New Jerusalem.

There were those among his hearers who were moved by his words, but
to most they were meaningless, and to many they were an offence.
Peter Pennecuik was darkly critical.  "The man is unsound as a
peat," he declared.  "Whaur's the iron o' doctrine and the fire o'
judgment in sic a bairnly screed?  There's an ill sough there,
sirs--he's ower fond o' warks and the rags o' our ain righteousness.
Worthy Mr. Proudfoot will be garrin' the stour fly the day
denouncin' the Laodiceans that wad be lukewarm in cuttin' off the
horns o' the wicked.  Is there ony such godly zeal in our man?
Whaur's the denunciation o' the sins o' Montrose and his covenant-
breakers?  It seems that he's mair convinced o' his ain sins."

"He has maybe cause," Chasehope observed dryly.

It had been David's intention to visit the manse of Kirk Aller and
obtain the answer of the Presbytery's moderator to the charges he
had formulated.  This was a duty which could not be shirked, since
he had put his hand to it, but at the moment the fire of battle had
died in him, and he had no zest in the task.  He found himself
longing to take Isobel's view and believe that his senses had
played him false, that the events of the Beltane and Lammas nights
were no more than illusions.  So he had delayed journeying to Kirk
Aller, hoping that his mood would change, and that that which was
now a cold duty would revive as a burning mission. . . .  Suddenly
a post brought him a summons from Mr. Muirhead to wait upon him
without delay.

He rode down the riverside in a day of October glooms and shadows.
Sometimes a wall of haze would drop from the hills so that the
water ran wan as in the ballads, and the withering fern and
blanching heath had the tints of December.  Then a light wind would
furl the shrouded sky into fantastic towers and battlements,
through long corridors of which the blue heavens would shine like
April at an infinite distance, and the bald mountain-tops, lit by
sun-gleams, would be revealed.  When he rode over the crook-backed
bridge of Aller, past the burgh gallows, he saw that the doomster
had been busy at his work.  Three ragged scarecrows hung in chains,
the flesh already gone from their limbs, and a covey of obscene
birds rose at his approach.  Stragglers of Montrose, he guessed,
and he wondered how many gallows-hills in Scotland showed the same
grim harvest.  The thought, and the fantastic October weather,
deepened the gloom which all morning had been growing on him.

He found a new man in the minister's chair.  The victory of his
cause seemed to have expanded Mr. Muirhead's person, so that he
loomed across the oaken table like a judge in his robes.  Pride
pursed his lips, and authority sat on his forehead.  Gone were the
airs of tolerant good-humour, the assumption of meekness, the
homeliness which had a greeting and a joke for all.  This man sat
in the seats of the mighty and shared in the burden of government,
and his brow was heavy with the weight of it.  He met David with a
cold, inquisitorial eye, and greeted him with a formal civility.

"I sent for you, Mr. Sempill," he said, "anent the charge which you
have set out in these papers, and on which you have already
conferred with me.  There has been no meeting of Presbytery, owing
to the disturbances in public affairs, but I have shown the papers
to certain of my brethren and obtained their mind on them.  I have
likewise had the privilege of the counsel of the godly laird of
Wariston, who, as you no doubt ken, is learned alike in the law of
God and the law of man.  I have therefore taken it upon myself to
convey to you our decision, whilk you may take to be the decision
of the courts of the Kirk, and that decision is that there is no
substance in your case.  You are upset on the relevancy, sir.
There is nothing here," and he tapped the papers, "which would
warrant me in occupying the time of folk who have many greater
matters in hand."

"I did not ask for a judgment, but for an inquiry, and that I must
continue to demand."

"Ay, but you must first show a prima facie case, and that you have
failed to do.  You have brought grievous charges against one noted
servant of God, and sundry women, of whom it can at least be said
that they bear a good repute.  Your evidence--well, what is your
evidence?  You say that you yourself have seen this and heard that,
but you are a tainted witness--a matter to which I shall presently
revert. . . .  You have the man Andrew Shillinglaw in Reiverslaw,
who, in the bit of precognition with which you have furnished me,
tells a daft tale of dressing himself up like a mountebank,
visiting the wood of Melanudrigill, and sharing in certain unlawful
doings.  I ask you, sir, what credence can be given to such
evidence?  Imprimis, he was himself engaged in wrongdoing, and so
is justly suspect.  Item, he is a notorious wine-bibber, and when
the maut is in, the wits are out.  Whatna condition was he in to
observe justly in the mirk of the night in the Black Wood, where by
his own account he was capering like a puddock and was all the time
in a grue of terror?  He claims on that occasion to have laid a
trap for the accused and to have informed two men of undoubted
Christian conversation of his purpose, and he claims that on the
next day the same witnesses at the toun of Chasehope were cognizant
of the success of his trap.  As I live by bread and by the hope of
salvation, this is the daftest tale that ever came to my ears.  A
smell of burning duds, and a missing hen!  The veriest cateran that
ever reived in the Hielands would be assoilzied on such a plea.
There is not evidence here to hang a messan dog.  Away with you,
man, and let's hear no more of what I can only judge to have been a
drunken cantrip."

"I demand that Ephraim Caird be interrogated by the Presbytery and
confronted with me and my witnesses."

"You must first prove a prima facie case, as I say, for otherwise
honest men might lose time and siller in being set to answer
malicious libels.  That is the law of Scotland, sir, and it is the
law of every Christian land, and you have lamentably failed in that
prior duty."

"There is my own evidence--the evidence of an eyewitness.  You may
account for Reiverslaw, but you have still to account for me."

"Just so."  A grim humour seemed to lurk at the corner of Mr.
Muirhead's mouth.  "We have to account for you, Mr. Sempill, and it
seems that it will be a sore business.  For I have here"--he tapped
a paper--"another dittay in which you yourself are named.  It is
painful for me even to give ear to accusations against a brother on
whose head my own hands have been laid in holy ordination.  But I
have my solemn duty to perform, and must consider the complaints of
a kirk session against a minister as carefully and prayerfully as
those of a minister against a kirk session."

The effect on David was of a sudden clearing of the air and a
bracing of nerve.  This was, then, to be no one-sided war, for his
enemies had declared themselves, and met attack by counter-attack.
He smiled at the portentous solemnity of Mr. Muirhead's face.

"I can guess one of the names appended to the charge," he said.
"It is that of Chasehope."

Mr. Muirhead turned over the paper.  "Ephraim Caird is there, and
others no less weighty.  There is Peter Pennecuik . . . and
Alexander Sprot in Mirehope . . . and Thomas Spotswood in the mill
of Woodilee.  If godly elders are constrained to delate him who has
been set over them in spiritual affairs, it's scarcely a thing to
be met with a smirk and a grin."

"I am waiting to hear the charge."

"It is twofold.  The complainants allege that you have had trokings
with the Wood and the evil of the Wood--and indeed on your own
confession we know that you have frequented it when decent folk
were in their beds.  There are witnesses to depone to following you
to the edge of the thing, as you made your way stealthily at dead
of night.  On what errand, Mr. Sempill?  And in what company?"

"That is what I would like fine to know," said David.

"You were seen to meet a woman.  They were simple folk who saw you
and not free from superstition, so they jumped to the conclusion
that the woman was no mortal, but the Queen of the Fairies.  That's
as it may be.  You and me are not bairns to believe in fays and
bogles.  But the fact that emerges is that you were in the Wood at
night, not once but many times, and that you were seen in a woman's
company.  That is a fine report on a minister of God, and it will
want some redding up, Mr. Sempill."

"My movements were wholly innocent, and can be simply explained,"
said David.  But the charge maddened him, he blushed deep, and he
had much ado to keep his tongue from stammering.  He wrestled with
a pagan desire to buffet Mr. Muirhead violently on his large
authoritative face.

"But can you explain THIS?" the latter cried, for he was not
unconscious of David's confusion.  "There is a second charge, and
its gravamen is the heavier, seeing that it alleges an offence both
against the will of God and the governance of this land.  On the
26th day of the month of September in this year of grace there was
found in the appurtenances of the manse of Woodilee--to wit, in the
baulks of the stable atween the thatch and the wall--a bundle of
garments, including a laced coat such as is worn by malignants, and
sundry other habiliments strange to the countryside, but well
kenned in the array of caterans whereof Montrose was the late
leader.  It is argued, therefore, that shelter was given in the
manse to a fugitive, and that a minister of the Kirk connived at
the escape from justice of one of the Kirk's oppressors.  What say
you to that, sir?"

"I say that it is true."

David was not prepared for the consternation in the other's face.
Mr. Muirhead sat erect in his chair, his head was poked forward
from between his shoulders like that of a tortoise from its shell,
colour surged over cheeks and forehead and his bald crown, and his
voice, when he found utterance, was of an unnatural smallness.  His
careful speech broke down into country dialect.

"Ye admit it!  God peety you, ye do not blench to admit this awful
sin!  Have ye no shame, man, that ye sit there snug and canty and
confess to a treason against Christ and His Kirk?"

There was more in the man's face than anger and incredulous horror;
there was pity, regret, a sense of an unspeakable sacrilege done to
all that he held most dear.  David saw that the minister of Kirk
Aller, though he might have little love for himself, would have
given much had this confession been unsaid--that he felt that shame
had been cast upon his calling and even upon his own self-respect.
So he answered gently:

"A wounded man came to my door.  I fed him and nursed him, and he
is now, I trust, in health and safety.  I would do the same thing
again for any distressed mortal."

Mr. Muirhead's eyes goggled.

"Have you no notion--have you no glimmering of what you have done?
I speak patiently, for I'm driven to think you're not right in the
mind.  You have loosed on the world a malefactor, a slayer and
despoiler of God's people."

"I have his word that he will not again take up arms in Scotland.
He was a soldier of the great Gustavus."

"What's the word of a malignant to lippen to?  Man, you're easy
begowked.  When the Lord's command anent our enemy is Smite and
spare not, you, an ordained minister, connive at his escape. . . .
Ay, and there's more to it.  I have news that you molested Leslie's
troops in their pursuit of a light woman that followed Montrose's
camp, and that you took the name of the Lord in vain in interdicting
them from their manifest duty.  Have you not heard that at the brig
of Linlithgow the wantons were drowned in scores by the command of
the worthy General, whilk was a notable warning to sinners and an
encouragement to God's people?  Are there not Commissions of the
Estates and of the Kirk appointed to judge the captured malefactors
in Edinburgh and St. Andrews, and gallows set on every burgh knowe
besouth of Forth?  And you dare help to cheat the wuddy of one who
was no doubt the blackest of them?  There's no a presbytery in the
land but has sent in a memorial to encourage those in authority in
their righteous work.  For shame, man!  Even in your own parish you
have Chasehope lending a hand and riding the hills like a moss-
trooper--the very man you would delate for sin."

"I obey God's word and my own conscience.  I can imagine no blacker
sin than cruelty to the defenceless."

"God's word!" cried Mr. Muirhead.  "You've been lamentably ill-
instructed.  What did Joshua to the people of Jericho, but utterly
destroy them, both man and woman, young and old?  What did Gideon
to the kings Zeba and Zalmunna?  What was the command of the Lord
to Saul when he went out against Agag king of the Amalekites but to
slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, and when Saul would
have saved Agag, what said Samuel to him?--'Rebellion is as the sin
of witchcraft and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry.'  Your
eyes are full of fatness if you canna see the Lord's will.  And
your conscience!  You would set up your own fallible judgment
against God's plain command and the resolved opinion of the haill
Kirk."

"I am a minister of Christ first and of the Kirk second.  If the
Kirk forgets its Master's teaching, we part company."

"And what's that teaching, prithee?"

"To have mercy and not sacrifice."

The minister of Kirk Aller closed his eyes as if in pain.

"You're deep deep in the mire of your carnal conceits," he said.
"I thought you were only wayward and mistaken, but I see you're
firm on the rock of your impenitence.  Troth, Mr. Ebenezer of Bold
was in the right--you've heresy in you as well as recalcitrance.
This is Presbytery business, sir--ay, and maybe matter for the
General Assembly.  I would be a faithless guardian of the sheepfold
if I didna probe it to its bottom.  This complaint must go
forward.--Meantime, till the Presbytery has adjudged it, I forbid
you to conduct the ordinances in the kirk of Woodilee.  I will
appoint some worthier person, lest the pure gospel milk on your
lips be turned to poison."

"I refuse to obey you," said David, "for you have no power to
command.  I stand on my rights to continue my ministrations till
such time as the lawful authority sets me aside.  Meantime I
require that my charge against Chasehope go to the Presbytery
equally with his charge against me."

Mr. Muirhead was on his feet, with the famous glower on his face
which had aforetime awed timid brethren.  It did not awe David, who
gave him back stare for stare with a resolution to which he was
little accustomed.  Indeed the vigorous youth of his antagonist and
something in the set jaw made the elder man pause.  He shuffled off
as if to end the interview, and David strode from the house with
unseeing eyes and a burning heart.

All the way home his head was filled with a confusion of angry
thoughts.  He saw himself caught in toils at once absurd and
perilous.  He could imagine the prejudice which his sheltering of
the fugitive would raise against him; he saw his indictment of
Chasehope nullified by this legend of his own visits to the Wood;
above all, the bringing in of Katrine made him clench his hands
with a sense of furious sacrilege.  In that moment he seemed to
himself like a child without friends battering at a wall as broad
as the earth and as high as the heavens. . . .  But the consequent
feeling was not of hopelessness but of a tight-lipped rage.  He
longed to be in a world where blows could be struck swift and
clean, and where hazards were tangible things like steel and
powder.  Not for the first time in his life he wished that he had
been a soldier.  He was striving against folly and ignorance, blind
prejudice, false conventions, narrow covenants.  How much better to
be fighting with armed men!

Isobel met him at the manse door with a portentous face.

"There's a new man come to Crossbasket," she announced.  "His
plenishin' cam' up the water this mornin'--four horse-loads--and
the drovers are bringin' his sheep and kye.  I saw the body himsel'
in the kirkton an hour syne.  He's the rale down-the-water fairmer
breed, verra weel set up and no that auld, and he wears a maud like
a herd.  But Mr. David, sir"--she lowered her voice--"guess ye wha
he is?  I couldna be mistook, and when he cried me guid day I saw
brawly that he kenned me and kenned that I kenned him.  He ca's
himsel' Mark Riddel, but it's the glee'd sodger man that lay in our
best bed."



CHAPTER XV

HALLOWMASS


Ill news travels fast, and by noon next day word of the complaint
against their minister, of Mr. Muirhead's suspension of him from
the pulpit, and of David's defiance was in the mouth of every
parishioner in Woodilee.  David was aware of curious eyes following
him as he went about the place, and of a new constraint on the part
of most of his Kirk Session.  Peter Pennecuik fled his approach,
and could be seen hobbling into the nearest kailyard, while
Mirehope, when he met him, gave him greeting with averted face.
But he noted, too, a certain sympathy in others.  Women, who had
formerly avoided him, had now a friendly word, especially the young
ones, and Alison Geddie--whose name had appeared in his charge--was
overheard, as he passed, to comment in her pea-hen voice to her
gossip:  "Peety for sae wise-like a lad, and him aye with the kind
word and the open hand to puir folk."

Isobel, whose face was now always heavy with unspoken news, he kept
at a distance, for in these days he was trying to make peace with
his soul.  By day and by night, on the hills and in his closet, he
examined himself to find in his conscience cause of offence.  He
went over every step in his past course and could discover no other
way than that he had followed.  He could not see matter for blame
in an act of common charity, though Old Testament precedents might
be quoted against it; nor could he blame himself for his war
against the things of the Wood.  If he read his duty more by the
dispensation of Christ than of Moses, it was Christ whom he had
been ordained to preach. . . .  Of Katrine he scarcely suffered
himself to think.  She was a thing too fine and gracious to be
touched with such doleful cares.  Yet it was the thought of her
which kept youth alive in him, and in his dreariest moments gave
him a lift of the heart.  When he looked down from the Hill of Deer
on the dark shroud of Melanudrigill and beside it the shaws of
birch and hazel which stretched towards Calidon, he saw his strife
as a thing natural and predestined, and he himself as only a puppet
in the grip of primordial powers.  The thought gave him the
confidence which springs from humility.


On the Sabbath he preached from a text in Ecclesiastes:  "So I
returned, and considered all the oppressions that are done under
the sun: and behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they
had no comforter; and on the side of their oppressors there was
power; but they had no comforter."  His hearers looked no doubt for
some topical word, but they did not find it; few realized the
meaning of a discourse which David preached rather to himself than
to others.  It was a confession of faith, a plea for personal
religion, and an anathema against shibboleths and formulas which
did not dwell in the heart.  So long as religion is a pawn in a
game of politics--the argument ran--so long will there be
oppressors and oppressed, with truth the perquisite of neither
side, and therefore comfort to none. . . .  The congregation was
notably reduced, for the five elders and their families were
absent.  But there was one new figure who sat modestly in the back
parts of the kirk.  It was that of a man of middle age, dressed
like the other farmers in homespun, but holding himself with a
spruceness rare in a place where men and women were soon bowed in
the shoulders by unremitting toil.  His cheeks were shaven, so that
he stood out from the others, since, besides the minister, only
Chasehope was unbearded.  His skin was as brown as a hazel-nut, and
though the face was composed to a decent gravity, there was a
vigour in the lines of it which spoke of a life not always grave.
The man had a blue bonnet of a pattern common nearer the Border--
smaller than the ordinary type which came from the Westlands--and
after the fashion of Cheviot and Liddesdale he had a checked plaid
of the kind called shepherds' tartan.  But in the cast in the left
eye, shown by a sudden lifting of the face, he revealed his
identity.

The stranger did not wait to speak to the minister, but David found
Amos Ritchie at the kirkyard gate, and asked concerning him.  "It's
the new man that has ta'en the tack o' Crossbasket," was the
answer.  "He's frae the far Borders--Jeddart way, they tell me--and
it's no easy to understand the wild hill tongue o' him.  But he's a
decent, weel-spoken body, and it seems he's a skilly fairmer and a
graund judge o' sheep.  He has stockit his mailin' weel, and has a
full hirsel on Windyways. . . .  Na, he's a single man and bauds to
himsel', though he has a name for a guid neebor."

Amos accompanied the minister to the manse, and there was a shy
friendliness in his air, as if he regretted the estrangement of the
summer.  He spoke only of weather and crops, but his manner
suggested a desire to say something by way of encouragement.  Only
at the manse gate, however, did he find utterance.  "If there's
deep waters to be crossed, sir, I'll ride the ford wi' ye," he
muttered as he turned away.

Presently it was apparent that a change had come over the parish.
David's doings in the summer had puzzled and alarmed it; even those
with a clear conscience had thought of him as a danger to their
peace and good repute.  But now that he was himself in dire
trouble, and indicted before the Presbytery, there was a revulsion
in his favour; his friendliness was remembered, his kindness in the
winter storms, his good looks and his youth.  He had his own party
in the place, a party composed of strange elements.  There were in
it noted professors like Richie Smail and Rab Prentice; Isobel and
her kin were hot on his side; Reiverslaw, of course, many of the
frequenters of Lucky Weir's ale-house, and all who from poverty or
misdeeds were a little blown upon.  If the Pharisees and Scribes
were against him, he had the publicans and sinners.  Also he had
the children.  By some secret channel the word had gone round in
the circles of childhood that their friend was in trouble, and in
queer ways they showed their affection.  The girls would bring him
posies; bowls of wild rasps and blaeberries would be left at the
manse; and often on the doorstep Isobel found an offering of
guddled trout neatly strung on rushes.  Daft Gibbie, too, had
become a partisan.  He would dog David's footsteps, and when spoken
to would only reply with friendly pawings and incoherent gabble.
He would swing his stick as if it were a flail.  "Sned them, sir,"
he would cry, "sned them like thristles."

But the comfort of the atmosphere in which he now moved was marred
for David by the conduct of Reiverslaw.  That worthy had been
absent in Nithsdale when Philiphaugh was fought, and did not return
till the week after the battle.  It would seem that the general
loss of stock due to the disturbances had benefited his pocket; he
had sold his hog-lambs to advantage, and had had a prosperous deal
in black cattle with Leslie's quartermaster.  By the middle of
October the work on the hill farms was all but over for the year,
and Reiverslaw was a leisured man.  Whether the cause was the new
access of wealth or the excitements of Lammas, he fell into evil
courses.  There was word of brawls in ale-houses as far apart as
Lanark and Kirk Aller, and he would lie for days in Lucky Weir's,
sleeping off potations, only to renew them in the morning.  His
language coarsened, his tongue grew more unbridled, his aptitude
for quarrels increased till he became a nuisance in the village and
a public scandal.  "A bonny friend ye've gotten in Andra
Shillinglaw," Isobel said bitterly.  "For three days he has been as
fou as the Baltic, and cursin' like a cornet o' horse."  David made
several attempts to reason with him, penetrating to the back parts
of the ale-house, but got no reply but tipsy laughter and owlish
admonitions.  It looked ill for the credit of his principal
witness.

The call of Calidon was always in his ears, but he did not yield to
it.  October brought a fortnight of drenching rains, and Katrine
came no more to Paradise.  He could not bring himself to seek her
in her home, for he dared not compromise her.  Already a nameless
woman appeared in the tales against him, and he would have died
sooner than let the woman's identity be revealed.  From her he had
had kindness and comradeship, but these things were not love, and
how could he ask for love when every man's hand was against him and
he could offer nothing but companionship in disrepute? . . .  But
loneliness weighed on him, and he longed to talk with two
especially--the minister of Cauldshaw and the new tenant of
Crossbasket.  But when he rode one afternoon to Cauldshaw, it was
not only the minister's self that drew him there, but the
remembrance that the Calidon household were among his parishioners.

Mr. Fordyce was scarcely recovered of an autumn ague, and his
little bookroom was as bleak and damp as a grave.  He sat in a
wooden armchair, propped up with pillows, nightcap on head, a
coarse drugget dressing-gown round his shoulders, and two pairs of
stockings on his thin shanks.  His wife was sick a-bed, outside the
rain dripped steadily, there was no fireplace in the chamber, and
gloom muffled it like a shroud.  Yet Mr. James was casting a
horoscope, and mild and patient as ever.

"Tell me the whole story, Mr. David, for I've heard naught but
rumour.  They say you've fallen out sorely with Mr. Mungo at Kirk
Aller."

David recounted the events of the past months, beginning with
Lammastide in the Wood, and ending with his last visit to Mr.
Muirhead, The other heard him out with many sighs and exclamations,
and mused for a little when he had finished.

"You havena been over-gentle with the Moderator," he said.  "Far be
it from me, that am so imperfect, to impute error to a brother, but
you canna deny that you took a high line with Mr. Mungo."

"I was within my rights in refusing to obey his suspension.  He had
no resolution of the Presbytery behind him."

"Maybe no.  But was there no excess of vehemence, Mr. David, in
defying one who is your elder?  Would not the soft word have
availed better?  You seem to have spoken to him like a dominie to a
school bairn."

"Oh, I do not deny that I was in a temper, but if I was angry it
was surely with a righteous anger.  Would you have me let that
black business of the Wood be smothered just because Chasehope,
with his sleek face and his cunning tongue, has imposed on the
Presbytery?  And for the charge against myself, would you, I ask
you, have refused succour to any poor soul that came seeking it,
though his sins were scarlet on him?"

"I'll not say.  I'm a timid man by nature, and I'm so deeply
concerned with my own state towards God that I'm apt to give other
duties the go-by--the more shame to me!  In the matter of the Wood
I think you have done honestly and bravely, and I doubt I wouldna
have had the courage to do likewise myself.  The Lord be thankit
that such a perplexity never came my way! . . .  As for Montrose's
man, what am I to say?  Mr. Mungo will quote Scripture against you,
and it's not for me to deny the plenary inspiration of the whole
Word, though I whiles think the Kirk in Scotland founds a wee thing
over much on the Old Testament and forgets the New.  But I can see
great trouble for you there, Mr. David, for the view of Kirk Aller
will be the view of the Presbytery--and the view of the General
Assembly, if the thing ever wins that far."

"But what would you yourself have done in like case?  Would you
have turned the suppliant from your doors?"

"I do not know.  To be honest with you, I do not know.  I am a weak
vessel, and very fearful.  But in such a case I should pray--ay, I
should pray to be given strength--to do as you did, Mr. David."

The young man smiled.  "I've got the comfort I wanted.  I'm content
to be judged by you, for you are nearer the Throne than the whole
Presbytery of Aller and the Merse."

"No, no.  Dinna say that.  I'm the feeblest and poorest of God's
servants, and at the moment I'm weakening on what I said, and
doubting whether a man should not bow to lawful authority, and
cultivate a humble spirit, as the first of the Christian graces.
What for did our Lord found the Kirk if it wasna to be obeyed?"

"Bide where you were, Mr. James.  What kind of a Presbyterian would
you make yourself out?  By your way we should be still under the
bondage of Rome, because Rome was once the lawful authority.  A
bonny Covenanter, you!  If the Kirk constrains conscience unduly,
and makes a tyranny out of Christian freedom, then the Kirk is no
more to be respected than the mass the old priests mumbled in
Woodilee."

Mr. Fordyce smiled wanly.  "I daresay you're in the right.  But
what a tangle for an honest man!  You've taken the high road, Mr.
David, and I must keep jogging along the low road, for there's but
the two of them.  A man must either jouk and let the jaw go bye, as
the owercome says, or he must ride the whirlwind.  I have been
given the lown downsetting, where I can nourish my own soul and
preach Christ to the best of my power, and let the great matters of
Kirk and State pass me, as a man hears the blast when he sits by
his fireside.  It is for stronger spirits like you to set your face
to the storm.  Alack and alas, I'm no fierce Elijah to break down
the temples of Baal, and I'm no John Knox to purge the commonwealth
of Israel.  If you go forward in God's name, my dear young man,
you'll have a hard road to travel, but you'll have the everlasting
arms to support you. . . .  But oh, sir, see that you fight in the
Lord's strength, and not in your own.  Cultivate a meek and
contrite spirit, for I suspect that there is a good leaven of the
old Adam in your heart."

"That's a true word.  There's an unregenerate heat of temper in me
at which I often tremble."

"And you must keep your walk and conversation most pure and
circumspect.  Let there be no cause of reproach against you save
what comes from following your duty."  Mr. Fordyce hesitated a
little.  "There was word of another count in Mr. Mungo's complaint
anent you. . . .  Wasna there some tale of a woman?"

David laughed.

"The Queen of the Fairies, Mr. Muirhead says, though he does not
believe in her. . . .  I have a confession to make to you, Mr.
James, which I would make to no other ear.  I have met with a lady
in the Wood, for indeed she was engaged with me in the same errand
of mercy.  I had met with her before that, and I count the days
till I may meet with her again.  It is one whom you know--Katrine
Yester."

"Mistress Katrine!" Mr. Fordyce cried out.  "The young lassie from
Calidon.  Mr. David, Mr. David, is this not a queer business for a
minister of the Kirk?  Forbye that she is of a house that is none
too friendly to our calling--though far be it for me to deny her
Christian graces--forbye that, I say, she is of the high gentrice.
What kind of wife would she be for a poor Gospel preacher?"

"Oh, man, there's no question of wife.  You make me blush to hear
you.  The lady would never think of me any more than an eagle would
mate with a throstle.  But a minister is a man like the lave
[rest], and this one is most deeply in love, though he has not the
thousandth part of a hope.  There's no shame in an honest love,
which was a blessing given to man by God's own self in Eden."

"It's a matter I ken little of," said Mr. Fordyce shyly.  "Me and
Annie have been that long wedded that we've forgot what our wooing
was like.  She wasna by-ordinar in looks, I mind, but she had a
bonny voice, and she had mense and sense and a fine hand for making
apple jeely. . . .  Mistress Katrine!  You fly high, David, but I
wouldna say--I wouldna say. . . .  Anyway you've a well-wisher in
me. . . .  But Katrine Yester!"

David left the minister of Cauldshaw ingeminating that name, and in
a blink of fine weather set out on his way home.  He was on foot
and beyond Reiverslaw, where the road first runs out of the birks
to the Hill of Deer, when he was overtaken by a horseman.  The
mount was no farmer's shelty or minister's garron, but a mettled
chestnut mare, with marks of breed in head and paces, and he who
rode her was the new tacksman of Crossbasket.

In that open bright place there could be no eavesdropper.  The
rider dismounted and flung his arms round the minister.

"I pay my debt," he cried, "by becoming your dutiful parishioner,
your next-door neighbour, and your faithful hearer ilka
Sabbath. . . .  Danger, you say.  Man, the darkest hidy-hole is
just under the light, and the best sanctuary for a hunted man is
where he is not expected.  They're riping the ports for Mark Kerr,
once captain of Mackay's and till late a brigadier under the King's
Captain-general, but they'll no trouble about honest Mark Riddel, a
plain farmer-body from Teviotside, that comes up Aller seeking a
better tack and has mair knowledge of sheep than any herd on the
hills.  And Mark will pay his way with good white siller, and will
be a kind neighbour at kirk and market.  My Roxburghe kin are buried
deep, but there's folk in Woodilee already that mind of my great-
aunt that was married into Annandale, and my cousin once removed
that was a herd in Megget.  Trust an old soldier for making a fine
palisado around him of credible lees.  I run no risk save the new
ones that I make for myself, and I'm in no mind for that, for a
peaceful year or two will be good for my soul, till I see whatna way
the cat jumps.  Montrose must get him abroad, and if I'm to bide
quiet let it be in my own countryside and not in a stinking foreign
city. . . .  But for yourself, Mr. David?  From all I hear you've
been making an ill bed to lie on."

They sat down in the roadside heather, and David brought up to date
the tale which he had first told him in the deeps of the Wood.  To
unburden himself to this man was a greater comfort than his talk at
Cauldshaw, for this was one accustomed to desperate straits and
chances, and of a spirit more akin to his own.  The soldier
whistled and looked grave.

"Faith, you've stirred up the hornets, and it's not easy to see
where you will get the sulphur to smoor them.  There's much in
common between you and my Lord Marquis.  You see the ills of the
land and make haste to redd them, but you have no great notion of
what is possible."

"You would not have had me do otherwise?"

"No, no.  I like your spirit fine, and beyond doubt you've taken
the honest road.  But we live in a pitiful world, where honesty is
an ill-requited trade; and you've let yourself be forced into
defence, whilk is an unpleasant position for a campaigner. . . .
Count me on your side, but let me take my own gait.  It winna do
for you and me to appear to be chief [friendly] in public.  I'll
make haste to conciliate the mammon of unrighteousness--whilk I
take to be Chasehope--so dinna wonder if you hear that the two of
us are like brothers.  But it's the Kirk I fear, your own sacred
calling, Mr. David.  One shilpit body in bands and a Geneva gown,
the way things are guided now, is more powerful than a troop of
horse, and less easy to get upsides with. . . .  Still and on, I'm
at hand across the glebe, and we'll no be beat for lack of good
contriving.  The night's the time, when we can step across and
collogue at our ease."

To have the soldier at Crossbasket gave a lift to David's spirit.
But at first he saw him rarely, for it was wise to let the man
settle down in the place before appearing in his company, lest
people should suspect a previous friendship.  Mark Riddel appeared
to be for ever on the move, and the minister met him oftenest on
the Rood road--generally in the early darkness.  It pleased him to
think that his neighbour was visiting Calidon, for it seemed to
bring Katrine nearer.  But he made no effort to see the girl
himself.  With the fall of the leaf the season for Paradise had
gone, and he could not seek her at home till he had unravelled the
tangle of his own perplexities.

The chief of them was the approach of Hallowmass.  He was
determined not for one moment to forgo his charge against Chasehope
and his coven, whatever the counter-charge against himself might
be, and if necessary to go in person again to the Wood.  But his
chief ally, Reiverslaw, spent his days drinking soddenly in the
clachan, and when he sought him out at the ale-house he got nothing
but fuddled laughter.  Then one morning he found him on the hill,
and apparently in a better mind.

"My ran-dan is bye," said Reiverslaw sullenly.  "Ye've cause to
upbraid me, sir, and no words o' yours can be waur than what I gie
mysel'.  It's apt to take me that way at this time o' year, and I
think black burnin' shame that I should be sae thirled to the fauts
o' the flesh--drinking like a swine in a stye among folk that, when
sober, I wadna touch wi' a graip's end.  I'm no better than the
beasts that perish.  But I've fand out ae thing in these humblin'
days.  There'll be nae Wud at Hallowmass.  The folk we ken o' dinna
fancy the Wud aince the Lammas is bye, and it's the clachan itsel'
that will see their next cantrips."

"But there is no place that could contain them--" David began.

"I ken, but they maybe follow some ither gait.  I'll be in the
kirkton that nicht--na, na, ye needna fear for me, I'll no gang
near the hostler-wife--the verra thocht o' yill and usquebagh staws
[sickens] me.  But I'll be there, and you maun be in the manse, and
we'll guide our gait according to what the nicht brings forth.
I'll wager Chasehope will no be long out o' my sicht, and if he
meddles wi' me he'll find me waur than the Deil's oxter. . . .
Keep a watch on yoursel' that day, sir, for there's mony will wish
ye out o' the clachan."

The last day of October came, and David rose to find that the rain
had gone, and that over the drenched hills had dawned a morning as
bright as April.  He spent the forenoon in distracted study,
striving to keep his mind on printed pages, but his restlessness
was such that after dinner it sent him to the moors.  He took his
old road for the Rood tops, and by three o'clock had reached the
pass from Clyde, where in July he had had his talk with Reiverslaw.

The earth was soaked with the October rains, and as the sun's power
declined in the afternoon a mist began to creep out of the glens.
Insensibly the horizon shortened, the bold summit of Herstane Craig
became a blur and then was hidden in clouds, the light wind of the
morning died away, and over the land crept a blind eerie stillness.
David turned for home, and long before he had reached the crest
above Reiverslaw the fog was down on him.  It was still a gossamer
covering through which it was possible to see a hundred yards
ahead, but objects stood up in it in unfamiliar outlines--a
sheepfold like a city wall, a scrag of rowan like a forest tree.

A monstrous figure appeared in the dimness, which presently
revealed itself as a man on horseback.  David saw that it was Mark
on his chestnut.

"Well met," the man cried.  "I'm pushing for home, for I'm getting
the yowes to the infield, but I saw you before the mist dropped and
I guessed I would find you here.  There's a friend of yours up bye
that would be blithe to see you--up the rig from the auld aik on
the road to the Greenshiel."  With no further word Mark touched his
mare and went off at a canter.

The friend, thought David, would be Richie Smail, who might have
some message to him from Reiverslaw.  So he turned as directed past
the root of oak towards the ridge of the hill.  In twenty yards a
figure loomed before him, a figure on a horse.  He fancied it was
Mark returning, till as he drew nearer he saw that it was no man
that sat the black gelding and peered into the thick weather.

It flashed through his mind that Mark had sent him here on purpose.
And then something came into his soul which he had never known
before, a reckless boldness, a wild joy which caught at his heart.
The girl was looking away from him, and did not turn her head till
he was close on her and had spoken.

"Mistress Katrine," he cried breathlessly.

She looked down on him, her face rosy, her hair bedabbled with the
mist jewels.  She did not start at his approach.  Was it possible
that she was expecting him?

"What does the minister on the hill?" she asked.

"What does Mistress Katrine?  It will be a thick night and you are
still far from Calidon."

She was dressed all in green, with a kirtle which scarcely reached
her ankles and left her foot in the stirrup clear.  The feather
from her green hat hung low over her curls.  David had never seen a
woman gloved and booted for the hunt, and in that hour and in that
wild place the apparition was as strange and as beautiful as a
dream.

"I took out the hawks this morning with Edie the falconer, for the
mallards were flighting over from Clyde.  Edie went back an hour
ago with the birds, and I lingered to watch the mist creep up.
Maybe I have lingered too long."

"That was good fortune for me," he said.  "I have not dared to come
seeking you, but now that we are met I will convoy you to Calidon.
Presently the world will be like the inside of a feather bed."

She made no protest, when he laid his hand on her bridle to turn
her horse, and as he stole a look at her he saw that she was
smiling.  That smile sent a tremor through him so that he forgot
every care and duty.  He and she were enclosed in a magical world--
together and alone as they had never been before. . . .  He felt
that he could bring her safely through raging rivers and across
mountains of stone, that for her he could scale the air and plough
the hills, that nothing was impossible which she commanded.  They
two could make of the world a song and a rapture.  So deep was his
transport that he scarcely heard her voice when she spoke.

"I have been hearing of your troubles, Mr. David.  He whom we must
call Mark Riddel has told me."

"I have no troubles," he cried.  "Now that I see you the world is
altogether good."

"Will you tell that to the Presbytery?" she asked, laughing.

"I will tell it to the broad earth--if you give me leave."

A momentary confusion came over her.  She slightly checked her
horse, and as the ground shelved the beast stumbled.  The slip
brought her in contact with David's shoulder, and before she knew
his hand was laid on hers.

"Oh, my dear, my dear," he cried.  "Katrine, I must say it . . . I
am daft for love of you. . . .  Since I first saw you down in the
greenwood your two eyes have been sun and moon to me.  Your face--
God forgive me--comes between me and the Word.  There are times
when I cannot pray for thinking of you. . . .  It's nothing I ask
of you, Katrine, but just leave to tell you.  What was it your song
said?--'There's nane for me but you, my love'--and oh! it's the
gospel truth."

She did not reply, but her hand did not move under his.  They were
descending the hill towards Rood, and the fog had grown so thick
that each to the other was only a shadow.  Before it had enclosed
them in a visible encirclement; now it seemed to have crept so near
that it dislimned the outlines of horse and rider.  He held her by
touch rather than by sight, and this disembodiment seemed to give
him courage.

"I seek nothing," he said, "but that you should know my love.  I am
perplexed with coming battles, but so long as you're in life
there's nothing can daunt me.  I would not have you smirched with
the stour of them, but if you'll let me think of you and mind of
you and whiles see you I'll be as strong as Samson.  The papist
cries on his saints, and you are the saint whose name is written on
my heart."

Still she did not speak, and he cried out in alarm.

"Have I angered you?  Forgive me--forgive me--but I had to speak.
Not one other word more will I say till we are at Calidon door."

Her answer, when it came, was strange, for it was a song crooned
very softly:


     "It's love for love that I have got,
      And love for love again."


A great awe came over David and checked his breath--the awe of one
who sees and yet does not believe, the answer to a hopeless prayer.
His hand tightened on hers, but she slipped it away.  "So turn,"
she sang:


     "So turn your high horse heid about
      And we will ride for hame, my love,
      And we will ride for hame."


The hand which had moved from under his was laid on his head.
Suddenly a face bent down towards him and a kiss as light as a
bird's wing brushed his forehead.  He caught her to him from the
saddle.



CHAPTER XVI

THE WITCH HUNT


David awoke next morning to a world which had been suddenly re-
created.  That Katrine should return his love upheaved for him the
foundations of the globe.  Nothing could be the same again, in face
of this tremendous fact; his troubles lifted like mist in the sun,
for what ill could befall one whom Katrine loved?  Even the incubus
of sin in Woodilee seemed to lighten, for evil could not prevail
with such a lady walking the earth.  He felt that he had come anew
into the land of the living, and every fibre of him sang praises.

His new fortitude was proof against even the news which Reiverslaw
brought.  That worthy arrived at the manse with a long face.  The
coven in Woodilee had held their Hallowmass rites, and to the best
of his belief they had held them in the kirk. . . .  He had lost
sight of Chasehope early in the evening, and had gone to Mirehope
on a false scent. . . .  They had been watching the manse and knew
that the minister was from home. . . .  He had hastened up the road
seeking David and had been overtaken by the fog, and when he got
back to Woodilee the place had been under a blanket.  Doubtless the
Devil was protecting his own. . . .  There had been no cruisies lit
in the cottages, even of those who were known to be of the coven.
But, as luck would have it, he had entered the kirkyard and had
seen a speck of light in the kirk.  The door was locked, but he was
clear that there were folk inside. . . .  He had roused Robb to get
the key, but no key was to be found.  He had gone for Amos Ritchie
to break open the door, and though Amos had refused to stir, he had
borrowed a mell and a crowbar; but when he reached the kirk, the
place was quiet and dark again, and the keys were lying on Robb's
doorstep.

The man was really shocked, for this was a superfluity of
naughtiness for which he had not been prepared.  To David, with a
memory of his Kirk Session, the sacrilege was less of a surprise;
if men and women could defy their Maker by sitting at the communion
table and by taking in vain the Gospel words, they would not shrink
from polluting God's house.  But it proved the boldness and
security of the evildoers.  It was Chasehope of whom he chiefly
thought, Chasehope, that darling of the Presbytery, the ally of the
Kirk in hunting down malignants, the one in all the parish who
flaunted most his piety.  The man grew in stature as he contemplated
him.  Here was no feeble sinner, but a very provost in the craft,
who turned all the uses of religion to his foul purposes.  And at
the thought David, fired by his new happiness, almost rejoiced; he
was fighting not with human frailty, but against a resolute will to
damnation.

That day he received a summons to attend on the following Monday
upon a special meeting of Presbytery at Kirk Aller for a
preliminary examination.  The thing seemed to him now to have lost
all terrors.  He had no anger against his accusers, for were they
not dull old men who knew nothing of the ravishing world that had
been opened to him?  He would be very meek with them, for he pitied
them; if they chose to censure and degrade him he would bear it
patiently.  His extreme happiness made him feel more than ever in
the hands of the Almighty and disposed to walk softly before Him.
He had given many hostages to fortune, but he had won something
which could never be taken away.  Thankful and humble he felt, in
love with life and with all humanity, and notably less bellicose.
His path of duty was clear, but he would not court antagonisms.  He
owed much to the less fortunate, he who daily met Katrine in the
greenwood or on the hill in the soft noons which make a false
summer at autumn's end.

So on the Sabbath he preached a sermon which was long spoken of in
Woodilee.  He discoursed of charity--a topic not popular in the
Kirk, and commonly left to such as Mr. Fordyce who were afflicted
with ill-health.  For a young minister, his face ruddy with the
hill winds and his figure as well set up as a dragoon's, to expand
on such a matter seemed a mere waste of precious time, when so many
more marrowy subjects lay to his hand.  Yet there was that in
David's earnestness which impressed his audience almost as much as
if his sermon had been on death and judgment.  He had a new hearer.
A man sat beneath the pulpit whose eyes never moved from the
minister's face--a mere lath of a man, thin to emaciation, with a
narrow head and a much-freckled face, a ragged beard, and eyes with
red lights in them like a ferret's.  David noticed that, as the
kirk emptied, the others seemed to shun the newcomer's proximity.
As he moved to the door, there was a drift away from him, like
sheep from a collie.

That night Isobel gave him news of the stranger.

"The pricker has come," she announced in a solemn voice.  "He
arrived yestreen and is bidin' wi' Chasehope.  Yon was him in the
kirk the day, yon body wi' the fernietickles [freckles] and the
bleary een.  They ca' him Kincaid--John Kincaid, and he's frae
Newbottle way--anither than a guid ane, if a' tales be true.  Eh,
sir, this is a shamefu' business, routin' out puir auld bodies and
garrin' them gie daft answers, and syne delatin' them on what they
ca' their confessions.  There's naebody safe that hasna a power o'
keepin' a calm sough and giein' back word for word.  I wadna be
feared mysel' o' ony Kincaid, but if you was to cross-speir me, Mr.
David, wi' your searchin' een, I daresay ye could get me to own up
to ony daftness ye liked to pit to me.  I dinna aud wi' this
prickin' o' witches, and I can find nae warrant for it in the Word.
Belike it's some device that thae weary Embro lawyers hae howkit
out o' their rotten herts."

As he rode to Kirk Aller next day David reflected much on Isobel's
tale.  Who could have brought a pricker to Woodilee--and lodged him
with Chasehope?  Was it the work of the Presbytery?  Was it a plan
to cover up the major sin by hunting out minor sinners?  He knew of
the pricker class as of the worst repute, knaves and quacks who
stirred up popular superstition and were responsible often for
hideous brutalities.  Even the Law looked askance at them.  He did
not like to be absent from his parish when such a creature was let
loose in it.

The examination of the Presbytery lasted for two days.  He had gone
lightly to face it, but he found it a formidable affair.  Business
began with long prayers and prelections delivered to his address.
The Moderator constituted the court with the formality of a Lord of
Session and the solemnity of a minister fencing the tables at the
Communion season.  He announced that the matter for examination
would be limited to the charge of assisting the Kirk's enemies.
The prior charge of witchcraft preferred by the minister of
Woodilee against certain parishioners would be relegated to a later
day, since the Privy Council on his motion had issued a commission
to inquire into the machinations of the Devil in that parish,
naming as its members himself, the minister of Bold, and the Laird
of Killiequhair.  This, thought David, explains the pricker.  Mr.
Muirhead added that he had moved in the matter at the request of a
godly elder, known to all of them, Ephraim Caird in Chasehope.

The court was composed of the two score of ministers in the
Presbytery, and only Mr. Fordyce was lacking, for he was once more
stretched upon a bed of sickness.  As it was only a preliminary
examination there were no witnesses, since the object was to give
the accused a chance of stating his case and so narrow the issue to
be ultimately tried.  The Moderator read aloud sworn statements, to
which no names were appended, the names, as he explained, being
reserved for the time when the complainants should appear in
person.  To David it was obvious that, though one of the statements
was by a soldier of Leslie's, the others must come from members of
his own flock.  There was nothing new in the details--the finding
of the cavalier's clothes in the manse outhouse, the interference
with the troopers at the Greenshiel, and certain words spoken on
that occasion; but what surprised him was the fact that the avowal
which he had made to Mr. Muirhead was not set down.  It was clear
from the Moderator's manner that he proposed to forget that
episode, and was willing that David should deny any and every
charge in the libel.  Indeed he seemed to encourage such a course.
"The Court will be glad," he said, "if our young brother can blow
away these most momentous charges.  Everybody kens that among wars
and rumours of war daft tales spring up, and that things are done
in the confusion without ill intent, whilk are not defensible.  It
is the desire of all his brethren that Mr. Sempill shall go forth
assoilzied of these charges, which are maybe to be explained by the
carelessness of a domestic and the thoughtless words of a young man
carried for a moment out of himself, and no doubt incorrectly
reported."

But David did not take the hint.  He avowed frankly that he had
entertained a fugitive of Montrose at the manse, and had assisted
him to escape.  Asked for the name, he refused to give it.  He also
confessed that he had endeavoured too late to protect an Irishwoman
at the Greenshiel, and had spoken with candour his opinion of her
persecutors.

"It is alleged," said a heavy man, the minister of Westerton, "that
you promised these poor soldiers eternal torments, and them but
doing their Christian duty, and that you mocked at them as inferior
in valour to the reprobate Montrose."

"No doubt a false report, Mr. Archibald," said the Moderator.
"It's like that the worthy sodgers had been looking at the wine
when it was red and werena that clear in their understanding."

"I cannot charge my memory with what I said," David replied, "but
it may well have been as set forth.  That, at any rate, was what I
had it in my mind to say."

A sigh of reprobation rose from the Court, and the Moderator shook
his head.  He honestly desired to give David a way of escape, not
from any love he bore him, but for the credit of the Kirk.  This,
too, was the general feeling.  As David looked over the ranks of
his judges he saw stupidity, arrogance, confusion, writ on many
faces, but on none malevolence.  This Court would deal mildly with
him, if he gave them the chance, for the sake of the repute of
their common calling.

He laboured to be meek, but no answers, however soft, could
disguise the fact that he and they looked upon things from
standpoints eternally conflicting.  It was suggested to him again
and again that the stranger at the manse had been entertained by
his housekeeper, an ignorant woman and therefore the less
reprehensible, for had she not rolled up the clothes and hidden
them in the byre, as the accused admitted?  But David refused to
shelter behind any misapprehension.  He had admitted the man, what
was done had been by his orders, and--this in reply to a question
by the minister of Bold--what he had done he was prepared to do
again.  The close of the first day's sederunt found the charges
proven in substance by the admission, indeed by the vehement
proclamation, of the accused.

For David there was no share in the clerical supper at the Cross
Keys.  He lay at a smaller inn in the Northgate, a resort of
drovers and packmen, and spent such time as remained before bed in
walking by Aller side, under the little hill crowned with kirk and
castle, watching the salmon leap as they passed the cauld.  Next
day, the facts having been ascertained by admission, the Presbytery
debated on principles, David was summoned to justify his conduct,
and--with a prayer that he might be given humility--complied.  With
every sentence he rode deeper into the disapprobation of his
hearers.  He claimed that the cause of the helpless, however
guilty, was the cause of Christ.  Should a starving enemy be turned
from the door, even though it was an enemy of the Kirk's?

"Man, can ye no distinguish?" thundered the minister of Bold.
"Have you no logic in your head?"  And he quoted a dozen savage
Scriptural precedents against him.

Was the Court, David asked, in a time of civil strife and war
between brothers, clear that the precedent of Israel and the tribes
of Canaan held?  The men they fought against were professing
Christians, indeed professed Presbyterians.  Granted that they were
in error, was it an error which could only be extirpated in blood?

It was an unlucky plea, for it brought forth a frenzied torrent of
denials.  The appeal of his opponents was not only to Scripture,
but to the decisions of the Kirk.  Was there not here, one cried,
that rebellion which was as the sin of witchcraft?  What became,
cried another, of the deference which a young man was bound to show
to the authority of his fathers in God?  "Are we to be like
Rehoboam, who hearkened to callow and inexperienced youth, and not
to those elders who partook of the wisdom of his father Solomon?"

Presently David was silent.  He remembered that meekness became
him, and he had a sharp sense of the futility of argument.
Respectfully he bowed his head to the blast, while a dozen of his
brethren delivered extracts from their recent sermons.  The
Moderator confirmed the sense of the Court.

"Our young brother is lamentably estranged from Christ," he said in
a voice which was charged with regret as well as with indignation.
"He is like the Church of Laodicea, of whom it was written,
'Because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue
thee out of my mouth.'  I tell you, sir, he that is not with us is
against us, and that in the day of the Lord's judgments there can
be no halting between two opinions.  It is the duty of the Kirk to
follow His plain commandment and to rest not till the evil thing be
utterly destroyed from our midst, even as Barak pursued after the
chariots to Harosheth of the Gentiles, and all the host of Sisera
fell upon the edge of the sword, and not a man was left.  You are
besotted in your error, and till you repent you have no part in the
commonwealth of Israel, for you are like Lot and have taken up your
dwelling in the Cities of the Plain and have pitched your tents
towards Sodom, whereas the Kirk, like Abram, dwelleth in the plain
of Mamre, which is in Hebron, and hath built there an altar to the
Lord."

The Presbytery refrained from any judgment on the case, that being
deferred till a later meeting, when, if necessary, evidence could
be called; but in view of the fact that the minister of Woodilee
had acknowledged his fault and exhibited contumacy thereanent, he
was by a unanimous decision suspended from occupying the pulpit and
dispensing the Sacrament in the parish, and from all other pastoral
rights and duties.  As the winter was close on hand, when evil
roads lessened church attendance, it was agreed that spiritual
needs would be met if Mr. Fordyce were enjoined to conduct public
worship alternately in Woodilee and Cauldshaw.

David rode home in a frame of mind which was neither sad nor glad.
He felt no shame at his suspension, but he recognized with a pang
the breadth of the gulf which separated him from his brethren, and
the ruin of those high hopes with which a year ago he had begun his
ministry.  He realized that he was but a poor ecclesiastic, for he
could not feel that loyalty which others felt to a Kirk which was
mainly the work of men's hands.  "They have lamentably perverted
reason and justice"--he remembered Montrose's words; and yet most
of them were honest men and pious men, and maybe their good on a
wide computation was greater than their ill.  It was his unhappy
portion to have encountered the ill.  But if the Kirk cast him off
he had Christ--"Other sheep I have which are not of this fold,"
was Christ's word--and he must follow with all humility the light
that was given to him.  When the main trial came on he would not
relent in his denunciation of the Wood, and his loss would be well
repaid if, like Samson, he could bring down with him the pillars
of Gaza. . . .  He consoled himself thus, but he knew in his heart
that he had no need of consolation, for the thought of Katrine was
there like a live coal.

He came to the manse in the gloaming, to find Isobel waiting for
him in the road.

"Heaven save us a'!" she said, "but there's an awfu' thing come to
Woodilee.  They've prickit a witch, and it's nane ither than puir
Bessie Todd o' the Mains.  Guid kens what they did till her, but a'
nicht the clachan rang wi' her skirlin'.  The pricker fand the
Deil's mark on her back, and stappit a preen [pin] intil it up to
the heid and nae bluid came, and they burnt her feet wi' lichtit
candles, and hung her by the thumbs frae the cupples till they
garred her own to awesome deeds.  I canna believe it, the puir
doited body, but if the ae half is true she's far ben wi' the
Adversary, and oh, sir, it's fearsome to think what wickedness can
be hidden in the hert o' man.  She said the Deil gie'd her a new
name, whilk she wadna tell, and she owned that ilka Lord's Day,
when she sat under ye on the pu'pit stair, she prayed to him--'Our
Father, which wert in Heaven.'  But whatever her faut, it canna be
richt the way they guidit her, lickin' her wi' a bull's pizzle and
burnin' the gums o' her till she yammers like a bitted powny.  If
she maun dee, let death come quick.  For the Lord's sake, Mr.
David, get her down to the Kirk Aller tolbooth, for the Shirra is
kinder than yon red brock [badger] o' a pricker.  The verra sicht
o' his wild een sends a grue to my banes--and Chasehope standin' by
him and speakin' saft and wicked, and smilin' like a cat wi' a
mouse."

David's heart sickened with disgust.  Chasehope had turned the
tables on him; he had diverted suspicion from himself by
sacrificing a half-witted woman.  And yet this Bessie Todd had been
a member of the coven--he had seen her grey locks flying in the
Wood.  Chasehope was presiding at the examination and torture; he
would no doubt take good care that no word of the truth came out in
her delirium.  And Isobel, who had denied with violence his own
charges against this very woman, seemed to believe her confession.
She was revolted by the cruelty, but convinced of the sin.  That
would no doubt be the feeling of the parish, for who could
disbelieve avowals which must send the avower to a shameful death?

"Where is the wretched woman?" he asked.

"They have her lockit up in Peter Pennecuik's girnel. . . .
They've gotten a' they want, and they say that the Shirra has been
sent for to carry her to the Kirk Aller steeple, whaur they confine
the warlocks. . . .  They're in the girnel now, and the feck o'
Woodilee is waitin' at the door.  Will you stop for a bite? . . ."

David waited only to stable his horse, and to buckle on the sword
with which he had girt himself on the night of the second Beltane.
He ran so fast towards the clachan that he was at Peter Pennecuik's
house before Isobel, labouring in his wake, had turned the corner
of the manse loan.

The night had fallen dark, but from inside the girnel came a
flicker of light.  David had once before seen a witch hunt--in
Liberton, as a boy--and then there had been a furious and noisy
crowd surging round the change-house where the accused was
imprisoned.  But the Woodilee mob was not like that.  It was
silent, almost furtive.  The granary was a large building, for it
had once been the barn of the Mains farm; it was built of unmasoned
stone cemented with mud, and had a deep roof of thatch; through the
chinks of both walls and roof came thin streams of light.  The
spectators did not press on the door, but stood in groups some
paces back, as hushed as in the kirk of a Sabbath.  The light was
too dim for David to recognize faces, but he saw that one man stood
at the door as keeper, and knew him for Reiverslaw.

He had been drinking, and greeted the minister hilariously.

"We've gotten ane o' the coven," he whispered thickly, "ane you saw
yoursel' in the Wud."

"But Chasehope is among her accusers."

"I ken, but we'll get that kail-worm too, in the Lord's guid time.
At ony rate, we're sure o' ane o' the deevils."

"You fool, this is a trick of Chasehope's to divert attention from
the Wood.  This miserable woman has only confessed bairnly faults,
and on that he'll ride off scot free."

The truth penetrated slowly to Reiverslaw's foggy brain, but in the
end he saw it.

"God's curse on him, but ye're maybe right.  What are ye ettlin',
sir?  Gie me the word and I'll come in by and wring the truth out
o' him wi' my hands at his gutsy thrapple."

"Bide where you are, and let none leave this place unless I bid
you.  I will see if I can get justice done."

But when Reiverslaw opened the heavy door to let him enter, the
first glance told David that he had come too late.  The great empty
place had straw piled at one end, and on a barrel in the centre a
flickering lantern.  By it, on an upturned barrow, sat the pricker,
a paper in his hand and an inkhorn slung round his neck, his face
wearing a smirking satisfaction.  He had once been a schoolmaster,
and at this moment he looked the part again.  Behind him, sitting
on kegs or squatted on the floor, were a dozen men--Chasehope at
his elbow, Mirehope, the miller, Peter Pennecuik, Nether Fennan--
David saw only a few faces in the dim light.  Daft Gibbie by some
means or other had gained entrance, and had perched himself in a
crevice of the wall, whence his long shoeless legs dangled over
Chasehope's head.

On the straw behind the lantern lay the witch.  Her grey hair had
fallen round her naked shoulders, and that and a ragged petticoat
seemed her only covering.  Even in the mirk David could see the
cruel consequences of torture.  Her feet were black and swollen,
and her hands, with dislocated thumbs, were splayed out on the
straw as if they were no longer parts of her body.  Her white face
was hideously discoloured in patches, and her mouth was wide open,
as if there were a tormenting fire within.  She seemed delirious,
for she gabbled and slavered uncouthly to herself, scarcely moving
her lips.  Every now and then her thin breast was shaken with a
frenzied shivering.

At the sight something gave in David's head.  He felt the blood
rush above his eyebrows, and a choking at the back of his throat.
Always a hater of cruelty, he had rarely seen its more monstrous
forms, and the spectacle of this broken woman awoke in him a fury
of remonstrance.  He strode to the lantern and looked down on her,
and then turned away, for he sickened.  He saw the gimlet eyes of
the pricker--red like a broody hen's--and behind him the sullen,
secret face of Chasehope.

"What devil's prank have you been at?" he cried.  "Answer me,
Ephraim Caird.  Who is this mountebank, and what have you done to
this unhappy woman?"

"All has been done decently and in order," said Chasehope.  "The
Presbytery is resolved to free this parochine of the sin of
witchcraft, and this worthy man, who has skill in siccan matters,
has been sent to guide us.  There is a commission issued frae the
Privy Council, as ye may have heard, to try those that are accused,
but the first needcessity is to find the witches and exhort them to
confession.  This woman, Elspeth Todd, is convict out o' her ain
mouth, and we've gotten a memorial o' the ill deeds she owns to.
Word has been dispatched to the Shirra, and the morn, nae doot,
he'll send and shift her to Kirk Aller."

The man spoke smoothly and not discourteously, but David would have
preferred oaths and shouting.  He put a great restraint on his
temper.

"How did you extort the confession?  Answer me that.  You have
tortured her body and driven her demented, and suffering flesh and
crazed wits will avow any foolishness."

"We followed the means sanctioned by ilka presbytery in this land.
It's weel kenned that flesh sell't to the Deil is no like common
flesh, and the evil spirit will no speak without some sort o'
compulsion."

David snatched the paper from the pricker and held it to the
lantern.  It was written clearly in a schoolmaster's hand, and
though oddly and elliptically worded, he made out the sum of it.
As he read, there was silence in the place, except for the babbling
of the woman and the mowing of Daft Gibbie from his perch.

It seemed to him a bedlamite chronicle.  The accused confessed that
she had been guilty of charming, and had cured a cow on the Mains
by taking live trouts from its belly.  She had "overlooked" a boy,
Hobbie Simson, at Nether Fennan, and he had sickened and lain for
three months on his back.  She had made a clay figure of one of the
ewe-milkers at Mirehope and stuck pins into it, and the girl had
suffered from pains and dizziness all summer.  She had shot cattle
with elf-bolts, and had cursed a field on Windyways by driving
round it a team of puddocks.  The Devil had trysted with her on a
rig of Mirehope's, and had given her a name which she would not
reveal, and on the rig there had been ever since an intractable
crop of thistles.  Her master visited her in the likeness of a
black cat, and she herself had often taken the same likeness, and
had travelled the country at night sitting on the crupper of one of
the Devil's mares.  By means of the charm of the seven south-
flowing streams and the nine rowan berries, she had kept her meal-
ark full in the winter famine.  She confessed to having ridden John
Humbie, a ploughman of Chasehope's, night after night to a witch-
gathering at Charlie's Moss, so that John was done with weariness
the next day and unfit for work.  The said John declared that he
woke with the cry of "Up horsie" in his ear.  At these gatherings
she admitted to having baked and eaten the witch-cake--a food made
of grey bear and a black toad's blood, and baked in the light of
the moon, and at the eating had sung this spell:


     "Some lass maun gang wi' a kilted sark;
      Some priest maun preach in a thackless kirk;
      Thread maun be spun for a dead man's sark;
      A' maun be done ere the sang o' the lark."


She admitted that she had taken the pains of childbirth from women--
but what women she would not say--and that then the child had been
born dead, and had so become a "kain bairn" for the Devil.  Last,
and most damning, she had between her shoulders the Devil's secret
mark.

Some sentences from the document David read aloud, and in his voice
there was bitter scorn.  He believed most devoutly in the menace of
witchcraft and in a Devil who could take bodily form and divert the
course of nature to seduce human souls, but this catalogue of sins
seemed to him too childish for credence.  It was what any woman
crazed with pain might confess in the hope of winning respite.
Most of the details he remembered from his boyhood as common talk;
the witch-cake rhyme he had sung himself; the charm to fill Bessie's
meal-ark during the winter he knew to be false, for she had nearly
died of want, and he had fed her from the manse kitchen. . . .  He
had seen her in the Wood, and yet there was no mention of the Wood.
Chasehope had been present at the torture, and doubtless his fell
influence had kept her rhapsody away from the point of danger.  The
poor soul was guilty, but not of this childishness.

He looked at her as she lay, mindless, racked, dying perhaps, and
an awful conviction entered his mind.  She was a human sacrifice
made by the coven to their master. . . .  He had read of such
things, he half-remembered tales of them. . . .  Perhaps she was a
willing victim--he had heard of such--coming forward with a
perverted joy to confess her shame.  The torture--that would be to
stimulate her imagination.  Isobel had always said she was weak in
her mind. . . .  She might have been chosen by lot in the kirk on
Hallowmass-e'en. . . .  Chasehope was not her inquisitor, but the
dark priest who conducted the ritual.

His anger and disgust rose to a fury.  He tore the paper into
little pieces and flung them in the pricker's face.

"What doubly damned crime have you committed?" he cried.  "You have
tortured a wretched weak woman and taken down her ravings for
truth.  You have maybe killed her, murderer that you be!  Your sins
cry out to God, and yours above all, Ephraim Caird, whose hands I
have myself seen dipped in the blackest witchcraft."

Chasehope's face was smiling blandly.

"I kenna what right ye have to meddle, sir," he said.  "The paper
ye've torn is but a copy.  The memorial itsel' will be in safe
hands this nicht.  Wad ye set yoursel' up against the Presbytery
and the law o' the land, you that have been suspended this day, as
is weel kenned, frae your rights as minister o' this parish?  Ye'd
best gang hame to your bed, sir, and pray that ye may be delivered
frae the sin o' presumption.  This woman will bide the nicht in
this place under lock and key, till the Shirra sends for her."

"She will go with me to the manse this night--and, please God, I
will nurse her back into life."

There could be no question of the consternation of the audience--it
almost equalled his own.  Chasehope alone kept his composure; the
others stared in horror and growing anger.

"That will no be permitted," came from the lowering Mirehope, and
"A bonny minister," cried another, "to file his house wi' a dirty
witch.  He maun himsel' be ower great wi' the Deil."  The pricker
twisted and grinned, and his eyes watched approvingly the spasms of
the woman on the straw.

David was carried out of himself, and before he was aware of it had
drawn his sword.

"She goes to the manse.  I will suffer no let or hindrance in this
plain duty.  Whoever opposes me will rue it."

"Wad ye deforce the session?" Mirehope shouted in a voice like a
bull and got to his feet.  From the idiot on his perch came an
unexpected encouragement.  "Fine, sir.  Fine, my bonny Mr. David,"
cried Gibbie.  "Stap your sword in his wame.  I'll uphaud ye wi' my
staff, for the puir kimmer was ill-guidit.  I couldna sleep a wink
a' nicht for her skellochs."

A voice broke in on the storm, and David saw that it was the new
tenant of Crossbasket.

"Put up your blade, sir," he said.  "There's no need for fighting
among Christian folk.  These honest men have been following the
light vouchsafed to them, and if there's blame to be cast it's on
this pricker chiel that comes from I know not where."

There was something in the quiet tones which fell like oil on
yeasty water.  David settled back his sword into its sheath,
Mirehope sat down again on his keg, Chasehope turned his head to
the speaker with the first sign of discomposure he had yet shown.

"Ye'll forgive me, neighbours," Mark continued, "since I'm but new
come to the parish, but I've seen a hantle o' the world, and I
would be wae to see honest men run their heids against a stone
wall.  The woman may be a' you say and waur, but it looks as if her
handlin' had been ower sair, and I'm muckle mista'en if she'll no
be a corp ere morning.  Consider, friends.--This is no a court
constituted by a Privy Council commission; it's nae mair than a
private gathering o' well-wishers to the Kirk and the Law.  In my
time I've meddled ower much wi' the Law for my comfort, and I ken
something about the jaud.  The Law has no cognizance of a pricker
or onything like him, and if well-meaning folk under his guiding
compass the death of a man or woman that has not been duly tried
and sentenced, the Law will uphaud it to be murder, just as muckle
as if a caird had cut a throat at a dyke-side.  I greatly fear
ye've brought yourselves into its danger by this day's work."

Mark spoke with an air of anxious and friendly candour that called
for no opposition.  Indeed it was plain that more than one of his
hearers had similar doubts of their own.

"The wife's weel eneuch," said Mirehope.  "Ye'll no kill a tough
auld greyhen like that wi' a raxed thumb or brunt taes."

"I hope you're richt, neighbour," said Mark.  "But if she suld dee,
what will ye say to the Shirra--and what to the Court o' Justiciar?
Ye've taken doun frae her mouth a long screed o' crimes, but I'm of
the minister's opinion, that they're what ony distrackit body wad
admit that wasna verra strong in the intellectuals and fand her
paiks [punishment] ower sair for her.  Lord bless me, but they're
maist o' them owercomes I heard at my grannie's knee.  I counsel ye
in all friendliness to let the minister do his best to keep her in
life, or it sticks in my mind that Woodilee will mak' an ill
showing when the King's judges redd up the business."

Chasehope angrily dissented, but he had few supporters.  Most of
the others wore an anxious air.

"I come to the matter of the pricker."  Mark's homely wheedling
tones were like those of a packman in an ale-house kitchen.  "I ken
nocht about him, but I canna say I like the looks o' him.  I doubt
if I was strapped up by the thumbs and had yon luntin' een
glowering at me I wad speak wi' strange tongues mysel'.  It's no
that difficult for a pawky body to gar a weaker vessel obey his
will. . . .  Get up off that barry," he said sharply.  "Stand ayont
the licht till I have a look at ye."

The words came out like a crack of a whip-lash.  The atmosphere of
the place had suddenly changed, the woman's mutterings had ceased,
and, as David stood back from the lantern, he saw that Mark had
moved forward and was beside the pricker, a yard from him, with the
light between them, and the faces of both in full view of the rest.
The one shambled to his feet and set his hand to his head as if to
avert a blow, while the other, his dark face like a thundercloud,
stood menacingly over against him.

"Look at me," Mark cried.  "Look me in the een, if there's that
muckle smeddum in your breast."

The eyes of the pricker were like small dark points in his dead-
white eyeballs.

"Ye're one Kincaid, but ye've gone by mony names.  Ye've been a
dominie and a stickit minister, a thief and a thief-taker, a spy
and a witch-finder, and ye'd fain be a warlock if the Deil thocht
your soul worth half a bodle. . . .  Turn your een to the licht,
and keep them there. . . .  Answer me ere the Pit opens for ye.
Was there ever a word in your mouth that wasna as false as hell?
Say 'I am a liar, like my father the Devil afore me.'"

"I am a liar," the man croaked.

Mark stretched out one hand and passed it over the pricker's brow.

"What's aneath here?" he asked.  "Honest banes?  Na, na, rottenness
like peat."  To the horrified spectators he seemed to pass his hand
backwards and forwards through the man's head, as if a knife had
gone through a pat of butter.

"What's in your een?" he cried, leaning forward.  "I see the fires
of hell and the worm that dieth not.  God! the bleeze o' them is
keekin' through!"

For a moment it seemed to all that a ruddy glow of flame leaped to
the roof, and Daft Gibbie in his agitation fell from his seat and
rushed to the door.  The idiot flung it open and screamed beyond
Reiverslaw to the waiting crowd, "Come inbye, every soul o' ye.
The pricker that tormented puir Bessie is getting his paiks, and
Glee'd Mark is drawin' hell fire out o' him.  Come inbye and see
the bonny sicht."

Reiverslaw and a dozen others entered the granary; the door
remained half open and the night wind swept up the dust and chaff
of the floor and made the red light seem a monstrous wavering cloud
that hung like an infernal aureole over the wretched man.

Mark had him by the shoulder.  "And what's this?" he cried, tearing
his shirt aside and showing his bare throat.  "As I live by bread,
it's a Deil's pap!"  Certainly to the audience it seemed that above
the breast grew a small black teat.

The creature was in an extremity of terror.  Fear had so drained
the blood from his eyeballs that the pupils seemed to burn with an
uncanny brightness, even after the red had gone out of the light.

"There's nae bull's pizzle needit to make this wauf [feeble] body
confess."  Mark's iron grip was still on his shoulder.  "If ony
neighbour has ony misdeed in his mind, I'll warrant to wring it oot
o' the pricker as glib as a bairn's schule-lesson.  I'll mak' him
own to the Black Mass in the kirk on Hallowe'en. . . .  There's
nane speaks?  Weel, we'll leave the dott'rel to his ain
conscience."

He relaxed his grip, and the man dropped gibbering and half-
senseless on the floor.

"There's your bonny pricker," said Mark to Chasehope.  "There's
your chosen instrument for getting truth out o' auld wives.  Do as
you like wi' him, but I counsel ye to get him furth o' the parish
if he be a friend o' yours, or the folk will hae him in the deepest
hole in Woodilee burn."

Chasehope, white and stammering, found himself deserted by his
allies, but he still showed fight.

"I protest," he cried.  "I kenna what hellish tricks ye've played
on a worthy man--"

"Just the same tricks as he played on the auld wife--a wee bit o'
speirin'."

"It's no my blame," said Chasehope, changing his ground, "if I have
leaned on a broken reed.  The man was sent here by folk that
vouched for his worth.  And nevertheless, whatever the weakness o'
the instrument, the Lord has wrocht through him to produce a
confession--"

"Ay.  Just so," said Mark dryly.  "But what kind o' instrument is
yon to procure the truth?  Will ye get caller water out o' a foul
pipe?"

"The Lord works--" Chasehope began, but Mark broke in on him.  His
dark mocking face, in which the squint of the left eye was now most
noticeable and formidable, was thrust close to the other's.

"See here, my bonny man.--Ye can get ony mortal daftness out o' man
or woman if ye first put fear on them.  Ye've seen the auld wife
and ye've seen the pricker.  Do YOU come forrit forenent the licht.
Ye're a buirdly chiel, and weel spoken o' for canniness.  Ye can
keep your thumbs unraxed and your hide unscorched for me, but by
the God abune us I'll warrant that in ten minutes by the knock I'll
hae ye confessin' fauts that will keep the haill parish waukrife
till Yule. . . .  Will ye thole the trial?"

The big man shrank back.  "Na, na.  I kenna what spell the Deil has
gien ye, but ye'll no lay it on me."

"So muckle the better for yoursel'."  Mark turned to the others.
"Ye've a' seen, neighbours, that my spell, as he ca's it, was nae
mair than just an honest speirin'.  I'm loth to think that this
clachan should suffer for what has been done this day, so the
sooner we get the wife to bed and weel-tended the better for us
a'."

"She shall go to the manse at once," said David.  He had been
examining the tortured woman, who had passed into unconsciousness,
and it seemed to him that her heart beat very faintly.

"That will be wisest, no doubt," said Mark, but at this point
Chasehope found support in his protest.  Mirehope, Nether Fennan,
and the miller exchanged anxious looks.

"Take her to Alison Geddie," they cried.  "She has a toom [empty]
bed, and it's near by."

"She will go to my own house," said David, "and be nursed by my own
hand.  I trust no man or woman of you after to-day's devilry."

The place had filled up, and it seemed to him that the better part
of the parish were now onlookers.  It was clear that a considerable
number were on Chasehope's side, for the mention of the manse had
wakened a curious disquiet in many faces.  David solved the problem
by dragging out from the back of the granary a wooden sledge used
for drawing peats.  He covered it with straw and laid the woman on
it.

"Reiverslaw!" he cried.  "You take the one end and I'll take the
other."

The farmer advanced, and for a second it looked as if he might be
prevented by force.  He turned fierce eyes on the crowd.  "Ay, sir.
I'll dae your bidding. . . .  And if ony man lifts his hand to
prevent me, he'll get a sarkfu' o' broken banes."

The strange cortge moved out into the darkness, without
opposition.  It may have been the honest feeling of the majority
that let it go; it may have been the truculent Reiverslaw, or David
with his white face and the sword bobbing at his belt: but most
likely it was the fact that Mark Riddel walked by the minister's
side.



Bessie Todd died just before morning.  Isobel received her old
gossip with tears and lamentations, laid her in the best bed,
washed and salved her wounds, and strove to revive her with
cordials.  But the trial had been too hard for a frail woman far
down in the vale of years.  David watched all night by her bedside,
and though at the end she became conscious, her mind was hopelessly
unhinged, and she babbled nonsense and scraps of childish rhymes.
If he could not pray with her, he prayed beside her, pleading
passionately for the departing soul.

As Isobel straightened the body and closed the eyes, she asked
anxiously if there had been any space given for repentance.

David shook his head.

"Puir thing, she got the Devil's fee and bountith, and muckle guid
it did her.  Let's hope, sir, that afore her mind left her she had
grace given her to renounce him and creep to the Mercy Seat. . . .
We'll gar some folks in Woodilee look gash [ghastly] for this.
There was a time, Mr. David, when I wad have held ye back, but my
word now is Gang forrit, till ye rive this parish wi' the fear o'
God, and sinners we ken o' will howl on their knees for as quiet a
death-bed as Bessie's."




CHAPTER XVII

WOODILEE AND CALIDON


The pricker disappeared from the parish in the night.  The dead
woman was buried decently in the kirkyard, and her male kin
attended the funeral as if there had never been a word against her
fair fame.  There was indeed a certain revulsion of feeling among
plain people in Woodilee.  Bessie had been liked; she was regretted
and pitied; the downfall of the pricker seemed to invalidate her
confession.  But there was a party--Chasehope was the leader--who
held that solemn things had been trifled with and that the minister
had gone far to bring God's curse on the parish.  He had laid his
hand to his sword like a malignant, and had made light of an awful
confession before the pricker had been discredited.  Bessie might
have been innocent of witchcraft, but in his plea for her he had
shown a discreditable leniency towards the sin.  Women might be old
and frail, but if they were leagued with Satan it was enough to put
them beyond the pale of Christian sympathy.  The minister was
patently rebellious and self-willed, a scorner of the yoke of Kirk
and Word.

But the night's events caused a notable increase in one reputation.
The new tenant of Crossbasket had shown himself an ill man to
counter.  He had the interests of the parish at heart and had given
wise advice, and he had confounded the pricker with a terrible
ease.  Clearly a man with power; nor was there reason to think that
the power was not given him from on high.  A hard man to gainsay,
as even Chasehope had found.  His friendliness had made him
popular, and folk were slipping into neighbourly ways with him.
Soon he would have been "Mark" to most, and "Glee'd Mark" behind
his back.  But from that night formality and decorum invested him;
he was "Crossbasket" even to the children, and the humbler doffed
their bonnets when he drew near.

He came to David one evening when the candle was lit in the study.

"What arts were yon," the minister asked, "that turned the pricker
from a man into a jelly?"

Mark had sat himself in a deep armchair covered with black leather,
which had been David's father's and had come to the manse from the
Pleasance after the roup.  He had crossed his legs and let his head
lie back while he puffed his tobacco-pipe.  He laughed as he
answered:

"A simple divertisement, but good enough for such a caddis-worm.  A
pinch of Greek powder in the lantern, and for the rest a device I
learned among the tinklers in Hungary when some of us gentleman-
cavaliers had to take to the hills and forests for a season.  But
the body was easy game.  The sight of my een was enough to melt his
wits. . . .  Chasehope's another kind of lad--there's metal there,
though it's maybe of the Devil's forging. . . .  But for the moment
we've fairly houghed his shelty."

"You saw how distraught he was," Mark continued, "ay, and others
beside him, when you offered to carry the wife to the manse.  The
reason wasna ill to seek.  When she was being tortured to
confession, Chasehope was beside her and mastered her with his
een. . . .  She was one of the coven, you tell me.  But once in
your hands he was feared she would tell things of more moment than
the blethers they wrung out of her. . . .  She didna speak?  Ay, I
thought she was ower far gone.  It was maybe as well that the puir
thing died, for after the handling she got there was small bodily
comfort left for her."

"By her death her tormentors are guilty in God's sight of murder,"
said David.

"No doubt.  And maybe also in the sight of the Law.  That's why I
say we have houghed Chasehope's mare for him.  He canna ride off on
a pretended zeal for witch-hunts, for this one has notably
miscarried.  This pricker business is looked askance at by those
that ken best, and it's certain it has no countenance frae the
Justiciar.  They've killed the wife with it, and their pricker will
not show face again in this countryside.  What becomes, think you,
of the braw commission of the Privy Council that Chasehope had the
procuring of?  The thing is begowked before it is begun.  The
ministers of Kirk Aller and Bold, and yon knock-kneed haverel, the
laird of Killiequhair, will e'en hae to content themselves at home,
and Chasehope, in place of hiding his sins behind his zeal for
burning witches, is left with his repute a wee thing touched, like
a bad egg.  There's folk in the parish beginning to speir questions
that never speired them before."

"I am convinced that the woman Bessie Todd was a human sacrifice,
decided on by the coven, and maybe accepted of her free-will.  I
have heard that every now and then they must pay such a teind to
Hell. . . .  She was weak in the mind, remember."

"I had the same notion myself.  No, I wasna there when the pricker
was busy, but them that were tell me that he put the feck of the
words intil her mouth.  That would consort with what I've heard of
the black business elsewhere.  She was doomed to die, as surely as
if she had stood in the doomster's cart. . . .  But I have found
out another thing.  Our neighbour Chasehope is a King-Deil."

"What in Heaven's name is that?"

"You may well speir.  He is the priest of the coven, but he is
more, for he is a kind of Deil on his own account.  That is why you
saw them in the Wood bowing before him and nozzling him like dogs.
There's been King-Deils before this in Scotland.  Francie Stuart
was one--him that was Earl of Bothwell in the days of James the
Saxt, and he had a braw coven down by Dunbar and the Bass."

"And the man an elder of the Kirk!" David exclaimed.  "The words of
Scripture are never off his lips, and more than once he has
reproved me for sin."

"That's the lad.  There's a holy pleasure to be gotten out of
hypocrisy.  And yet--and yet!  I'll wager that Chasehope has no
doubt but that he is a redeemed soul, and will get an abundant
entrance at the hinder end.  That Kirk of yours has so cunningly
twisted religion that a man can grow fat in his own sins and yet
spend his time denouncing the faults of others, for he is elected
into grace, as they call it, and has got some kind of a title to
Heaven.  I'm a plain body that canna see how God and the Devil can
be served at the one time, but there's many a chiel makes a trade
of it.  They've gotten one creel that holds their treasure in
Heaven, and one full of the lusts of the flesh, and though they
ettle to coup the latter before the day of death, they are
confident that it winna canker what's in the other creel.  It's
queer doctrine, and maybe I havena riddled it out right, for I'm
loth to believe that an honest man could uphold it, though I've
heard it often propounded with an unction that made my flesh
creep."

"You speak not of the Christian doctrine of election, but of its
perversion," said David solemnly.

"Weel, it's the perversion that has gotten the upper hand these
days.  The Kirk has made the yett of grace ower wide for sinful
men, and all ither yetts ower narrow.  It has banned innocence and
so made a calling of hypocrisy, for human nature is human nature,
and if you tell a man that ilka honest pleasure is a sin in God's
sight, he finds a way to get the pleasure and yet keep the name for
godliness.  And mind you, the pleasures he enjoys with a doubtful
conscience will no long be honest.  There will be a drop of black
ink in the spring water that makes it drumly, and ere he kens he'll
be seeking a stronger brew.  The upshot will be that folk who sit
under you in the kirk will dance in the Wood on the auld heathen
holy-days, and the man whose word gangs furthest with the
Presbytery will be hugging lusts to his bosom that would make a
common foot-sentinel spew.  For they've all their sure title, as
they call it--they're all elected into grace, so what for should
they fash themselves?"

Mark's face was smiling, but his voice had a note in it which was
not humour.

"You laugh," David cried, "but I'm nearer weeping."

"I laugh, but it's to prevent me cursing."  The other's jaw had set
and there was a smouldering fire in his eyes.  "I tell you the
Cities of the Plain were less an offence to Almighty God than this
demented twist of John Calvin that blasts and rots a man's heart.
For if it makes here and there a saint, it is like a dung-heap to
hatch out sinners."



David was suspended from officiating in the kirk, but he was still
a placed minister, and there was no embargo upon his utterances
elsewhere.  So while every alternate Sabbath Mr. Fordyce came over
from Cauldshaw to occupy the pulpit, and in defiance of the
Presbytery ate his dinner at the manse, on the others David
preached in the kirk-yard.  Twenty years later these sermons in
the open air were remembered, when Mr. Fordyce, then far advanced
in age, was driven from Cauldshaw to hold preachings in the Deer
Syke. . . .

There was a novelty in the practice which brought many the first
day; and on later Sabbaths the audience increased, for David had
never delivered such discourses in the Woodilee pulpit.  One famous
sermon was on the peril of trifling with salvation.  A soul was not
saved by an easy miracle, but must mount hardly and painfully to
eternal life; to accept grace lightly was to cast scorn upon the
atonement of the Cross.  But doctrine figured little, nor were
there any of the forecasts of hell and judgment which were the
common proof of an earnest minister.  "He is a guid dowg," Richie
Smail was reported to have said: "he wad wyse folk gently to
Christ."  Something of the joy in his own heart revealed itself in
a peculiar tenderness; often there were wet eyes among his hearers,
and the children, squatted on the grass or on the flat gravestones,
forbore to whisper and fidget, and listened with a grave attention.
His elders did not attend; indeed, with the exception of Peter
Pennecuik, they forbore even to grace the orthodox ministrations of
Mr. Fordyce.  Chasehope and his friends walked the five moorland
miles to Bold to sup on the strong fare of Mr. Ebenezer till such
time--early in the New Year, it was believed--as the Presbytery
pronounced final judgment on their minister.

Woodilee had split into two factions.  There was the party of the
Session, who held David to be a malignant, or at best a Laodicean,
one who gave a doubtful sound of doctrine, a rebel, a despiser of
authority, a preacher of a cold morality.  To this side belonged
many of undoubted piety, who had been shocked by his defiance and
gave ready ear to whispered scandal.  Of David's party were
respected professors like Richie Smail and Rab Prentice, several
godly women, a decent hind or two, and a tail which was neither
godly nor respected.  Among his supporters were some whom he
suspected of dealings with the Wood, and in general he had with him
all that was least esteemed in the parish.  To have Reiverslaw--who
was again drinking hard--as his prophet, and Daft Gibbie as his
fugleman, did not enhance the credit of his cause.  Between the
Jews and the Samaritans there were no dealings.  Isobel, now a hot
partisan, had quarrelled on this score with her nearest and
dearest, and, encountering Jean of Chasehope-foot in the clachan,
and being goaded by her tongue, fell on her tooth and nail and
chased her into Peter Pennecuik's kailyard.  Amos Ritchie, too, had
declared his colours, and woe be to the man who, in his presence,
spoke ill of the minister.  He was no longer employed by the
farmers around the kirkton, so the smithy fire was mostly unlit,
while the smith did odd jobs at Reiverslaw and Calidon.  Only the
new tenant of Crossbasket mixed amicably with all.  On the road he
had the same greeting for Chasehope as for the minister, and he
would drink a stoup at Lucky Weir's with Amos or Mirehope,
Reiverslaw or the miller, in all good-fellowship.  But this
popularity rested more perhaps on fear than on affection.  Dark
whisperings began to spread.  "What ken we o' Crossbasket?" said
one.  "Nae doot he's frae Teviotside, but whaur was he afore that?
He never learned that glower on Jed Water."  "He's a pawky carle,"
said another, "and ye canna get far ben wi' him.  There's mair in
his heid than the Word ever learned him.  I wadna wonder some fine
day to see him gang off in a fuff and a lowe.  Ye say he has the
speech o' a guid Christian?  Weel-a-weel, a soo may whistle, though
it has an ill mouth for it."



By late November winter should have closed in upon the glen with an
iron hand.  The first frosts should have stripped the trees, and
the first snows lain at the dyke-back.  But that year it seemed as
if the seasons had gone widdershins.  November was bright and calm,
and the harvest, delayed by October rains, was soon gathered.  Oats
and bear, flax and rye--the little crops were housed within a week,
and since the snows tarried, it was the middle of December before
the cattle were in the byres and yards, and the sheep brought down
to the infields.  The countryside presented a strange spectacle.
Heather lingered in bloom, and the leaves were on the ashes and
hazels till long after Hallowmass.  When they did fall there were
no frosts to crumble them, and they lay in great drifts in the
woods and by the roadside, and children dived and scrambled among
them.  There were swallows still in the thatch in November, and
Amos Ritchie, when he went out to the moss to intercept the
travelling skeins of wild geese, found that the curlews and plovers
had not yet flitted to the seashore and that there were no wildfowl
to be seen in all the blue heavens.  Morning after morning the sun
rose clear as in June, the nights were mild and starlit, herbs
which should have been snug below the earth sprouted prematurely,
the hedgehog and the badger had forgotten to go to sleep, and only
the short hours of light showed that it was midwinter.  Reiverslaw,
always a scorner of precedents, kept his sheep on the hills, where
the pasture was as rich as in summer-time.

But the old and the wise frowned and shook their heads.  One said
it was such a year as '71, of which his grandsire had told, when
winter did not begin till February, and did not end till June.
Another recalled "saxteen fifteen, named the Lown Year, when there
was nae frost, and a blight o' worms and cawterpillars and hairy
objects fell on the land."  And every wife in the parish, when at
Christmas the grass was still rank and high, and hips and haws
still hung on the bushes, quoted dolefully the saw that "a green
Yule makes a fat kirkyard."

But if there was a presage of calamity in it for the thoughtful, it
was weather of a rare beauty for those who had the heart to enjoy
it.  There was no sickness in the parish and as yet no hunger, so
David's pastoral duties were light.  He was on the uplands most of
the day, and now his feet took him away from the Hill of Deer and
the north ridge of Rood and across the glen to the hills between
Calidon and Aller, for there he could meet Katrine with no fear of
interfering parishioners.  The garrison had been withdrawn from
Calidon, since Nicholas was known to be out of the country and
Mistress Saintserf was regarded as well affected, but David did not
go there.  So long as the short afternoons were crystal under a
canopy of blue, and the sun set behind Herstane Craig in gold and
crimson, the place for lovers was the hill, for there the world was
narrowed to themselves.

But the minister's conscience smote him at last, and on New Year's
morning he presented himself at Calidon door.  By arrangement
Katrine was not there, and from her aunt he got the tempestuous
welcome which custom ordained as appropriate to the season.

"Sit ye down, sir, and prie our shortcake and October.  Yours is
the first stranger foot that has crossed this threshold, and it's
surely propitious that it should be a minister's.  Our ain Mr.
James is lyin' again, for this lown weather doesna 'gree wi' him,
though it's hard to say what 'grees wi' him, for the creature's
body is sair failed. . . .  It's mony a day since we cast een on ye
here, Mr. David, and siccan days as they've been for me and mine."

She descanted on the troubles of the autumn, her success in saving
Calidon from being sequestered--"Peter Dobbie, him that's our doer,
is far ben wi' Wariston, ye maun ken, and worthy Mr. Rintoul in the
West Kirk said a word in the right lug"--on the difficulty in
getting funds to Nicholas Hawkshaw at Utrecht, on the garrisoning
of Calidon--"They punished our yill, but they fashed us little, for
they were sair hadden down by Katrine."  But she said nothing of
Mark, though in the end she had been made privy to that business,
and she did not hint at the trouble in Woodilee which was the talk
of the country.  Behind all her garrulity lurked a certain
embarrassment, and it did not make David's task the easier.

At last he took his courage in both hands.

"I came here this morn for a purpose," he said, and with halting
voice and a fiery face he made his confession.  The old woman
regarded him with eyes that strove to express amazement and failed;
it was clear that she had had her suspicions.

But her words when she spoke were those of one who had been
startled out of all propriety.

"Heard ye ever the like?" she cried.  "Man, d'ye ken of whom ye
speak?  Katrine is a leddy born--there's nae aulder or prouder
stock in the land--and ye're the oy [grandson] o' the miller o' the
Roodfoot, and ye seek to make her your marrow [mate].  We ken that
the warld is coupit upside-down these days, but this fair cowes a'.
Guid faith, ye're no blate."

David held his peace, for he had no answer.  He felt in the pith of
his bones his immense audacity.

"How would the lassie set wi' a manse, think ye?" she continued.
"She's been brocht up amang papists and prelatists, and though
she's had mony a swatch o' the Gospel frae honest Mr. James, she's
no muckle wiser than a babe.  Forbye, she's a daft quean that wad
never mak' a 'sponsible minister's wife.  Think ye that the King's
court and dancin' and glee-singin' and ridin' on a horse is a guid
preparation for a moorland parish and a fower-room house?  How will
ane that's been used to velvet and pearlins tak' wi' linsey-wolsey
and drugget?"

"That is for Katrine to decide," he said humbly.  "I have heard
that true love can glorify a cot-house."

"Havers!" she cried.  "There's a decency in a' things, and ye canna
mate a blood-horse wi' a cadger's powny.  Wedlock, as I weel ken,
is nae business o' kissin' and rhymin', but a sober contrack, and
if twa folks are gaun to live cantily thegither, they maun see that
mair than their hearts are weel agreed.  There maun be a chance--
there's nae certainty in this perishin' world--o' a bien doun-
settin', and a sufficiency o' gear, and a life that will be guid
for baith.  What say ye to that?  A minister's wife!  Guidsakes,
the Session wad think her a randy, for she'd lauch at their
solemnities, and your brither ministers, wha are maistly cotters'
sons, wad be fleyed by her gentrice, and the folk wad be as feared
o' her as a chuckie o' a pyet.  Ye're a man o' sense, Mr. David.
Ye canna deny that the thing is past a' reason."

"Oh, mistress," said the unhappy David.  "There's truth in what you
say--I cannot gainsay it.  But I plead that true hearts may break
down every obstacle, and Katrine's and mine are as true to each
other as the dial to the sun.  There was a time when you were young
yourself, mistress--you mind that then there was no rule for lovers
but their love."

"I mind weel," she said more gently, "but it's for auld folk to be
eident and save the young frae folly. . . .  I'll no deny that I
would be blithe to see Katrine provided for.  She's a fine lassie,
but forbye mysel' she has nae near kin to mind her, now that
Nicholas is put to the horn and hidin' amang the Hollanders.  Fine
I wad like to see her in safe hands. . . .  But what can ye offer,
Mr. David?  It's no as if ye were on firm ground yoursel'.  They
tell me ye've cast out wi' your Session and are bickerin' wi' the
Presbytery, and ony day may be turned out o' Woodilee and maybe
excommunicat by the Kirk.  That's a braw prospect for a wife.  Wad
ye have Katrine tak' a creel on her back, like a tinkler quean, her
that has in her the bluid o' the Black Douglas and the auld kings
o' Scots?  Ye've made a bonny hash o' things, for ane that's
ettlin' to be a bridegroom."

"I am set about with perplexities, and the hands of many are
against me.  But I have Katrine on my side--and I was in hopes that
I might have you, mistress."

"I'm no against ye," she said, and there was kindness in her eye.
"Never think that.  I've heard the clash o' the country and I've
riddled it out, and by my way o't ye've taken the richt road.  I
ken nocht about the Wud, but I ken something o' the tods and
foumarts o' Woodilee, and for the business o' glee'd Mark Kerr it's
no a Hawkshaw or a Yester or a Saintserf would cast a stone at ye.
But it's solemn truth that ye've gotten on the wrang side o' the
Kirk, and the Kirk is your calling, Mr. David. . . .  Ye maun ken
that I've had mony a crack wi' our Mr. James anent ye, and if it's
the pure Gospel word I'm seekin' it's to him I'll gang and no to
Kirk Aller.  I'll tell ye what he said.  'Mr. David,' says he, 'has
his plew on the wrang rig.  He wad hae made a grand sodger, and if
he had been a papist he wad hae made a guid monk.  He has the
makings o' a saint and he has the makings o' a warrior, but a manse
is no the place for him.  For,' says Mr. James, 'he canna, like me,
withdraw himsel' into his closet--he is ower hale o' body and het
in spirit for that--and he canna walk doucely as the Kirk ordains.
For if he sees wrang he maun set it richt, though the Kirk tells
him to bide still, and he'll no put his conscience in the keeping
o' ony Presbytery.  He's ower staunch a Presbyterian,' says he,
'for the Kirk of Scotland as at present guidit, whilk is a kind o'
Papery wi' fifty Papes instead o' ane.'"

"Maybe that's the truth," said David.

"Ay, it's the truth, and I'm blithe to hear ye acknowledge it. . . .
But we'll hae the lassie in, for this crack concerns her maist.
The cunnin' limmer, to keep sae mum and begowk her auld auntie!"

When Katrine appeared, her cheeks a little flushed and her eye
bright, she was greeted by Mistress Grizel with surprising
gentleness.

"What's this I hear o' ye, lassie?  Ye've gotten a joe and never
telled me! . . .  Na, na, my lamb, dinna be feared that I'll flyte
on ye.  It's a road we maun a' travel, and nae doubt wedlock is a
holy and blessed state and a hantle better than spinsterhood, for a
woman maun either be guidit by a husband or be subject to a' and
sindry.  But it's a serious step, and wants carefu' and prayerfu'
thocht.  I've had a word wi' Davie--for I tak' the liberty to ca'
him Davie as if he were my ain son--and as in duty bound I've set
forth the difficulties.  I say naething against ye as a man, Davie.
Ye're wise-like and weel-spoken, and ye've gentle ways, if ye hae
na gentle bluid.  But I say muckle against ye as a minister, and I
canna picture Katrine as the leddy o' a manse.  Forbye, there's the
solemn fact that ye've made Woodilee ower het a bit to bide in,
and what ye've done there ye'll dae in ony ither parochine in the
land. . . .  Sae hearken to me, sir.  Ye've mista'en your trade,
like mony anither honest lad, but the faut can be mended.  Ye're
young eneuch to start in a better."

Katrine had moved to David's side and laid her hand on his
shoulder.  "Aunt Grizel would have you forsake the Kirk for the
world," she laughed.

"But I am solemnly vowed to God's service," he said.

"Nae doot," said Mistress Grizel.  "But a man serves his Maker as
weel in buckskin as in a Geneva gown--better, if a' tales be true.
This is the counsel of ane that wishes ye weel, you and that denty
lass at your elbuck.  Mak' your peace wi' the Kirk--submit yoursel'
to the Presbytery--ye need gie up nane o' your views, but submit
yoursel' to the lawfu' authority.  Tell them that ye'll be guidit
in your public doings by them that has been set ower ye. . . .
Troth, they'll no be sweir to mak' a brig for ye, for they dinna
want a scandal in the Kirk.  They'll censure ye lichtly for a
thochtless callant, and the thing will drap.  By that course ye'll
dae nae violence to your conscience--ye'll just be humblin'
yoursel' before your elders in the Lord, as we're commanded."

"But what of the witchcraft in Woodilee?" he asked.

"Let it gang by the board.  It's no you or ten like you will clean
out that dirty nest.  Leave it to the Almighty, whose judgments are
slow and siccar [sure]."

"You would have me sit silent in Woodilee in the midst of that
iniquity?"

"Na, na.  I would have ye get out o' Woodilee as fast as a bird
when the thack's burnin'.  We've Mr. James's opinion, whilk ye
canna controvert, that ye were never meant for a minister.  I'se
warrant it will be made easy for ye--the Presbytery will no object,
and Calidon's the chief heritor, and I'll get a word spoken to Mr.
Rintoul.  Ye'll leave wi' a guid name, at peace wi' God and man,
and there's a' braid Scotland for ye to find a habitation. . . .
Peter Dobbie tells me that your father, honest man, made a hantle
o' siller and that ye've heired the haill o't.  Gang down the water
to the auld Yester lands, and buy a bit estate and set up Katrine
in her forebears' countryside.  Ye're young and yauld and there's
muckle guid work to be done in Scotland by ane that lives in the
fear o' God, be he laird or minister."

David turned to Katrine, but her face was impassive.  From her he
would get no guidance.  Like her aunt, she awaited his answer.

For a moment he wavered.  On one side he saw peace, comfort, a new
life with his beloved in a new place, the cutting of a tangle which
constricted his youth; on the other--a thankless fight, where
victory was wellnigh impossible, a sordid struggle which would
darken the sunlight for both and taint all the springs of joy.  He
dropped his head on his breast and suffered for an instant the
anguish of indecision.  Then he spoke, and his eyes were on
Katrine.

"I cannot.  I would be going back upon my vows--I would be false to
my faith--I would deserve to be cried out upon as a coward--I would
be making terms with the Devil."

"Thank God!" said the girl, and her arms were round his neck.

The old woman stared at him, coughed dryly, and then very
deliberately took her seat in the big armchair which had been
Nicholas Hawkshaw's.  The two stood before her like prisoners
brought to judgment.

"Ye'll tak' that puir lassie and expose her to the ill-will o' the
Kirk and the countryside.--Ye'll set her up as a mark for clash and
scandal.--Ye'll condemn her to a wearifu' battalation that can have
but the one end, for those that are against ye are mair than those
that are for ye.  A man may fecht stoutly his lee lane, but he is
sair trauchled by a wife."

"I will reply," Katrine cried.  "I am a Yester.  What cognizance
does Yester bear, Aunt Grizel?"

"Azure a chevron or between three garbs of the same, and for badge
a lion guardant, wi' the ditton 'Thole feud.'"

"My motto is my answer.  Would you have me shame my kin and run
from a challenge?"

"But what kind o' challenge, my lamb?  Ye'll be nae Black Agnes o'
Dunbar--but a minister's wife, fechtin' against lees and clypes and
fause tongues and ignorance--the cauld law o' the land and the
caulder laws o' the Kirk.  Ye'll hae to thole and thole wi' never a
back-straik o' your ain, and keep a smilin' face and a high heid
when your heart is sick.  Ye maun bow to them ye scorn and bend the
knee to them that your guidsire would have refused for horse-boys,
and be servant to the silliest body that summons ye in the name o'
Christ.  Have ye made your market for that, my doo?  There never
was Yester--or Hawkshaw neither--that feared feud, but can ye thole
sic dreidfu' servitude, day in day out, in a wee house in a dreich
parochine wi' nae company but hinds and wabsters?"

The girl looked at David, and there was that in her eyes which made
him both exultant and very humble, so that he longed at once to
sing and to weep.  She turned to the Bible which lay on the great
table, ran a finger over its pages and read, and the words were
those which Ruth spoke to Naomi:

"Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after
thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I
will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God:
where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried: the Lord
do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me."

"So that's the way o't," said the old woman.  "Weel, I've said my
say.  Ye're a pair o' fules, but there's maybe waur things than
fules in God's sicht. . . .  Davie, lad, get down on your hunkers
and I'll gie ye my blessing--the blessing o' a warldly auld wife
that yet has orra glints o' better things. . . .  Man, I kenna
where ye got it, but there's gentle bluid in ye.  Your common body
would have chosen the saft seat."



CHAPTER XVIII

THE PLAGUE


In the first week of the New Year the miraculous weather showed no
sign of breaking.  The sun from rising to setting shone temperately
in a clear sky, the nights were little less warm than May, and even
the old folk cast the blankets from them and opened the doors of
their press-beds; the peat-stacks and the fuel-stacks were scarcely
touched, and the fires smouldered only for cooking; the burns were
shrunken to summer size, and the spawning fish could not pass the
shallows of Rood.  But a change had come over the mind of the
parish.  Men no longer called down blessings on the fine open
winter, for such weather seemed in defiance of nature, and an
uneasy anticipation of portents weighed on their spirits.  The sun
did not warm, the unclouded skies did not cheer, the hard roads did
not invite to movement.  A curious languor fell upon Woodilee.

It seemed as if the same apprehension were felt by the natural
world.  The cattle and sheep, in spite of the good pasture, grew
thinner than in the rigours of winter.  The packman's pony turned
away from the rich bite by the roadside.  Though the air was cool
and tonic, beast and man sweated with the smallest exertion.
David, tramping the high moors, found that he was more weary after
five miles than after twenty in the summer heats.  The deer from
Melanudrigill had none of their winter boldness, and indeed all
wild animals had become shyer of the presence of man than the
oldest inhabitant remembered.  But all were aware and restless;
there were more worm-casts on the turf than in spring, and migrant
birds, which usually tarried long in the sheltered glen, now passed
high in air for the south.  David saw many a drove as he opened his
window in the morning.  Even the fieldfares, which Amos Ritchie
used to snare in the Mirehope fields, did not come within sight of
his bird-lime. . . .  A brooding strangeness had come into the air,
and apathy silenced the very tykes in the village street.
Neighbours rarely gathered at Lucky Weir's for a mutchkin, though
it was thirsty weather; men seemed to be afraid lest what they saw
in another's eye might give substance to their own fears.

Peter Pennecuik, sitting on the stone by the smithy door and
mopping a wet forehead, watched Amos drop his tools heavily as he
returned from a job at Reiverslaw.

"What mak' ye o' the weather?" he asked.

Amos straightened his back.

"I dinna like it.  The gillyflowers in my yaird are ettlin' to
bloom.  My grannie had a verse o' auld Thomas the Rhymer--what was
it?--


     "A Yule wi'out snaws,
      A Januar' wi' haws,
      Bring the deid thraws."


"There's a judgment preparin'," said Peter, "but whatna kind o'
judgment I daurna guess.  Certes, it's no canny."

"I've heard o' nane ailin', but there's seeckness comin'.  I can
smell it in the air, and the brute beasts can smell it, for they're
sweir to come near Woodilee.  There's no a tod or a maukin on a'
the Hill o' Deer.  D'ye no find a queer savour in the countryside,
Peter?  There's wind enough to shake the saughs, but the warld
smells like the inside o' a press-bed when the door's steekit.  Oh
for a snell, dirlin' blast!  There's something rotten and stawsome
and unearthly about the blue lift and the saft air.  It's like
withered floo'ers on a midden. . . .  If there's nae seeckness yet,
there's seeckness on the road.  I maun awa' in and see to Ailie,
for this morn she was complaining o' a sair heid."

Two days later the child of a cotter at Mirehope returned from
school in the manse kitchen, and to his mother's amazement beat his
head against the door.  He fell asleep on the wedder's skin beside
the fire, and when he was wakened for his supper his cheeks were
flaming and he seemed to have difficulty with his speech.  He was
put with the rest into the box which was the children's bed, and
all night filled it with his cries, so that the others sought peace
on the floor.  In the morning his face and throat were swollen, his
eyes were sightless, and he struggled terribly for breath.  Before
noon he was dead.

In this way came the plague to Woodilee.

Its coming was realized in an instant, for the sinister weather had
prepared the people for calamity.  Before the dark the rumour of
the breaking out of the pest was in the uttermost sheilings.  With
it went the word that Peter Pennecuik had sickened, and that
another child at Mirehope and one of the Chasehope ewe-milkers were
down with it. . . .  Next day the place was a beleaguered city.
Johnnie Dow, the packman, hearing the news at Cauldshaw, diverted
his round to Kirk Aller, though thirty pounds Scots were owing to
him in Woodilee.  The roads were blocked as if Montrose's kerns
commanded them.  As it was winter-time there was little work on
hand, and even that little was not done.  A Sabbath hush fell on
the glen, people shut their doors and sat within at their prayers,
and that best seeding-ground for plague, a lively terror, was amply
prepared.

Peter Pennecuik died in eight hours.  There was no heart in the
man, and in sickness his command of pious phrases fell away from
him, and he passed out of life in a whimpering misery.  It was not
an edifying death-bed for one who had been a notable professor.
But very soon Peter was forgotten--for he was an old man and ripe
for his end--as the young and strong were, one by one, struck down.
Amos Ritchie's wife, Ailie, followed--the less to be wondered at,
for she had always been frail.  But when Jess Morison at Chasehope-
foot, dark-browed, high-coloured, and not yet twenty, swooned as
she drew water at the well, and died in delirium before evening,
fear in the parish became panic.  The young herd at Windyways, the
trimmest lad in the glen, and the miller's man, who looked as
gnarled as an oak and as strong as a mill-wheel, followed.  But
the tragedy was the children.  Two of them were struck down for
each grown-up person, and perished with the speed of plucked
flowers. . . .  It was another kind of peril from that which old
folk remembered in the year '10, for no pox attended it nor any of
the usual sores.  The ordinary first symptom was a blinding headache
and a high fever; then came a swelling of the throat and glands and
a quick delirium.  But in many cases there was no outward swelling;
the mischief seemed to descend straightway to the lungs and produce
a severe haemorrhage.  In such cases there was no final delirium;
the patient died with clear mind and little bodily pain in an
extreme languor.  The first type commonly seized the young and
full-bodied; children and old folk followed, as a rule, the second
course.  But both were fatal: in a week out of fifty-nine smitten,
fifty-nine were dead.

There was no doctor to be had in all the countryside.  The leech at
Kirk Aller, sent for by David, refused to come within a mile of
Woodilee, and the old women, the usual medical authorities of the
village, had nothing but senseless concoctions and--in secret--more
senseless charms.  Presently even these were forgotten, and the
place lay in a stupor of fear under a visitation from Heaven.
Cottages which the pest had entered were, by popular consent, shut
to the world, so that they became a hot-bed of infection for the
other inmates.  A man who had sickness in his dwelling dare not
show his face in the street except under cover of night.  There was
no neighbourly assistance asked or given.  The members of a
stricken family had to conduct their life in a dreadful isolation,
till they too sickened; there were shuttered dwellings where life
was slowly blotted out, and the village only learned that the end
had come for all by the fact that the chimney ceased to smoke. . . .
At first an attempt was made to bury the dead decently, the
remaining members of a household undertaking the task, but the
spread of the pestilence soon made this impossible.  The dead were
laid in byre and stable beside the startled beasts, sometimes by
the poorer households in the kailyard, and David more than once
found a staring, unshrouded corpse in the nettles of the manse
loan.  There were cottages where all the inmates were dead and
unburied, with a lean cat mewing round the barred doors. . . .  And
all the while the soft blue weather continued, and the wind came
balmy from the hills over those silent fields of death.

At first the stupor of Woodilee was shot with an awful apprehension
of divine wrath, and the people sought to propitiate their Maker by
humbling themselves before Him, and--even the least devout--by
constant prayer and the reading of Scripture.  But this mood did
not long survive.  The fury of the blast which smote them drove all
religion out of their minds, and left them stark and numb with
mortal fear.  To begin with, David was welcomed in the house of
death, he was summoned in haste, his coming was watched for; even
if his ministrations did no good to the unconscious sufferers, they
seemed to comfort the others.  But presently he found himself an
unregarded intruder.  Whenever he knew of a case he hastened to it,
but the panic-stricken eyes of the living looked at him as blindly
as the glazing eyes of the dying.  His prayers even to himself
seemed idle; at any rate they fell upon dulled ears.  What contact
could he establish with the sick in the delirium or languor of
death, and with those who waited on the same fate with the wild
despair of beasts in a trap?  What use to point to God when God
overshadowed them as a merciless tormentor?  And all the while he
was in a fever of anxiety.  More than one of the dead were among
those whom he had remarked in the Wood.  Men and women were
hastening to judgment with their sins heavy on them--sins
unrepented and for ever unrepentable.  He, their minister, had to
stand feebly by and see souls descending into damnation.

The thought drove him frantic, but it alone gave him power to
continue in his fruitless duties, for in this trial he found the
flesh very weak.  It was not that he feared death, even death by
plague, but that a horror of Woodilee had fallen on his spirit.
His shrinking from the Wood, his hatred of the sins of the Wood,
his quarrel with the Session, the distrust in which he was held by
many of his congregation, the episode of the pricker and Bessie
Todd's death--all combined to make the place reek for him of
ugliness and decay.  The pest seemed merely to add rotting
carcasses to rotting souls. . . .  Then the pity of it would
overcome him, when he thought of children whom he had taught and
honest folk who had been kind to him, now cold in death.  He was
helpless to cure either body or spirit.  He had no leechcraft--what
would it have availed if he had, for he remembered the Edinburgh
doctor by his father's bed?--and his spiritual ministrations were
as idle as wind. . . .  Above all, he felt himself a prisoner shut
into a noisome cage from which there was no escape.  None dare
leave or enter Woodilee.  One afternoon, in a mood of despair, he
climbed the Hill of Deer for a glimpse of the outer world.  There
lay Calidon on its windy braes, but Calidon was now as distant for
him as the moon.  There lay the hills in whose spacious
wildernesses no pest lurked, for there were no unclean mortals to
harbour it, and beyond them was the world where men might live in
daylight and honour.  As he looked down on Woodilee a haze seemed
to lie over it.  Was it the effluvia of the plague, a miasma which
walled it round more impenetrably than stone walls and iron
shutters? . . .  He struggled to conquer his shrinking.  "Faithless
servant," he told himself, "faithless even over a few things!
David Sempill, you rebel against the Lord's will not because of the
sufferings of your poor folk, but because of your own pitiable
discomfort.  Think shame, man, to be such a whingeing bairn.  "For
he had realized that the root of his trouble was that he was
severed from Katrine.

But that evening Katrine came to him.

While he sat for a little in his study before starting on his
melancholy visits, he heard Isobel's voice below high-pitched in
excitement.  Then he heard another voice which took him down the
stairs three steps at a time.  The girl, booted as he had seen her
in the mist on the eve of Hallowmass, stood in the light of
Isobel's candle, one gloved hand raised in protest and with an
embarrassed smile at her lips and eyes.  To David it seemed the
first smile that he had seen for an eternity.

"Awa' hame wi' ye, my leddy," Isobel cried.  "Ye canna come here,
for the pest's in ilka bite we eat and sowp we drink and breath we
draw.  Awa' wi' ye, an' keep your mouth tight steekit till ye're
ower the Hill o' Deer.  Oh, haste ye, or ye'll be smitten like the
lave, and ye're ower young and bonny to dee."

"Katrine, Katrine," David exclaimed in agony.  "What madness
brought you here?  Have you not heard that half the parish is sick
or dead?  There is poison in the very air.  Oh, my dear, come not
near me.  Wrap a fold of your cloak over your mouth and never
slacken rein till you are back in Calidon."

The girl drew off her gloves.  Her eyes were on Isobel.

"I am his promised wife," she said.  "Where should I be if not by
his side?"

The news left Isobel staring.  "His promised wife," she stammered.
"Heard ye ever the like--the manse o' Woodilee to seek a mistress
from Calidon! . . .  But the mair reason why ye suld tak' tent.
There's nae place for a bonny doo like yersel' in this stricken
parish--ye canna help ithers and ye may get your ain death.  Awa'
hame, my braw leddy, for the minister has eneuch to trouble him
without concern for his joe."

The girl walked to David's side and put her hand in his arm.

"You will not forbid me," she said, and her face was still smiling.
"I do not fear the plague, and I do not think it will harm me, for
it smites those who live in foul hovels, and I am always about the
hills.  But I do fear this loneliness.  I have not seen you for two
weeks, David, and I have been imagining terrible things.  I have
come to help you, for I have known the pest before--many times in
France, and in Oxford too.  I know what precautions to take, for I
have heard wise men discuss them, but you in Woodilee, from all I
hear, are no better than frightened bairns."

"But your aunt--Mistress Saintserf--"

"Aunt Grizel knows of my coming.  She has given me this pomander of
spices."  She touched a trinket which hung from her neck by a gold
chain.

David struggled to salve his conscience by energy in dissuasion,
and though his heart cried for her presence, it was torn, too, by
fear for her safety.  He commanded, pled, expostulated, but she
only turned a smiling face.  She sat down before the peat fire and
stretched out her feet to the hot ashes.

"You will not drive me away, David," she said.  "Would you forbid
me from a work of necessity and mercy--and you a minister?"

In the end he gave up the task, for here was a resolution stiffer
than his own, and his strongest arguments faltered when he saw her
smile, which was like sunlight in a world of darkness and grim
faces.  He found himself telling her how the plague had begun, and
of the nature of its course--the lack of leeches and medicines, the
dearth of helpers, the households perishing silently indoors.  She
listened calmly, and did not blanch even at the tale of the
shuttered cottages and the unburied dead.

"A pretty mess your folk have made of it," she said.  "You have
turned Woodilee into a lazar-house, and given the pest a rare
breeding-ground.  Never mind your spiritual consolations, David.
Let the miserable bodies come before the souls.  You say you have
no leech to cure the sick, and that maybe is as well, for I never
yet heard of leech that could master the plague.  But if you cannot
cure, you may prevent its spread.  Our first task is to safeguard
those who are not yet smitten.  If you shut up a cottage where
there is one sick man, you condemn every member to death.  That
must be stopped without delay--and for God's sake let us bury the
dead--bury or burn."

"Burn?" he cried out aghast.

"Burn," she nodded.  "Fire is the best purifier."

"But we shall rouse the place to madness."

"Better that than death.  But we want helpers--bold men who fear
neither the pest nor an angry people."

He shook his head.  "There are none such in Woodilee.  The bones of
all are turned to water."

"Then we must stiffen them. . . .  There is the one whom we now
call Mark Riddel.  It was he who told me of your trouble, for he
was at Calidon yesterday on his way back from Annandale.  There is
the black-avised man, too, at Reiverslaw. . . .  Are there none
more?"

The girl's briskness was rousing David's mind from its torpor.

"Amos Ritchie, maybe."

"That gives us three--four with yourself--and four resolved men can
do wonders.  Others will fall in once the drum is beaten.  Rouse
yourself, David, and be as eager to save bodies as you ever were to
save souls.  And do not forget to pray for a change in this
lamentable weather.  A ringing frost would do more to stay the pest
than all the leeches in Scotland. . . ."

She departed as suddenly as she had come.  "I dare not come by
day," she told him, "for if Woodilee heard of a stranger its panic
would be worse.  We have to do with terrified bairns.  But I will
be here at the same hour to-morrow night, and by that time you must
have gathered your helpers."

David did not return from his visitations till the small hours, but
he brought back the first piece of good news.  One of the hinds at
the Mains, after lying for two days in delirium, was now quit of
the fever and in a wholesome sweat--sleeping, too, a natural sleep.
It was the first case of a possible recovery, and he was aware how
much a single life saved would do to quiet the broken nerves of the
parish.  Also Katrine's advent had lifted him out of the slough of
despond in which he had been sunk for weeks.  She had spurred him
to action, and shown him a duty which he had been too blind to see.
He fiercely repressed the anxiety with which the mere thought of
her presence in that tainted place filled him.  He dare not forbid
the exercise of courage in another--even in one who was dearer to
him than life.

Next morning he went to Reiverslaw, but got no comfort.  Andrew
Shillinglaw met him out of doors, and made it very clear that he
had no desire to come too near him.  The conversation was conducted
at a distance of a dozen yards.

"Na, na," he cried.  "I'm off this verra day to Moffat, and I'll no
set foot in Woodilee till the pest has gane.  Ye ask ower muckle,
Mr. Sempill.  It's maybe YOUR duty to gang among them--though ye
ken as weel as me that the haill parochine is no worth the life o'
a tinkler's messan--but it's no duty o' Andra Shillinglaw's.  I
never could abide the reek o' the folk, and they have doubtless
gotten what they deserved."

"Ay, I'm feared," he admitted in answer to David's appeals.  "Ilka
body has something that puts the grue on him, and with me it's aye
been the pest.  I'll face steel and pouther, angry men and angry
beasts, but I'll no face what gars a man dee like a ratton in a
hole.  And what for should I face it for folk that are no a drap
bluid's kin to me?"

The man spoke loudly and violently, as if a little ashamed of
himself, and went into the house, where David could hear the bar
falling.

From Amos Ritchie he had a different answer.  Amos, since his
wife's death, had gone about with bent shoulders and a grey face,
and had sat for long hours in his smithy beside a dead fire.  There
David found him, and propounded his request.

"I'll do your will, sir," was the answer.  "I've sae little left to
live for that I've the less to fear.  But there'll be need o' mair
than you and me, for the parish is dementit, and daft folk are ill
to guide.  The first thing is to get the deid buried.  For God's
sake dinna speak of burnin', for though the body is but our earthly
tenement, burnin' is ower like the Deil's wark."

That night Katrine came again, and with her Mark Riddel.  The
soldier had lost something of his bluff composure, and a troubled
eye met David's.

"I have been listening to a sermon on courage," he said ruefully.

Katrine pointed a mocking finger at him.

"He would run away," she said, "he, the old soldier of a hundred
battles."

"'Deed and I would.  A hundred battles, nor a thousand battles,
wouldna reconcile me to the pest.  I could name you many a bold
captain who at the rumour of pestilence shifted his leaguer, though
he would have held his ground before all the Emperor's armies.  But
it seems I must take my orders from this child, when I hoped to
slip off cannily to a cleaner countryside. . . .  Ugh, Katrine, my
dear, I wish you had set me an easier task than to sweep the midden
of Woodilee and turn sexton."

"It's an armed and mailed sexton you must be," she said.  "You may
have to put reason into the folk with the flat of your sword.
Comfort yourself, Mr. Mark, this task is not so much unlike that
you were bred to."

The soldier grew visibly more cheerful when he heard that there
were only three volunteers for the business.  "There's trouble
brewing, then," he said, "and it's God's mercy that I've won a
certain respect in the parish, for it looks as if more persuasion
would be needed than a good word and a clap on the back.  When do
we start our dowie job, for I confess I would sooner be at it than
thinking of it?"

"A lean man like you, all bone and whipcord, need not fear," said
David.

"Tut, man," said Mark impatiently, "fear is not in the question.
My trouble is that I've a nice stomach and a fastidious nose.
Death, whether it comes by pest or steel, is the same to me, and
that's a thing worth less than a strae. . . .  God's curse on this
weather! . . .  To work, Mr. David, or I'll be rueing my bargain."

For three days and nights the three men wrought at their repulsive
task with niggardly intervals for food and sleep.  They made a list
of the stricken houses and forced their way into them, even when
the doors were bolted.  The dead were buried--some in the kirkyard,
some in near-by fields, and this duty fell especially on Amos
Ritchie, who performed it with dogged fidelity.  Now and then there
was trouble--a crazed wife or mother would refuse to part with the
body of a husband or child, and in some cases the minister had to
intervene with stern appeals.  More difficult was the business of
keeping houses, where the sick lay, open to the air and light.
David and Mark had to drive cowering sons out of doors with threats
of violence, and in some cases with violence itself.  One obstinate
household had their door smashed by Amos's axe; another was turned
neck and crop into the byre that a sick woman might have peace and
air.  The three men constituted themselves a relieving force, and
had often to do the fetching of food and water.  Terrible were the
sights revealed behind many of those bolted doors and windows, and
though Amos seemed unaffected, the other two had often to rush to
the air to check their nausea.  Thanks they got none, rarely even
curses; the miserable folk were too sunk in despair for either.
Yet it is likely they would have failed, had not the news of
recoveries got about.  Besides the hind at the Mains, two children
had now weathered the storm and were reported to be mending fast.
The communal mind of Woodilee, which up to then had been blank
fatalism and lethargy, was now shot with gleams of hope.  The pest
might have worked itself out and be on the decline: the corridor
was still long and black, but there was a pinprick of light at the
end of it. . . .  Also Mark Riddel in himself was a cogent
persuasion.  The dark keen face and the reputation of mystery and
command which he had won at the witch-pricking were arguments
sufficiently potent, apart from the long sword which he wore at his
side.  For in this work the douce tacksman of Crossbasket had
disappeared: it was the captain of Mackay's who gave orders and saw
that they were obeyed.

By Candlemas it was clear that the tide had turned, for there were
more on the way to recovery than dying.  Well it was that the
change had come, for the weather now broke--not, as David had
prayed, in wholesome frost, but in perpetual drenching rains.  The
downpour had come in an instant; within half an hour during the
night the wind had shifted, the sky had clouded, and the fall had
begun.  It was the night, the eve of Candlemas, which the three men
had chosen for their work of burning.  Now that people were
beginning to move about the streets again, it was essential to get
rid of centres of infection, and two of the worst were cottages in
the clachan where all the inmates had died.  Such houses could only
be purified by burning, and about ten that night fire was put to
them.  Dry as tinder, they blazed furiously to heaven, and there
were those in the parish, dabblers in witchcraft, who must have
turned scared eyes to the glow which was fiercer than any that the
altar in the Wood had known. . . .  But in an hour came the rain,
and the murky smoke-wreaths were turned to steaming embers.

It was a proof of the returning strength of the parish that the
burning of the cots startled it out of apathy.  Woodilee feebly and
confusedly began to take stock of things, and tongues started to
wag again.  The numbness of loss, the languor of fear, gave place
to recrimination.  Who was responsible for the calamity of the
pest?  It must be a mark of the Lord's displeasure, but against
whom?  They remembered that their minister lay under the ban of the
Kirk--had been forbidden to conduct ordinances--was convicted of
malignancy and suspected of worse.  In their search for a scapegoat
many fastened upon David.  Practical folk said that he had been in
Edinburgh in the time of plague, and had maybe brought back the
seeds of it.  The devout averred that the uncanny weather had
followed upon his public sins, and that the pest had come close on
the heels of the Presbytery's condemnation.  Was there not the hand
of God in this, a manifest judgment?  The ways of the Almighty were
mysterious, and He might ordain that the people should die for the
sins of one man.  Even those who had been on David's side were
shaken in their confidence.

To crown all, came the events of the past week.  To his critics
there was no reason in his doings: they believed the pestilence to
be a visitation of Heaven, to be stayed not by the arm of flesh,
but by fasting and prayer.  He had been assiduous in his futile
visiting, it was true, and he had buried the dead; but he had
broken in on their suffering with violent hands, and had herded men
and women like brute beasts.  Doors and windows, open to the
February rains, attested his methods; by his act two cottages, once
snug and canty, were now grey ashes. . . .  Amos Ritchie in such
matters was but a tool; Mark Riddel was too much feared to be the
mark of censorious tongues; but David, still their titular
minister, was a predestined target.

And as the village crept back to life, and those who had escaped
took heart to do a little work again, and the convalescent
staggered to their doors and looked on the world, there arose
stranger rumours.  The minister was all day out and about--praying
on occasion, but more often engaged in homely tasks like cleaning
up a kitchen and boiling water for those who were too frail to help
themselves.  Dark looks and ugly mutterings often followed him, but
he was too intent upon his work to take heed of them.  The general
sullenness he set down to the dregs of grief and terror.  That was
for the daylight hours, but--it was whispered--after nightfall he
had a companion.  There were stories of a woman, a creature
beautiful and young, who sang in a honeyed voice, and appeared
especially at the bedsides of the children.  At first few credited
the tale, but presently came ample confirmation.  She had been seen
at three houses in the clachan, at the Mirehope herd's, at the
Mains; with her had been the minister; and the bairns to whom she
had spoken cried for her return. . . .  The old and wise shook
their heads.  There was no such woman in the parish or in all the
countryside.  And some remembered that the minister in the back-end
had been observed to meet with a woman in the Wood, and that she
had seemed to those who saw her to be no mortal, but the Queen of
Elfhame.

The truth was that no commands of Mark, no protestations of David,
could keep Katrine out of the village.  She saw the reason for not
appearing in the daylight, for a stranger in Woodilee--above all
such a stranger as she--would have been too much for the brittle
nerves of the parish.  But after nightfall the case was different,
and when with David she had once stood by the bed of a sick child,
nothing could prevent her making a nightly duty of it.  Into those
sodden, woeful households she entered like a spring wind; the
people may have marvelled, but they were still too apathetic to ask
questions, and they felt dumbly her curative power.  Among unkempt
pallid men and frowsy wild-eyed women the face bright with the
weather, the curls dabbled with rain, the cool firm arm, the alert
figure, worked a miracle, as if an angel had troubled the stagnant
waters of their life.  Her hand on a child's hot brow sent it into
a peaceful sleep; her presence gave to the sick the will to live
and to the fearful a gleam of courage.  What they thought and said
when she had gone will never be known, but for certain they longed
for her coming again.

On the 18th day of February the pestilence took its last victim--an
old woman, the mother of the Windyways herd, and the earth was
still fresh on her grave when the rain ceased.  The wind swung to
the north, and the black frost for which David had longed settled
on the land.  It put an end to the pest, but it bore hard on the
convalescent, and the older and feebler died under its rigour.  In
the pure cold air the taint seemed to pass from the land, and the
problem of David and his helpers was now a straightforward fight
with normal ailments and the normal winter poverty.  Stock during
the visitation had been scarcely tended, and the byres and infields
were full of dead beasts; while in the general terror the customary
frugality of the parish had been forgotten and many a meal-ark was
empty.  There was need of clothing and food, of fuel and cordials,
and it did not appear where they were to come from.

There was no help to be looked for from outside, for to the
neighbourhood Woodilee was like a leper settlement; none would have
dared to enter the place, and had a Woodilee man shown his face in
another parish he would have been driven back with stones.  Mr.
Fordyce managed to send to David more than one distressful letter,
lamenting that for the sake of his own people he could not lend his
brother a helping hand; but save for that, from the 8th day of
January to the 15th day of March there was no communication with
the outer world.  In this crisis Mark Riddel wrought mightily.  He
had ways and means of getting supplies from distant places, and his
pack-horses, guided by himself or Amos Ritchie, brought meal and
homespun blankets from quarters which no man knew of.  David
exhausted the manse stores, and Isobel kilted her coats and, with a
charity seasoned by maledictions, kept her pot or girdle
continually on the fire.  But it was the house of Calidon that
provided the main necessaries.  Its brew-house and its girnel, its
stillroom and its cellars, not to speak of Mistress Grizel's
private cordials, were plundered for the sake of a parish which
Mistress Grizel could not refer to without a sour grimace.  When
Katrine rode to the manse of a night she would bring with her
usually a laden shelty.

The end of the plague was for David a harder season even than its
height.  For with convalescence Woodilee seemed to lose its wits.
Before it had sat dazed and broken under the rod; now it woke to an
ardour of self-preservation.  At the beginning the people seemed to
be careless of infection; now the survivors were possessed with a
craze to live, and fought like terrified animals to get out of
danger.  They could not leave the parish bounds, but those that
were able fled from the village.  The leaky sheilings on the hills,
occupied by the ewe-milkers during the height of summer, gave
lodging to many, and several died there of the violence of the
frost.  The outlying farms were believed to be the safer, so
Mirehope and Nether Fennan had many undesired tenants in their
outhouses.  The result was that, in a season of convalescence, when
nursing was especially needed, the bedridden were often left
deserted.  David tried to enlist men and women who had either
escaped the plague or had been for some weeks recovered, but he got
only fierce denials or an obstinate silence.  The place had become
brutish, and the selfishness of beasts seemed to have become the
rule of life.

The one exception was Chasehope.  During the worst weeks the
clachan had had no news of him, but it was rumoured that he had
made a fortress of his farm-town, and had assiduously tended his
own people.  At any rate at Chasehope there had been only one
death.  Now he appeared in the street, and to David's amazement it
was clear that he came on an errand of mercy.  His house seemed
still to be well provided, and he brought with him a certain amount
of provender.  This he did not bestow indiscriminately but only on
certain families, which David guessed to contain members of the
coven.  To these he spoke with authority, and he used his power to
put reason into the distracted.

He alone in the place seemed to have no fear of infection--to be
careless of the risk which had sent panic abroad among the others.
He passed the minister with a grave salutation, and showed no wish
to give or ask for help; he had some business afoot which was his
private concern.  But the fact stood out that this man, alone in
Woodilee, had mastered fear.

Once in a cottage where a child was recovering he came upon David
and Katrine.  The girl was sitting on a stool by the bed making a
toy out of reeds for the child's amusement, and singing a French
nursery song about Cadet Roussel and his three houses.  David
lifted his eyes from admiring the grace and swiftness of her hands
to see Chasehope's heavy white face in the glow of the firelight.
The latter doffed his bonnet at the sight of Katrine, and murmured
some civility.  Clearly he knew her, for he picked up a reed from
the floor.  "Frae the Calidon mill-dam, belike," he said.

"You are the one man in Woodilee who has courage," David said.
"You are no friend of mine, Ephraim Caird, but I give you the
praise of a stout heart."

"Why should I be feared?" the other asked.  "Why should I dread to
walk even in the valley of death if His rod and staff are there to
comfort me?"

"Why should you!  But many professors are of a different mind."

"They are but poor professors, then.  I fear no ill, for I am in
the Lord's hand till His appointed time."

"But many who do not fear death fear to die by the pest."

"Ay, but I have my assurance.  I have the Lord's own promise, Mr.
Sempill.  I ken as weel that no pest can touch me as that my name
is Ephraim Caird and my habitation is Chasehope.  It's the lack o'
sound doctrine that gars folk turn cowards--they dinna lippen
enough to the Lord--they havena a firm enough grip o' their calling
and election.  I have my compact sure, and I ken that the Lord will
no gie me a back-cast.  I can rejoice even in this sore affliction,
for He hath demanded a sacrifice, and what is man to question His
will?  Dear in His sight is the death of His saints--ay, and of
sinners, too, for His judgments are not exhausted.  There's mair to
come, Mr. Sempill--take tent o' that, sir--the conviction is heavy
on me that the wind o' His displeasure has still a blast to blaw."

The pale eyes had almost the green of a cat's in the dim light, and
the bald brows above gave the whole face the air of a mask, which
at any moment might slip and reveal nightmare lineaments.  The
child in the bed looked up as he spoke, saw his face and screamed
in terror, and Katrine, after one glance behind her, was busied
in crooning consolations. . . .  In that moment David had a
revelation.  This man, secure in his election to grace, secure
against common fear, was likewise secure against common reason.  He
was no hypocrite.  To him the foulest sin would be no sin--its
indulgence would be part of his prerogative, its blotting out an
incident in his compact with the Almighty.  He could lead the coven
in the Wood and wallow in the lusts of the flesh, and his crimes
would be but the greater vindication of God's omnipotence. . . .
In that illuminating instant madness had looked out of his eyes.



CHAPTER XIX

THE SACRIFICE


As March drew to its close the wheels of life began once again to
run creakingly in Woodilee.  The frost disappeared under a week of
southwesterly gales, and then the wind moved to the east and blew
dry and blighting, so that the lean beasts shivered in the
infields.  The gross unseasonable herbage of the winter had gone,
and it promised to be a backward spring.  The men went out feebly
to the farm-work, and the ploughing began, though the draught-oxen
were so poor in condition that the work moved slowly.  The siege,
too, was raised.  Johnnie Dow once again showed his cautious face
in the clachan and brought news of the outer world; the pack-horses
again struggled through Carnwath Moss; and there came word from
Kirk Aller that the meeting of the Presbytery to adjudicate on
David's case was fixed for a day in April.  Mr. James rode over
from Cauldshaw and the kirk was opened, but David did not renew his
preachings at the kirkyard gate.

The truth is that he was weary to the bone.  Mark Riddel met him
one morning on the road and drew rein sharply at the sight of his
face.

"Man David, you're like a ghost.  You've worked your body ower sore
these last months, and if you dinna take care you'll be on your
back.  You and Katrine are two inconsiderate bairns.  You've both
of you done the work of ten men, and you'll no listen to wiser
folk.  Take my advice and get furth of this woeful parish till your
body is rested and your mind quieter."

"I am summoned to my trial at Kirk Aller in a week's time."

"And that's the crown of it!  That's what you get for wearing
yourself to skin and bone for a thankless folk.  There are times
when I scunner at my native land.  There's a rumour that Montrose
has escaped abroad and is now at the Emperor's court, and if it
werena for you and Katrine I could find it in me to join him.
There's a blight on the country which affects even a brisk heart
like mine, and I'm getting mortal sick of the eternal crack of nowt
and wedders."

But though Mark came to the manse every evening and would have
nursed him like a mother, David could not relax the tension of body
and spirit.  He slept badly, and in spite of Isobel's coaxing ate
little; his nights were filled with wild dreams, and, worse, these
dreams seemed to pursue him in his waking hours.  He felt no
special ailment of body to which he could attribute his distress,
beyond an extreme fatigue.  He would take long walks by day and
night, but though he returned from them very stiff and weary, they
did not bring him healthful sleep.  He tried to master himself, to
laugh at himself, but the malaise would not be expelled. . . .  He
was the prey of childish fears, looking nervously for something
malign to come out of the dark or round the corner.  And presently
the barriers of the real seemed to crumble.  He saw faces where
there were none, he listened to voices in the deepest silence.
Once, coming at night up the manse loan, he heard footsteps on the
dry earth approaching him.  They grew louder, passed and died away
behind him, and he realized that the footsteps were his own.

A word of Chasehope's stuck evilly in his memory.  The Lord had
demanded a sacrifice, but the sacrifice was not yet complete, the
man had said.  The word tortured him and he could get no relief
from thinking, for the thing was beyond thought.  An oppression of
coming disaster weighed on him.  He told himself that his enemy had
meant no more than the Presbytery trial, but he could not lay the
ghost.  Something darker, more terrible, hung on the skirts of his
imagination.  Chasehope was no doubt mad, but truth might lurk in
madness; a maniac saw that which was hidden from others.  It was
for Katrine that he feared, and what he feared he could not give a
shape to--there lay the agony of it.

Presently his old dread of the Wood returned--that dread which he
thought he had exorcised for ever.  He had defied it, but what if
it should prove too strong for him?  In his distraught thoughts the
pestilence seemed to have come out of it--Chasehope had moved
unscathed through the weeks of plague--Chasehope and the devils he
served were the plague's masters.  Was there some other terror
still in its depths waiting to be loosed on him?  He had moments of
clear-sightedness, when he despised himself for his folly, and
realized that to be thus faint of heart was to acknowledge defeat
and to abase himself before his enemy.  But the conviction
returned, stronger than will or reason, and David would walk the
hill with clenched hands and muttering lips, or in his closet
struggle in blind prayer for a comfort that would not come.

After Katrine's nightly visits to Woodilee had ceased the minister
had meant to go daily to Calidon.  But with this new mood of terror
upon him he was ashamed to face the girl; and he had sufficient
manhood to put restraint upon his longings.  The time came,
however, when anxiety conquered scruples.  He rode to Calidon with
a fluttering heart, an excitement rather of fear than of joy.

Mistress Saintserf faced him grimly.

"What have ye done wi' my bairn?" she demanded.  "She is fair broke
wi' ridin' the roads and tendin' the riff-raff o' Woodilee--and the
haill parochine no worth a hair o' her heid.  Christian charity,
says you--but there's bounds to Christian charity!  Ye're a bonny
lad to tak' so little care o' your joe."

Presently she condescended to details.  "She has nae strength, the
puir thing--clean worn out like an auld bauchle [shoe].  Yestreen I
garred her tak' to her bed, and she's lyin' as biddable as a wean,
and her for ordinar' sae sweir to bide still. . . .  Na, ye canna
see her.  But dinna fash yoursel', my man.  She's no sick--just
weary wi' ower heavy a task.  A long lie in her bed will put her
richt, and a change in this dowie weather.  Pray for a bit blink o'
sun. . . .  Ye're lookin' gey gash yoursel'.  Ye'd be nane the waur
o' a week on your back."

As David rode homeward he remembered the last words and laughed at
the irony.  A week in bed, when he could scarcely endure three
hours in a night!  Mistress Saintserf's news had put him into an
agony of apprehension.  He stabled his horse and set out to work
off his anxiety by bodily fatigue, but it grew with every mile he
walked.  Weariness, he told himself, was only natural after such a
winter's toil; was not he himself worn out, and did not even Mark
Riddel confess to a great fatigue?  But he could not console
himself with such thoughts.  At any moment she might fall into a
fever, and then--he remembered with dreadful distinctness the
stages of the malady.  Was this the last lingering effort of the
pest?--he had heard of such cases coming weeks after the thing
seemed to have been stayed.  And always there rose in his mind
Chasehope's prophecy of a sacrifice still to come.

He would fain have gone back to Calidon and waited for news.
Instead he sent Isobel with a message to Mistress Grizel.  His
housekeeper was noted as a skilful nurse and an amateur leech, and
he begged that she should be allowed to help in waiting upon
Katrine.  The sending of her did something to ease his mind, for it
was a direct piece of service to his beloved; moreover, if Isobel
was in Calidon, he could go there as often as he wished and have
speech with her, for he was a little ashamed to reveal to Mistress
Grizel his lack of fortitude.  Meantime he could fend for himself,
and cook what food he needed.

The time passed on leaden feet, and the hours of darkness were one
long sleepless nightmare.  Next day he was early at Calidon and
found Isobel with a composed face.  "Ye needna tak' it sae sair,
Mr. David," she assured him.  "The leddy's no that bad.  Nae doot
she's sair weary, but the feck o' the time she sleeps like a bairn,
and there's nae fever.  There's strong bluid in her that will no be
lang ere it conquers the weakness.  But losh, sir, ye've the face
o' a bogle.  Awa' hame wi' ye and lie doun, or I'll no bide anither
hour in Calidon.  Are ye takin' your meat?  Dinna look at me like a
glum wean, but dae as I tell ye."

David returned to the manse, and under the influence of Isobel's
cheerfulness fell asleep in his chair and slept till the late
afternoon.  He awoke freshened in body, but with a new alarm at his
heart.  Isobel had said there was no fever, but that meant that she
dreaded fever. . . .  By this time it might have come.  Even now
Katrine might be delirious. . . .  He realized how swiftly during
the pest fever had succeeded listlessness.

Nevertheless the hours of sleep had given him a greater power of
self-control, and he curbed his instinct to ride forthwith to
Calidon.  He wandered through the house and out into the glebe,
striving to fix his mind on small and homely things.  It was the
third day of April, but there was no sign of spring.  The
dislocation of the seasons had given the earth an autumnal air, for
the shoals of fallen leaves lay as if it were November, and the
frosts had not bleached the herbage.  He remembered how a year ago
at this time he had wandered on the hills and felt with joy the
stirrings of new life.  To-day the world was still clamped in
bonds, and death was in the bare trees and the leaden sky.  What
had become of his high hopes?  All gone save one--and that the
dearest.  A year ago he had had no thought of Katrine and had been
happy in other things.  Now these had been turned into ashes, but
he had got Katrine in their stead.  If she were to go--?  The
thought so chilled his heart that he fled indoors, as if in the
house he could barricade himself against it.

In his study he turned over his books.  He tried to pray, but set
prayer was idle, for every breath he drew had become an impassioned
supplication.  He had out his notes on Isaiah and the prolegomena
which he had completed, but his eyes could scarcely read them.
How small and remote these labours seemed!  Every now and then
a quotation from the prophet stood out in his manuscript, and
these were as ominous as a raven's croaking.  "Burning instead of
beauty. . . .  Their faces shall be as flames. . . .  Through the
wrath of the Lord of hosts is the land darkened, and the people
shall be as the fuel of the fire. . . .  This is the rest wherewith
ye may cause the weary to rest."

He turned from his notes in awe and took up his secular books.  One
he opened at random and saw that it was the neid, and the words
which caught his eyes were "manibus date lilia plenis."  Small
wonder that the book had opened there, for it was a well-thumbed
passage; but he shuddered as if he had cast the sortes Virgilian
and had got a doleful answer.

In the evening he found himself some food, and since the dark was
full of ghosts for him, he lit many candles and banked up the peats
on the fire.  He was in a strange mood, rapt out of himself,
suffering not so much pain in his thoughts as a fever of
expectation.  His fingers drummed ceaselessly on his knees; as he
looked into the glowing peats he saw forms and figures that seemed
to mock him; to his unquiet ears a wind was blowing round the
house--a wind that talked--though the night was very still.  And
always there was in his head, like the refrain of a ballad, the
words "Burning instead of beauty."

He did not see Mark Riddel till the man was beside him and had
touched his shoulder.  Then he started up with a cry and
encountered a grave, perturbed face.

"You had better come to Calidon," Mark said.  "Katrine . . . she
has taken a turn for the worse.  She has been in a fever since
midday."

It was the news he had been expecting, and David rose obediently.

"I'll go on foot," he said.  "I can run faster than any horse."

Mark looked at him anxiously.  "You'll do no such thing.  You'd
faint or you were across the Hill o' Deer.  Bide where you are and
I'll saddle your beast."

The two set off at a gallop, but in the rough parts of the road
Mark slackened and took David's bridle.  "Hold up," he cried.
"It'll no mend matters if you break your neck."

David asked only one question.  "Have you got a leech?" he said.

"I'll have no leeches.  Your country botcher would only bleed her,
and she hasna the strength for that.  Grizel and yon wife Isobel
are all the leeches that are needed, and I'm not without skill
myself.  Keep up your heart, David.  All is no tint yet, and it's a
young life."

At Calidon gate David spoke again.  "Is it the pest?"

"I canna tell, for the pest has many shapes to it.  Weakness and
fever--there's no other signs, though God kens that's bad enough."

He was taken straight to her chamber by Isobel, and found there
Mistress Grizel, a silent, stern-faced guardian.  Katrine lay
tossing in high delirium, moaning a little, and moving her arms
feebly on the coverlet.  A bandage of wet cloths was on her brow,
and, as David laid his hand on it, he felt the pulse of the fever
beneath.  Her long dark lashes lay on her flushed cheeks, but every
now and then her eyes would open in a glassy stare.  He took her
hand and it was dry and burning.

"We maun let the fever rin its course," said Mistress Grizel.  "She
maun fecht her ain battle without the help o' man.  God be kind to
my bairn," and she kissed the hot lips.

"Ye'll be puttin' up a prayer?" she turned to David.

"I cannot pray . . . I can only watch. . . .  I beg you to let me
watch here beside her."

"Have your way.  There's little need o' speech if there be prayer
in the heart.  Isobel will get ready your chamber, for ye canna
leave this house."

Presently David was in the sick-room alone, and if he could not
pray he spent the hours on his knees.  Isobel and Mistress Grizel
returned from time to time; once Mark came in and put his hand on
the girl's brow.  The night passed and the dawn came, but still
David knelt at a chair by the bedside, his head sometimes in his
hands and sometimes lifted to gaze at the face on the pillow.  He
was tortured with the sense of his frailty.  A sacrifice, another
sacrifice, was required, and for what sins but his own?  He had
been lacking--oh, he had been lacking in every Christian grace.  In
those black moments he saw himself as the chief of sinners, his
struggles to rise foiled by a dragging weight of self, his ardours
half-hearted, the fruits he brought forth but poor pithless stalks,
his errors dark and monstrous like birds of night.  He was not
conscious of any special sin--only of a deep unworthiness which
made him unfit to touch the hem of her garment. . . .  Had ever any
one so made music in the world by merely passing through it?  And
now--burning instead of beauty. . . .

Mr. Fordyce came over from Cauldshaw in the evening.  He spoke to
David but got no answer--it may be doubted if his words were
understood.  But an invitation to follow him in prayer was
rejected, so Mr. James prayed alone--"for Thy handmaiden who is in
the pangs of a great sickness--and for him Thy servant to whom her
welfare is especially dear."  The prayer seemed to David to make an
enclosure for Katrine and himself apart from the world. . . .

Mark took him to his room and made him lie down on his bed.  He
gave him a bowl of spiced ale, which David drank greedily, for he
was very thirsty.  Maybe the posset contained some innocent drug,
for he slipped into dreams.  They were pleasant dreams, shapeless
and aimless, but with a sense of well-being in them which soothed
him, so that he woke to Mark's pressure on his arm with a vacant
smile.  But one glimpse of the real world--the corner of a four-
post bed, torn arras, and the skirts of Mark's frieze coat--brought
down on him the dark battalion of his cares.  He had no need to
wait for the spoken word; Mark's eyes were message enough.

"Come!  The fever has abated," were the words.

David's brain was sluggish: the words seemed to be at variance with
the speaker's face; for a moment he had a bewildered spasm of
comfort.

"She is recovered?"

"She is dying," said Mark.  "It is now the afternoon.  She is going
out with the daylight."

The small lozenged windows, though there were two of them, lit the
room faintly, for the sky was lowering and grey.  Mr. Fordyce had
returned, and poured out his soul at the bed-foot, but presently he
grew silent like the others, for there was a hush in the room which
made even the words of prayer a sacrilege. . . .  The flush had
gone from the girl's face, and the waxen cheeks and the blanched
lips told of a mortal weakness.  Her hand was in David's, as
passive as a plucked flower.  The lashes were quiet on her cheeks,
and her faint, difficult breathing scarcely stirred the coverlet.

In that final hour peace of a kind entered into David's soul.  He
was truly humble at last, for all the flickerings and unrest of
human desires were stilled.  The joy which he had scarcely dared to
hope for, the possession of that bright and rare thing, was now
confirmed to him.  Katrine was securely his for ever. . . .  At the
very end her eyes opened, and if they looked a little blindly at
the others they seemed to enfold him in a passion of love.  There
was even the glimmer of a smile.  And then the gloaming crept round
them, and, as Mark had foretold, she went out with the daylight.

The quiet was broken by the loud wailing of the two women, for the
composure of even the iron-Lipped Mistress Grizel now failed her.
Mr. Fordyce stilled it with an uplifted hand.  "The lamb is safe
folded," he said.

Mistress Grizel, after the fashion of her kind, must speak.  "She
was a kind lassie, and had nae thochts but guid thochts, and if she
was maybe no that weel instructed in sound doctrine, it was nae
faut in her . . . she was aye blithe to hearken to Mr. James--"
She stopped short at the sight of David's face.

"She is now at the right hand of the Throne," he said, "and I say
that in the face of every minister that ever perverted the Word.
She was made in the image of her Lord, and she has gone to meet
Him."



Later in the evening the mind of the practical Mistress Grizel
turned to the dismal apparatus of death.  "She'll better lie in
Cauldshaw in the Hawkshaw buryin' ground.  There's room in the auld
vault, the mair as it's no likely Nicholas will lay his banes
there."

"Nay, but she will not lie in Cauldshaw.  "David's face had a
strange calm in it and his voice was toneless and steady.  "She
will he in the part of the greenwood which was her own, in the
place she called Paradise.  I know her wishes as if she had told
them to me.  I will not have her laid in any kirkyard vault. . . .
She is too young. . . .  She is not dead but sleeping."

Mistress Grizel protested, but half-heartedly.  Mr. Fordyce had
little objection to raise.  "It is not the way of our Kirk," he
said, "to consecrate ground for the dead.  All earth is hallowed
which receives Christian dust.  But lest the graves of the departed
be forgotten, it has been the custom to gather them together in
some spot under the kirk's shadow.  In a wild wood, among bracken
and stones, it will be ill to keep mind of a place of sepulchre."

"I will not forget it."

"But when you yourself are dead and gone . . . ?"

"What matters it then?"  He could have laughed at the
meaninglessness of human fashions.  He felt that Katrine and he
were in a sphere of their own, safe for ever from intrusion, a
sphere independent of time and space, even of life and death.  But
Paradise had been the spot where their love had first been born; it
had become in the mind a symbol and a mystery; let Paradise,
therefore, receive the earthly covering of the blessed spirit, for
even the blessed have their terrestrial shrines.

So it came about that by night--for Mistress Grizel would not
permit a ceremony so unconventional in daylight--and by the light
of the torches of Jock Dodds and Edie the falconer, the girl was
buried near the spring in Paradise, with David and Mr. Fordyce at
the grave's head and foot.

To the former it was all a waking dream.  The solid earth had
become for him bodiless; the sun's progress, human speech, rain,
wind, the ritual of daily life, no more than a phantasmagoria:
reality lay only in that inner world where Katrine still lived for
him.  He abode solitary in the manse, and refused to let Isobel
return.  Indeed he begged Mistress Saintserf to keep her and be
kind to her.

"'Deed, I will do that, and be glad to do it, for she's a skilly
auld body and a great stand-by in the house.  But, Davie, my man,
what is to come o' you?  I was lookin' to get ye as a guidson, and
the Lord kens Calidon needs a man about the place--what wi' the
forty thousand merks to be paid for Nicholas's fine. . . ."

But she saw that her words fell on unheeding ears.  David's eyes
seemed to be looking beyond her to an infinite distance.



CHAPTER XX

THE JUDGMENT


David rode to Kirk Aller to face the Presbytery in a blustering day
of April rains.  The wind blew high from the south-west in the
leafless branches, and tossed the rotting leaves which should long
ago have been powdered by frosts and snows.  Aller was red with
spate, and in the haughs the flood-water lay in leaden shallows.
The birds, who should have been riotous in the bent, were few and
silent; scarcely a plover or a curlew piped; only from the gnarled
firs of the Wood came the croak of a nesting raven.  It was a day
to deaden a man's spirits, but David regarded it not.  He was still
in his secluded world, a chamber barred to all memories but one.
He had no clear vision of the home of the blessed dead, and what he
had would have been held unorthodox by the Kirk.  Now he thought of
her in a Platonic mood as inhabiting all things lovely and pure, a
spirit as rare as the lingering light of sunset.  But more often he
pictured her as an embodied saint admitted into the fellowship of
Christ, wrapped round with a richer love than mortals knew, but
reaching out warm hands to his loneliness.  And the words that came
to his tongue were the lines of Peter Abelard:


     "O quanta qualia sunt illa sabbata
      Qu semper celebrat superna Curia;"


but the sabbaths he dreamed of were not the sabbaths of the Kirk.

The world, the tangible world, was broken for him in fragments.
His chamber was not only shut to its winds, but it seemed set in a
high tower from which common realities showed infinitely small and
distant.  The Presbytery--the General Assembly--the Kirk--seemed
tiny things vanishing down the perspective of an inverted spy-
glass.  He was armoured against censure, for it was idle to censure
one who was overwhelmed by his own unworthiness and who at the same
time saw all human authorities diminished to cockle-shells.  He had
no fears and no hates: God had smitten him, and, humble under that
awful rod, he could view with indifference the little whips of his
fellows.  He did not blame them--why should dust accuse dust?

In his detachment only one thought affected him with any passion.
He retained his horror of the Wood.  If he were to fall he would
fain have brought down with him that unholy temple.  For Chasehope
he felt no hatred except as its high-priest; the man himself, with
his crazy twisted soul, was rather a mark for pity.  But he would
fain have rid Woodilee of that incubus. . . .  He had failed, and
Chasehope was the victor--Chasehope and the Wood.  For a moment his
mind returned to realities, and he questioned himself if he had
left anything undone.  This day his original libel would come
before the Presbytery, and he had the right to call his witnesses.
But where were they?  Reiverslaw had been absent two months from
the parish and had not yet returned, and without his testimony
Richie Smail and Rab Prentice were meaningless voices.  He could
give his own witness, but that the Presbytery had already
officially rejected.  Let it go--the Almighty in His own time would
be his vindication--he who was filthy let him be filthy still. . . .


     "Ubi molestiis finitis omnibus
      Securi cantica Sion cantabimus."


But even in his secret world regret penetrated and irked him, for
Melanudrigill was nigh to the greenwood and to Paradise.

The old kirk on the brae above the Aller bridge was crowded to its
full.  Never had been so large a meeting of Presbytery, both lay
and clerical, for the case of the minister of Woodilee had made a
great talk all winter in the glens.  Woodilee itself, now purged of
its taint, was strongly represented by four members of Session, and
in a prominent place at the Moderator's elbow sat Ephraim Caird.
As David entered heads were averted, but as he advanced to the seat
prescribed for him he found that Mr. Fordyce was his neighbour--Mr.
Fordyce heavily muffled in his ancient plaid, and with a face whose
ordinary sick pallor seemed to be flushed with a timid excitement.
He seized David's hand, and his own was hot and nervous, and his
lips moved as if he were praying under his breath.

The forty-third Psalm was sung, there were two lengthy readings of
Scripture, and then Mr. Muirhead, the Moderator, constituted the
Court and prayed for guidance.  David's attention wandered, though
he tried to supplement the public supplication with his own. . . .
His eyes seemed to have become distorted and the whole assembly
have gone crooked.  The fathers and brethren were no more than a
gathering of death's heads, their voices were like the creaking of
wheels and the scraping of boughs and the grinding of stones.  The
Moderator's massive visage was the mask behind which his brain
ticked small and foolish like a clock.  The minister of Bold was
only a child, a petted, noisy child.  The grave countenances around
him seemed shot with fear and confusion: almost it seemed he could
look into their hearts and see terrors and jealousies writhing like
coils of worms. . . .  He rubbed his eyes and forced himself to
attention.  The Moderator was speaking of the charge against
Chasehope and others anent the Wood.

"We have your written libel, Mr. Sempill," he said.  "It is your
right to implement it by the calling of witnesses.  Have you them
here?"

"My principal witness, Andrew Shillinglaw in Reiverslaw, has left
the parish because of the pest and is not yet returned.  Without
him I can do nothing."  David's voice, to his own surprise, came
out full and clear.

"Do you seek a postponement?"

David shook his head.  "What boots it?  The Lord will judge the
wickedness in His own time and in His own way.  But I would ask
that the matter be put to him whom I have accused as principal, and
that he deny or affirm it on his solemn oath."

"You hear that, Ephraim," said Mr. Muirhead.  "I'm loth to put such
a task on one of your noted godly walk, but it would maybe conduce
to the satisfaction of the Court if you would formally and finally
give these monstrous charges a solemn denial."

Chasehope rose and called his Maker to witness that there was no
word of truth in the accusation.  His voice was steady, his
expression of a decent gravity.  He looked towards David, and there
was not a quiver in the large placidity of his face.

"The Court is content," said Mr. Muirhead.  "Have you anything to
add, Mr. Sempill?"

"The Lord will yet judge between us," said David.

"That matter can therefore be dismissed," said the Moderator, in a
voice in which solemnity wrestled with satisfaction.  "We proceed
to the charges against our unhappy brother."

He set forth--not unfairly--the counts against David.  The
principal was that abetting of malignancy with which the Court was
already familiar, and which David had admitted and justified.  But
he added new matter.

"It has come to my knowledge," he said, "through the praiseworthy
vigilance of our friend Chasehope, that there is further
incriminating evidence on this score.  In the recent melancholy
visitation at Woodilee, our brother was guilty of strange deeds and
in strange company.  It seems that he harled the poor folk out of
their bits of dwellings, on the plea that when they crept together
they fomented the pest.  Thereby it is alleged he spread the taint
of the malady, and sorely troubled many a death-bed.  Further, he
violently and wrongfully broke open doors that were barred to him
and set fire to cot-houses where the sick had lain, thereby
destroying gear which was not his and depriving the folk of their
lawful habitations.  I have here an attested statement setting
forth the wrongs complained of.  What answer do you make to that,
Mr. Sempill?"

"I admit the acts, and reply that by their means and by God's mercy
the pest was stayed."

There was a murmur of disapproval throughout the gathering, and Mr.
Muirhead cast up his eyes to Heaven.

"More of this sinful pride!  As if the hand of the Lord was stayed
by breaking in the doors and burning the thack of honest folks'
houses!  But these are matters which are properly for the civil
courts, and do not come within the cognizance of this Presbytery.
What deeply concerns us is the company in which it is alleged that
these acts were done.  Mr. Sempill had as his helper one Amos
Ritchie, a dweller in Woodilee, of whom I had hoped better things,
and one Mark Riddel, a new-come tenant of the mailing of
Crossbasket.  We have had news of this Riddel before.  He took a
leading part in defending a woman accused of witchcraft in the
back-end, and--though it seems that the witch-pricker was a poor
creature with some irregularities in his conduct--yet it cannot be
denied that the words and doings of the man Mark Riddel on that
occasion gave great offence to godly folk in Woodilee, and led to
the just suspicion that he himself had meddled with unlawful
matters. . . .  Who think you that this Riddel turns out to be?
Who but that Mark Kerr that was a colonel with Montrose and a
notorious malignant and has been sought all winter by the arm of
the law.  Chasehope has riddled out the whole black business, and
has those that will swear to the man.  Information has been
dispatched to the Procurator-Fiscal, and it's like that by this
time hands will have been laid on him."

"I fear that he has gotten clean away," said Chasehope.  "The word
this morn was that there was no reek in the Crossbasket lum."

"He'll no gang far," said the Moderator, "for the countryside will
be up against him.  Now, Mr. Sempill, what say you on this count?
Did you ken the true nature of this man Mark Riddel?"

"I knew that he had been a soldier of Montrose.  What mattered his
past if he were willing to help in a work of Christian duty?"

"Christian duty!"  The Moderator's face crimsoned with wrath.  "The
words should choke in your throat, sir.  You dare to call it
Christian duty to harry the living and perplex the dying for some
whim of your own ignorant heart?  You found a yoke-fellow worthy of
you.  It is borne in on me that you and your presumption and your
slackness of walk and doctrine have been the cause of this sore
dispensation in Woodilee.  Upon your head, sir, lie the deaths and
sufferings of your afflicted people."

He checked himself with an effort and proceeded in a calmer tone.

"No evidence need be called on the main counts, for they have been
admitted by the panel.  By his own confession David Sempill, lately
ordained minister of the Gospel in Woodilee, is guilty of the
grievous sin of consorting with and abetting the declared enemies
of Christ's Kirk in Scotland.  Under the specious plea of charity--
whilk is a favourite device of the Enemy to delude mankind--he has
given shelter to one whose hands were red with the blood of the
saints, and has endeavoured to cumber the work of purging the
accursed thing from our midst.  Moreover, he has lately shown what
was in his heart by further and intimate converse with the ungodly.
I do not speak of other errors, of harsh and un-Christian conduct
towards his congregation, of lack of judgment, and of a weakness in
doctrine, whilk, if not actual heresy, is its near neighbour.  I
deal with the gravamen of the matter, a sin openly committed and
indeed acknowledged and gloried in."

Mr. Muirhead pursed his lips, and a sigh of approval rose from his
hearers.

"But it is needful at all times," he went on, "to temper mercy with
justice.  Our brother is young and has no doubt been led astray by
evil conversation and by over-much carnal learning.  There is yet
room for repentance, and the Kirk is merciful to the penitent.  If
he will make full confession of his sins and renounce and abhor
them and humbly seek forgiveness from an offended Jehovah, this
Court will doubtless be prepared to deal tenderly with him.  It
would not consist with decency that he continue in the charge of
Woodilee, but the matter of excommunication might be dispensed
with.  For let him understand clearly that if he persists in his
contumacy he will be outcast not only from the ministry of Woodilee
but from membership of the Kirk of Christ."

His voice had become sensibly gentler.  If his main object was to
avoid too great a scandal in the Church, there may have been a
spice of pity for the youth and the haggard face of the accused.

"I acknowledge myself most heartily to be the chief of sinners,"
said David.

"There must be more than a general confession," said the Moderator.
"You must condescend upon the transgression.  You must in this
place confess the heinousness of your guilt on the precise counts I
have expounded, admit your grievous errors and your abhorrence of
them, and humbly submit yourself to judgment."

"Nay," said David.  "I cannot admit that to be sin which I hold to
have been my duty."

Again from the assembly came a sound like sighing, but now it
seemed to have a note of wrath in it, as if the breath came through
clenched teeth.  The Moderator shut his eyes as if to ward off an
unbearable spectacle.  Then he looked down on David with his brows
drawn so that they made a line bisecting his great face.

"Man, man," he said, "you are far from Christ.  You confess your
sin, but you hug to your bosom one darling iniquity which you
proclaim a grace.  You are blinded and self-deluded, and I see no
hope for you in this world or the next.  You are an outcast from
the commonwealth of Israel."

He inclined his head to Chasehope, who had plucked at his arm and
now said something in his ear.

"I am reminded," he went on.  "Malignancy is not all the sum of the
sins of this unhappy man.  There was a charge which I had hoped
there would be no need to press, but which in his condition of
resolute impenitence I am bound to bring forward.  He was seen in
the back-end to frequent the Black Wood in the company of a woman,
and it is alleged--nay, it can be proved by many witnesses--that in
his doubtful work during the time of pestilence a woman was in his
company.  To public sins he would seem to have added private lusts.
Answer me, sir, as you will answer some day to your Maker, who and
what was the woman, and where is she to be found?"

The words scarcely penetrated to David's brain, for he had already
slipped away from the crowd of moody faces to his secret world.
But in the hush that followed the question another voice spoke, a
voice high-pitched and tremulous but as startling as a trumpet.

"She is with the angels in Heaven."  Mr. Fordyce had dropped his
plaid from his shoulders, and stood up with raised arm, his eyes
burning in his pale face.  His repute as a saint was so well
established that at any time he would have commanded silence, but
now he spoke in a quiet so deep that his hearers seemed to be
frozen in their seats.  Even the Moderator stopped in the act of
settling his bands, and his hand remained at his throat.

"I will speak and not be silent," said the voice.  "The woman whom
you would accuse with your foul tongues is this day with her Lord
in Paradise.  Well I kenned her--she was Katrine Yester and she
abode at Calidon--there was none like her for gentleness and grace.
She was the promised wife of David Sempill--and in the time of
calamity she left her bien dwelling and her secure life and wrought
among the poor folk of Woodilee--ay, as Christ left His Father's
house to succour sinful men. . . .  She is far ayont us for
evermore, and in the New Jerusalem she will be so near the Throne
that blessed will I be if I get a glimpse of her."

The words--which when remembered later were accounted a horrid
blasphemy--cast at the moment a strange spell over his hearers.
The hush was broken by many turning their heads, as if they could
not endure the sight of that prophetic face.  Even the Moderator
dropped his eyes; Chasehope stared at the speaker with half a smile
on his lips.

"Fools, fools!" the voice went on.  "I have been ower long silent
because of the infirmities of my flesh.  One came among you
preaching Christ and you have stoned him, as the Jews stoned
Stephen outside the walls of Jerusalem.  I pray that it may be
given him, like Stephen, to see the heavens open and the Son of Man
standing on the right hand of God. . . .  I tell you that there's
those among us now that will burn in Hell for this day's work.
Blind, blind . . ."

He choked, his face coloured with a rush of blood, he swayed and
would have fallen had not David caught him.  The cessation of the
haunting voice restored the assembly to its senses.  Murmurings
began, and the Moderator dropped his hand from his throat and found
speech.

"This is most unseemly.  Our brother is sick and has forgotten
himself.  Let the work of the Court proceed."

David lifted the half-fainting Mr. Fordyce in his arms.  He bowed
to the Moderator.  "My presence is no longer needed," he said.  "I
have no more to say and am in the hands of the Court.  Meantime I
must look to my friend."

He left the kirk with his burden.

He took him to the little inn in the Northgate and put him to bed.
The landlady was a kindly soul and promised to tend him well; there
was no serious illness--excitement and emotion and an unaccustomed
effort had drawn heavily upon Mr. Fordyce's small reserve of
strength--he needed only rest to be himself again.  David found a
Cauldshaw man just setting off up the water, and sent by him a
message to ease the mind of Mrs. Fordyce and tell her that her
husband would return on the morrow.  When he left him he was
sleeping.

This business occupied his time till late afternoon, and gloaming
had already set in before he rode out of Kirk Aller.  The
Presbytery business was long since concluded, and the kirk on the
brae was vacant and locked.  The members had departed, for the yard
of the Cross Keys, which in the morning had been like a horse fair,
was now empty.  The wind, which had been growing in violence all
day, had now reached the force of a gale, and as David turned the
corner above the gorge where the Aller breaks from the hills into
the haugh, it met him full in the face.  He pulled his hat low on
his head and looked back.  The little town, very bleak and grey in
the chill April evening, lay smoking with its hundred chimneys.
The sight affected him with a painful regret.  It seemed a last
look upon the life from which he was now an outcast, a life which
eighteen months ago he had so warmly embraced.

He was coming out of his abstraction now, and looking at cold
realities.  Mr. Fordyce's outburst in the Presbytery had shattered
his secret world.  Katrine was in bliss, and he was left alone on
the bare roads of earth.  Very solitary he felt; his father was
dead, Mark Riddel was a fugitive, Reiverslaw had failed him, his
Church had cast him out; there was no place for him, it seemed, in
all the habitable globe, no work to his hand, no friend to lean on.
He was looking at life now in a light as bleak as that April day
which was now vanishing from the hills. . . .  He seemed to have
lost the power of feeling.  He had no grudge against his enemies,
no hatred even for Chasehope; his humility had become so deep that
it was almost the abnegation of manhood.  He was very tired and had
lost the will to contend.  "Katrine, Katrine!" his heart cried,
"I'm not wanted on earth, and there's no comfort here for the
comfortless.  O my love, that I were with you!"

The night grew colder as it advanced, and the wind, which commonly
he welcomed, now cut him to the bone.  He drew his cloak round him,
and tried to urge his horse to a better pace.  But apathy seemed to
have fallen on beast as well as on master, and it jogged
funereally, as if in no hurry to leave the chilly out-of-doors for
the manse stable.  There was a moon behind the flying rack of the
sky, and there was light enough to see the dark huddle of the
hills.  Only where the track dipped to the trees by the river-side
was there any depth of shadow.

It was in one such patch of blackness that David heard the sound of
a horse behind him.  Presently the rider was abreast of him, and
even in the dark it seemed that he recognized him.  "Guid e'en to
ye, Mr. Sempill," said a voice, but a gust of wind made it hard to
recognize it.  The new-comer fell into step beside him, and when in
a minute they came out of the trees, David saw that it was
Chasehope.

"You are late on the road, friend," he said.

"I had weighty business on hand," was the answer.  The man was in a
good humour, for he was humming a tune.

"This has been a waesome day for you, Mr. Sempill," he went on.
"Ye have set yoursel' up against God's law and man's law, and ye
have taken a mighty fall.  I bear no malice--though weel I might if
the Lord hadna gi'en me grace to forgive.  What I have done in your
case I have done painfully as my solemn duty.  But there's pardon
even for the chief of sinners, and it's not to be believed that one
like yoursel', that had once a title in Christ, can be cast away.
Seek mercy where it is to be found, Mr. Sempill."

Chasehope spoke fast like one under the influence of drink, but the
man was temperate, so it must have been some excitement of the
spirit.  In the dim light David could not see his face, but he knew
the kind of light that was in his eye, for he had witnessed it
before.

"I speak in all loving-kindness," he went on.  "If ye're of the
Elect, you and me will meet before the Throne.  I would hold out a
hand to a stumbling brother."

David made no answer, but his silence did not check Chasehope's
flow, for he seemed to be burdened with that which must have vent.

"What have ye made of it wi' your railing accusations?  Bethink ye
of that, Mr. Sempill.  What has become o' your uncovenanted
Reiverslaw, and your Glee'd Mark wi' his warlockry, and the bonny
may ye trysted wi'?  Ane is vanished like a landlouper, and ane
will soon ken the wuddy [hangman's rope], and ane is under the
mools."

David spoke at last, and had the other had ears to hear he might
have detected a strange note in the minister's voice.

"You speak the truth.  I am indeed friendless and forlorn."

"Friendless and forlorn!  'Deed that's the word.  And wherefore,
Mr. Sempill?  Because ye have flung yoursel' against the rock o'
the Elect who are secure in the Lord's hands.  What said the worthy
Moderator after ye had gone?  He likened the Kirk to the stone
spoken of in Matthew twenty-one and forty-four--'Whosoever shall
fall on this stone shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall
fall, it will grind him to powder.'"

"There was another word spoken--that some for this day's work would
burn in Hell."

Chasehope laughed his rare and ugly laugh.  "Hoots, man, that was
just puir Mr. Fordyce, and a'body kens him.  No but what he has the
root o' the matter in him--but he's a dwaibly body wi' nae mair
fushion than a thresh [rush]."

"Nevertheless he spoke truly.  Hell is waiting for some, and maybe
this very night."

Again Chasehope laughed.  "Is Saul also among the prophets?" he
asked.  "Who are you, a minister outed and excommunicat, that you
suld take to the prophesyin'?"

"God makes use of the feeblest pipes to proclaim His will.  I tell
you, Ephraim Caird, that this very night judgment may overtake
you."

This time Chasehope did not laugh, but moved his horse a little
apart.

"Do ye daur to threaten me--?"

"I threaten no man, but God threatens you."

"Awa' wi' you!  I have a firm assurance.  And if ye daur lift hand
on me--"

"Be comforted.  My hand will not be lifted."

The man seemed to recover his composure, for he edged his horse
nearer and thrust forward his face.

"Ye've aye hated me.  I could see it in your een the first day at
the manse."

"I have never hated you.  There is no man living in whose company I
would rather ride this night.  I love you so dearly that I would
save your soul."

"You to speak of savin' souls!"  Chasehope began, and then stopped.
For there was something in David which struck a chill even to his
excited mind.  The quiet masterful voice cut into his wild gabble
like iron into peat.  If there was madness in the man, there was a
fiercer madness in the minister, for in the last minutes David's
weakness had fallen from him like rags, and he had quickened to a
flaming zeal.  It was a flame of such heat that it burned calmly,
but the glow of it, radiating from him, made the other's mere
wildfire.

David spoke no further word, but a nervous restlessness came upon
Chasehope.  He blustered and bragged.  See to what a pitch of
esteem he had come from following the narrow way!  And he whined.
He had the frailty of all mortals, but it was atoned for by the
imputed righteousness of his Redeemer.  He seemed to long for a
word of confirmation, and he pawed at the minister's sleeve.  But
no answer came, and the silence of the other began to unnerve him.
His voice had a startled note, he quoted texts as if they were
supplications to the stony impassiveness of his companion.  When
his horse stumbled and he almost collided with the minister, he
cried out suddenly, as if in fear.

They had crossed Aller half a mile below Roodfoot, and had come to
the turning of the ways.  The clouds had thinned and the struggling
moon showed Melanudrigill before them, rising and falling like an
ocean of darkness.  David kept his horse's head straight for it,
and Chasehope, who had been riding on his left, edged his beast
across the path.

"Ye'll be for the short road.  I'll gang quicker by the back o'
Windyways. . . .  Losh, that's an awesome wind."

"It is the wind of the Lord's anger."

"Guid e'en to ye, and God send ye a contrite heart!"  Chasehope
seemed to have recovered courage at the prospect of parting
company.

David laid a hand on his bridle.

"Nay, you and I do not twine here.  Our road lies yonder."

"Are ye daft, man?" Chasehope cried, his voice strong again.  "Who
are you to order a man like me?"  The voice was strong, but in its
shrillness was disquiet.

"I do not order you.  Look in your heart and you will find the
compulsion.  It was not for nothing, Ephrairn Caird, that we
forgathered this night.  The Lord ordained it, and in your marrow
you know that you cannot leave me.  This night we are in a closer
bond than man and wife."

"Havers!"  It was the last spasm of bluster, and the voice was
weaker than the word.  "I'll do no man's bidding.  Tak' your hand
from my bridle."

The hand was raised, and the other cowered to his saddle-bow, as if
to avert a stroke.  But the hand did not fall.  Instead it gripped
his arm, and the grip seemed to crush his bones.

"You fool," said the grave voice.  "This night I have the strength
of ten men, for the Lord is in me.  I could strike you dead if I
were minded, but the command is on me that we ride together."

Chasehope's arrogance had drained out of him, but it had left some
dregs of courage.  He struggled to compose his voice and recover
his everyday demeanour.

"Weel, since ye're so pressin' I'll do your will.  There's no half
a mile differ in the roads."  But the words did nothing to break
the spell which choked him.  They were like the wry-mouthed bravado
of a criminal at the gallows' foot.

No word was spoken as they crossed the haugh and skirted the Fennan
Moss, but had there been any one to see he would have noted that
David rode erect like a trooper, while Chasehope hung like a sack
in his saddle, and that David's knee was hard pressed against the
other's, as if the two were shackled.

They came to the edge of the Wood, where the road bent to the right
among the pine roots towards the glen of Woodilee burn.

"We dismount here," said David, "for we cannot ride among the
trees.  The beasts will find their way home."

Chasehope cried out, and his voice now was strangled with terror.

"The Wud!  No the Wud!  Ye daurna gang there. . . ."  He raised his
arm and would have struck, but David caught his wrist.  He
overbalanced himself and rolled to the ground, and in a second
David was beside him.  The horses, alarmed by the scuffle, dashed
up the track.

Fear made the man violent.  He flung himself on David, but for all
his weight found himself tossed down like a feather.  Was this
stern figure with the sinews of iron the minister whom he had
despised?

The quiet voice spoke.

"You are gross and elderly and I have the exercised strength of
youth.  At no time could you hope to strive with me.  But this
night the might of the Lord is in me, and I could break you like a
straw. . . .  You will come with me, though I have to ding you
senseless and carry you."

The man scrambled to his feet and made the place echo with his
cries for help.  No answer came, except the flap of disturbed night
birds.

"Where would ye have me gang?" he whimpered.

"Into the Wood--to the place you know of.  Ephraim Caird, this
night I give you the chance of salvation.  I may have erred--my
eyes may have deceived me--it may not have been you that capered
and piped in a dog's mask to yon lost crew.  If I have been wrong,
it will be proven yonder.  If I have been right, you will be given
a chance of repentance.  We go up to the Mount together that you
may choose between Abiron and Jehovah."

Chasehope crouched like a dog.  "I daurna--I daurna," he wailed.
"I'm a believin' man, but I daurna enter the Wud. . . .  It's no
the season--there's fearsome things ryngin' in't.  Oh, ye dinna
ken. . . .  Let me gang hame, and the morn I'll gang on my hunkers
to Kirk Aller and sweir that a' I hae said against ye was a lee.
I'll confess . . ."

David's grip was on his arm, but he did not struggle.  His legs
were loosened, and his whole body drooped like a creature stricken
with the palsy.

"I'll make confession--I'll tell ye things that are no to be named--
I took the Wud wi' ithers, but I kenned I was a redeemed soul and
that the Lord wouldna cast me away. . . .  I aye ettled to repent,
for I was sure o' the Mercy Seat. . . .  It is written that Solomon
went after the abominations of Moab, and was yet numbered among
the Elect. . . .  But I'll hae nae mair o't frae this day. . . .
I'll tak' my aith on the Word. . . .  I'll cast my idols ahint my
back . . . I'll burn the books . . . I'll forswear the Deil . . ."

"You will do it yonder," said David.

He had never entered the Wood from this side, and in the darkness
the road would have been at all times hard to find, but now he
seemed to have a map in his brain and to steer by an instinct.  In
this backward spring there was no sprouting undergrowth, but the
dead bracken stalks had not yet shrunk to earth, and he waded
waist-deep among them.  The man beside him had lost the power of
resistance.  He followed like an obedient hound, without the need
of David's grasp on his arm.  Often he stumbled, and once he fell
into the dell of a burn and had to be lifted out, but he made no
attempt at resistance or escape.  He walked and sometimes ran,
crouching almost double, and as he went he made little moaning
noises which might have been prayers.

The wind was wild in the tree-tops, and rushing down the aisles and
corries of the hillside made a sound which was now like a great
organ and now like muffled drums.  Higher they mounted till they
reached a broad shelf of more level ground, where the covert was
thick and the speed slow. . . .  And then, almost before he was
aware of it, David found himself looking at an open space with a
dark stone in the midst of it.

The moonlight was faint, but the glade was clear in its outlines, a
patch of grey turf in a ring of inky shadow.  The altar was no
longer white as in the summer midnight, but dark with the drenching
winter rains.  A bleak, sodden place it now appeared to David, a
trivial place, no more than a common howe in a wood.

But the other seemed to look on it with different eyes.  When he
saw the stone he gave one shrill cry of terror and collapsed on the
ground, burying his face in the moss as if to shut out the sight.
David seized him and dragged him forward till he lay by the altar,
and all the while his screams rose piercingly above the wind.

"There is no need for confession," the minister said.  "You have
betrayed yourself. . . .  Now I know with the uttermost certainty
that it was you I saw here at Beltane and at Lammas."

The man did not raise his head, but clasped David's legs and
nozzled him like a fawning dog, while, like a dog, he gave short,
terrified yelps.

"Your sin is proven and acknowledged," said David.  "Here on the
scene of your guilt you will choose your road.  I say to you, as
Elijah said to the people of Israel, 'If the Lord be God, follow
Him; but if Baal, then follow him.'  This night you renounce Abiron
or renounce Christ."

The man was silent, as if the extremity of fear had frozen his
speech.  But as David raised him, a shuddering like an epilepsy
shook his body.  His legs were limp, and David placed him on his
knees so that his brow rested on the stone.

"Renounce your master here in his temple . . .  I will give you
words if you have none of your own. . . .  Say after me, 'I abhor
and reject the Devil and all his works, and I fling myself upon the
mercy of God.'  Man, man, it is your immortal soul that trembles
above the Pit."

The huddled figure was still silent.  Then, after a violent shiver,
his voice came back to him.  He began to stutter words, words
meaningless to David's ear.  It may be that it was the renunciation
of his gods; but, whatever it was, it was not completed.

For suddenly energy returned to his limbs, and he sprang violently
to his feet.  Madness glowed in his eyes; his head was held for a
second in a listening posture.

"They come," he screamed.  "The dogs!--the red dogs!"

David seized him, but at that moment the maniac's strength far
exceeded his own.  He tore himself free with a rending of his
clothes.  His face was a limp vacancy of terror in which the eyes
glared unseeingly.  He leaped into the air, spun round, fell, laid
his ear to the earth, and then, with incredible swiftness, ran
uphill from the glade.  Once he halted to listen, and then, so bent
that he appeared to run on all-fours, and yelping like a stricken
beast, he vanished into the shades. . . .  In a pause of the wind
David heard his movements grow fainter, and he thought he heard,
too, a murmur of voices as at Beltane and Lammas.  It seemed to him
that these voices were now like the distant baying of hounds.



Lethargy returned upon David's soul.  He had done his duty, and at
the last moment, like Samson, had brought down the false temple;
but what signified it to one who had no further hope or purpose?
He walked out of the Wood as steeled to its awesomeness as to the
other common emotions of man.  His heart had dried up within him,
and his vitality had run down like an unwound clock.  He had but
the one thought--to visit Paradise again and Katrine's grave, and
this not for comfort but as a step enjoined by duty to complete the
heavy weight of his loneliness.  After that nothing mattered.  His
youth was gone, and he was become very old.

He crossed the barrier glen, brushed through the catkin-laden
hazels, and came to his sacred glade.  There was the well bubbling
darkly, and there beyond it was the fresh-made mound of turf. . . .
The sight melted something within him.  He flung himself on the
grass and his dry heart was loosened in tears.  As he wept he
prayed, and as he prayed he seemed to live once again the bright
days when Katrine had sung to him among the flowers.  Fragments of
her songs came back to him:


     "There's comfort for the comfortless
      And honey for the bee--"


Was there any comfort for a stricken man on this side of eternity?
He had a vision of her face with its proud laughing courage, he
heard again her voice coming faint and sweet from behind the hills
of death.  She was smiling, she was saying something too rare for
mortal ears to catch, but it seemed to thaw within him the springs
of life.

He lay long on the turf, and when at last he raised his head the
dawn was breaking.  The wind had fallen, and into the air had come
the softness of spring.  A thrush sang in the covert--he thought he
caught the scent of flowers. . . .  Of a sudden the world righted
itself and youth came back to him.  He saw brightness again on the
roads of life and a great brightness at the end of them, where
Katrine was his for ever among the eternal fields.



Rab Prentice, limping out in the early morning to see to the
lambing ewes in his hirsel, had occasion to take a short cut
through the hazel shaws.  He was surprised to see a man walking
with great strides from the coppice, and more surprised to
recognize him as the minister.  What did Mr. Sempill there at that
hour?  He watched the figure till it disappeared over the ridge,
and then went home much puzzled to his cog of brose.

In after days Rab Prentice searched his memory for every detail of
that sight, and often he recounted it to breathless listeners.  For
his were the last eyes in Woodilee to see the minister on earth.



CHAPTER XXI

THE GOING OF THE MINISTER


Woodilee was early astir, for it was to be a day of portents in the
parish.  Word had come the night before of the judgment of the
Presbytery--that their minister was deposed and excommunicated, and
that Mr. Muirhead of Kirk Aller and Mr. Proudfoot of Bold had been
deputed to preach the kirk vacant that very day.  There was little
work on the farms, for the lambing had scarcely begun, the
ploughing was finished, and the ground was not yet dry enough for
the seedbed; so the whole parish waited at the kirkyard gate.

Resentment was still deep against the minister as the cause--under
Heaven--of the pestilence, and for his high-handed dealings during
that time of trial.  There were also the old grievances against
him, so that those faithful to him were very few.  Isobel was at
Calidon, Reiverslaw had gone no man knew where, and only Amos
Ritchie and one or two women were left to defend him.  Strange news
had come about the tenant of Crossbasket.  There had been soldiers
seeking him with a warrant for his apprehension; it seemed that the
decent, quiet-spoken farmer-body was Mark Kerr, a kinsman of the
Lord Roxburghe, whose name had appeared in many proclamations of
the Kirk and the Estates, and who since Philiphaugh had been
zealously sought for through the length of Scotland.  Men
remembered his masterful ways and declared that they had always
known that he was gentrice; they remembered his handling of the
pricker and were confident that they had detected his ungodliness.
But that he should have lived among them gave them a feeling of
distinction and adventure, and the younger people cast curious eyes
towards the empty house of Crossbasket.

It was the first day that spring seemed to have come into the air,
and the congregation, waiting in the kirkyard for the arrival of
the ministers, were warmed by a mild and pleasant sun.  The elders
stood by the gate, each in his best attire, wearing--even the
miller--an air of ceremonial gravity.

"This is a great day for Woodilee," said Nether Fennan, "and a
great day for Christ's Kirk in Scotland.  We cleanse the tabernacle
of an unworthy vessel, and woe is me that some o' the bauldest and
stenchest Christians have no lived to see it.  Peter Pennecuik--
honest Peter had nae broo o' Sempill--clouts o' cauld morality, was
his word--Peter has gane ower soon to his reward."

"What's come o' Chasehope?" Mirehope asked.  "He suld have been
here langsyne.  He'll surely no be late on this heart-searching
day."

"I heard from the Chasehope herd," said the miller, "that Ephraim
never cam' hame last night.  The wife was sair concerned, but she
jaloused it would be Presbytery business."

"But that was a' by and done wi' by three in the afternoon.  He
would be seein' Edom Trumbull about the new aits.  Still and on,
it's no like Chasehope to let warldly matters interfere wi' his
Christian duty. . . .  Eh, sirs, what a testimony Woodilee will
bear the day!  Mr. Mungo is to proclaim the outing, and Mr.
Ebenezer is to preach the sermon, and on sic an occasion Bold is
like a hungry gled and the voice o' him like a Januar' blast."

Among the women sitting on the flat gravestones there was less talk
of the Kirk and more of the minister.  Most were bitter against
him.

"They may out him and excommunicate him," cried Jean of the
Chasehope-foot, "but wha will restore me the braw bairn that dee'd
in the pest whilk was sent to punish him?  Answer me that, kimmers.
I wad be the better pleased if I got my ten fingers at his
thrapple."

"Weel for you, wumman," said another, "that Isobel Veitch is no
here, or it's your ain thrapple would suffer."

"There's a queer tale come up the water wi' Johnnie Dow," said a
third.  "There was talk, ye mind, o' a lassie that he met wi' in
the Wud, and we a' ken that there was a lassie wi' him in the
hinder days o' the pest--the fairest face, some folk say, that they
ever looked on."

"Tuts, gossip, yon was nae lassie.  Yon face was never flesh and
bluid.  It was a bogle oot o' the Wud, and some says--"  The
speaker lowered her voice and spoke into her neighbour's ear.

"Bogle or no, Aggie Vicar, it cured my wee Benjie, and nae word
will be spoke oot o' my mouth against it.  The callant is still
greeting for anither sicht o' the bonny leddy."

"Haud your tongues and let me speak.  Johnnie Dow says the
Presbytery had it a' riddled out, and it seems it was nae fairy but
a leevin' lassie.  And wha think ye she was?  Nae less than the
young mistress o' Calidon."

The women exclaimed, most of them incredulous.

"But that's no a'.  It seems that she and the minister had made it
up thegither and she was promised till him.  Mr. Fordyce o'
Cauldshaw telled that to the Presbytery."

"Heard ye ever the like?  Will Sempill be hingin' up his bonnet at
Calidon and turnin' frae minister to laird?  The lassie will no
doubt heir the place, and it's weel kenned that Sempill has walth
o' gear o' his ain."

"He canna weel do that if he's excommunicat.  He'll aiblins
[perhaps] be for fleein' the country like the auld laird, and
takin' the quean wi' him."

"Ye havena heard the end o' the tale," said the first speaker.
"Dinna yatter like pyets, or I winna get it telled. . . .  The
lassie is deid--deid three days syne o' a backcast o' the pest, and
the minister is no to haud nor bind wi' grief.  Johnnie said he sat
yestreen at Kirk Aller wi' a face like a corp and took his paiks as
mild as a wean, and him for ordinar' sic an ettercap.  Johnnie
thriepit that he had maybe lost his reason."

There was silence among her hearers, and only Jean of the
Chasehope-foot laughed.  "She's weel oot o' it," she said, "and
he's weel served."

"Wheesht, wumman," said one.  "The lad has sinned, but he's but
young, and his punishment is maybe ower sair."

There was a movement among the crowd, for the ministers were seen
approaching.  They were received by the elders and conducted to the
minute session-house, which was a pendicle on the east wall of the
kirk.  The congregation, according to custom, now entered the
building, whence could presently be heard the sound of slow
psalmody.  Robb the beadle waited at the single door till the
ministers reappeared, Mr. Muirhead in Geneva gown and bands, Mr.
Proudfoot in his country homespun, for he was a despiser even of
sanctioned forms.  They too entered, and Robb followed, closing the
door behind him, but leaving the great key in the lock.

Amos Ritchie arrived, moodily sauntering through the gate.  He had
been unable to face the kirkyard crowd, knowing that he would hear
words spoken which might crack his brittle temper.  He reached the
door and was about to enter, when the sound of furious hoofs on the
road made him pause.  The rider hitched his bridle to the gate-post
and strode up the path, and Amos saw that it was Reiverslaw.

"Am I ower late?" the new-comer panted.  "What's asteer in the
kirk?"

"Ye're ower late," said Amos bitterly.  "Yestreen the minister was
condemned and excommunicat by the Presbytery at Kirk Aller, and
Chasehope was affirmed a saunt for want o' you to testify against
him.  This day Muirhead and Proudfoot are preachin' the kirk
empty."

"God be merciful to me," Reiverslaw groaned.  "I only got the word
last nicht, and I've left weary beasts on the road atween here and
Langholm. . . .  Where is the minister?  Where is Mr. Sempill?"

"The Lord kens.  He's no in the manse, for I was there at skreigh
o' day, and he hasna been seen since he left Kirk Aller. . . .
What does it matter?  The puir lad has his name blastit, and
Woodilee loses the best man that ever walked its roads. . . .  Are
ye for in?"

"I'm for in," said Reiverslaw grimly.  "If I canna help the
minister I can mishandle some that hae brocht him doun.  I'm
thinkin' Chasehope will hae sair bones or nicht."

The two slipped through the door and stood in the dusk at the
extreme back of the crowded kirk.  The first exercises having been
concluded, Mr. Muirhead was reading from the pulpit the finding of
the Presbytery.  The misdeeds of the minister were set forth
seriatim with the crooked verbosity of a legal document.  Then came
the pith:


"Wherefore the Presbytery of Aller, in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, the sole King and Head of the Church, and by the power
committed by Him to them, did, and hereby do, summarily
excommunicate David Sempill, at present residing in the parish of
Woodilee, delivering him over to Satan for the destruction of the
flesh that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord, and the
Presbytery did, and hereby do, enjoin all the faithful to shun all
dealings with him, as they would not be found to harden him in his
sins, and so to partake with him in his judgments."


The Moderator read the words with a full voice and with relish.  He
outlined briefly the civil consequences attaching to excommunication,
and dwelt terrifyingly on the religious state of one cut off from
communion with Christ and His Kirk.  Then he proceeded to depose the
minister in absentia from the charge and to declare it vacant till
such time as a successor was appointed.  The appointment would be
in the free gift of the people, subject to confirmation by the
Presbytery, since Nicholas Hawkshaw, the chief, indeed the sole,
heritor, was an outlaw and a fugitive.  He concluded with prayer, a
copious outpouring in which the godly in Woodilee were lauded for
their zeal, condoled with in their sufferings, and recommended for a
special mark of the Lord's favour.  Then he drew the skirts of his
gown delicately around him, and gave place to the minister of Bold.

Mr. Proudfoot chose for his text second Kings the tenth chapter,
the twenty-fourth verse, the second clause of the verse:  "If any
of the men whom I have brought into your hands escape, he that
letteth him go, his life shall be for the life of him."  It was a
theme that suited his genius, and never had he spoken with more
freedom and power.  Scripture was heaped upon Scripture to show the
guilt of half-heartedness in God's cause ("Curse ye Meroz, said the
angel of the Lord"); the other charges against David he neglected,
and concentrated on the awful guilt of unfaithfulness to the Kirk
in her hour of trial.  The bulk of the world lay prone under the
foot of Satan, but in Scotland the Lord had set His poor people
erect and committed His cause to their charge, and woe be to them
if they faltered in that trust.  At this point Mr. Proudfoot almost
attained sublimity.  There was a crusading zeal in his voice; his
picture of the stand of the faithful remnant against the world was
the vision of a stout heart.

He passed to David and his backslidings.  He drew the minister as a
weakling, beginning no doubt with an honest purpose, but soon
seduced from the narrow path by the lusts of the eye and the pride
of life.  "Oh, is it not pitiful," he cried, "in this short and
perishing world, with the Pit yawning by the roadside and the fires
of Hell banked beneath us--is it not pitiful and lamentable that
the soul of man should have other thoughts than its hard-won
salvation?  What signify profane learning and the delights of the
eye and the comforts of the body, and even good intents toward your
fellows, if at the hinder end the Judge of all will ask but the one
question--Have you your title in Christ?"

In especial, he dealt scornfully with the plea of charity.  There
could be no charity towards sin.  The accursed thing must be
destroyed wherever found, and were it the wife of a man's bosom or
the son of the same mother the sinner must be struck down.

The congregation listened as if under a spell.  So intent were they
that neither the people on their stools nor the Moderator in his
chair nor the preacher in the pulpit noticed that in the dim back-
end of the kirk the door had opened and some one had entered.

But it was in the close of his discourse that the gale came upon
Mr. Proudfoot's spirit.  Now he was at his application.  The
history of Israel was searched to show how Jehovah the merciful was
yet merciless towards error.  Agag was hewn in pieces--the priests
and worshippers of Baal were slain to a man--the groves were cut
down and ploughed up and sown with salt. . . .  So rapt were
preacher and people that they did not observe that a new-comer was
among them moving quietly up the kirk. . . .  The minister of Bold
concluded in a whirl of eloquence with his favourite instance of
Barak the son of Abinoam--how with ten thousand men of Naphtali and
Zebulun he went down from the mount Tabor and fell upon Sisera, the
captain of the hosts of Canaan, so that not a man was left.  He
likened himself in all humility to Deborah the prophetess; he
called upon the people of the Lord, even as she had called upon
Barak, to rise and destroy the Canaanites without questioning and
without respite.  "Let us smite the chariots and the host with the
edge of the sword, for in this day hath the Lord delivered Sisera
into our hand, and let us pursue after the remnant even to
Harosheth of the Gentiles!"



"Harosheth of your grannie!"

The minister's voice had stopped, and, in the profound hush that
followed, the four words fell with a startling clearness.  The
blasphemy of them was not decreased by the tone, which was of
measureless contempt.  The scared eyes of the people saw Mark
Riddel, for whom soldiers were now beating the countryside,
standing easy and arrogant before the pulpit, and those near him
drew away their stools in panic.  He had not the look of a hunted
man, and though his presence had always won him respect in Woodilee
he seemed now to have expanded into some one most formidable and
unfamiliar.  He wore the same clothes as he had worn in field and
market, but he held himself very differently from the friendly
crony who had sat in Lucky Weir's.  At his side, too, swung a long
sword.

Mr. Proudfoot looked boldly down on him.

"Who are you that dares to cast scorn upon the Word?" he asked in a
firm voice.

"Not on the Word," was the answer, "but on the auld wives that
pervert it.  "He nodded over his shoulder.  "They ken me fine in
the parish.  I was baptized after the Apostle, and for my surname
ye can choose Kerr or Riddel as it pleases you."

The Moderator sat with a flaming face.  "It is Mark Kerr the
malignant.  I summon all law-abiding and Christian men to lay hands
on him and convey him to a place of bondage."

But no one stirred.  The dark face with the laugh at the lips, the
fierce contemptuous eyes, the figure compact and light with a
strength which the toil-bent shoulders of Woodilee could never
equal, the repute for magical skill--these were things terrible
enough without the long sword.

Mr. Muirhead rose.  "Then I and my brother will get us forth of
this place.  Come, Mr. Ebenezer," and he gathered the skirts of his
gown.

"Nay, friends," said Mark, "ye'll bide where ye are.  And the folk
will keep their seats, till I give them leave to skail [disperse]."
He swung the key of the kirk door in his hand as he spoke.  "Sit ye
doun, Mr. Muirhead.  Sit ye doun, worthy Mr. Proudfoot.  You
billies have the chance ilka Sabbath o' sayin' your say and no man
can controvert you.  This day for a change ye will have to
hearken."

In justice to the two ministers let it be said that it was not the
sword that kept them in their places.  Neither lacked courage.  But
this man who stood confronting them, the very sight of whom seemed
to paralyse the folk of Woodilee, this shameless malignant had a
compelling something in his air.  He spoke as one having authority;
though he used the broad country speech, he had that in his voice
which, whether it spring from camp or court or college, means
command.  Very sensitive to this note in their disciplined Kirk,
the two ministers listened.

What fell from Mark's lips was discussed secretly for many a day in
the countryside.  Publicly it was rarely mentioned, for a more
awful blasphemy, it seemed, was never spoken in the house of God.
He told two pillars of the Kirk and a congregation of the devout
that they had all failed utterly to interpret God's Word; that they
were Pharisees faithful to an ill-understood letter and heedless of
the spirit; that they were fools bemused with Jewish rites which
they did not comprehend and Jewish names which they could not
properly pronounce.  "It's nothing but a bairn's ploy," he cried,
"but it's a cruel ploy, for it has spilt muckle good blood in
Scotland.  If ye take the blood-thirstiness, and the hewing in
pieces, and thrawnness of the auld Jews, and ettle to shape
yourselves on their pattern, what for do ye no gang further?
Wherefore d'ye no set up an altar and burn a wedder on't?  What
kind o' kirk is this, when ye suld have a temple with gopher and
shittim wood and shew-bread and an ark o' the covenant and branched
candlesticks, and busk your minister in an ephod instead of a black
gown?  Ye canna pick and choose in the Word.  If one thing is to be
zealously copied, wherefore not all? . . .  Ye fatted calves! . . .
Ye muckle weans, that play at being ancient Israelites!"

This was too much for Mr. Proudfoot.

"Silence, blasphemer," he cried.  "In the name of Him that snappeth
the spear asunder I will outface you."  He stumbled down the pulpit
stairs, and would no doubt have flung himself on Mark had not old
Nance Kello who sat at the foot impeded him and given Mirehope time
to catch his coat-skirts.  He stopped, breathing heavily, about
three yards from Mark, and, as he stood, it was not the sword that
a second time deterred him.  He felt dimly that this outlaw had
come to wear a fearful authority.  It was not the tacksman of
Crossbasket that spoke, but the captain of Mackay's--not the farmer
of Jed Water, but the kinsman of Roxburghe and the brigadier of
Montrose.

Mr. Proudfoot turned to his colleague and saw that the Moderator's
eye was puzzled and uncertain.  He bethought him of his chief ally
in the parish.  "Where is Chasehope?" he cried.  "Where is Ephraim
Caird?"

The answer came from an unlooked-for quarter.  Daft Gibbie sat
crouched in a corner of the kirk, and those near him had marked his
unwonted silence.  He did not gabble as usual, but sat with his
great head in his hands, murmuring softly and rolling his wild
eyes.  But at the mention of Chasehope he suddenly found voice.

"He's up in the hills," he cried.  "I seen him at skreigh o' day at
the buchts o' the Drygrain, and he was rivin' a yowe and cryin'
that it was a hound o' hell and that it suldna devour him.  He was
a' lappered wi' bluid, and when he seen me he ran on me, and his
een were red and he slavered like a mad tyke, and his face was
thrawed oot o' the shape o' man.  Eh, sirs, puir Gibbie was near
his end, for I couldna stir a foot, but afore he wan to me there
cam' anither sound, and as sure as death it was like a hound's
yawp.  At that he gangs off like the wund, and the next I seen o'
him he was skelpin' through the flowe moss, cryin' like ane in
torment, and I stottered hame to get Amos Ritchie to tak' his
flintlock and stop yon awfu' skellochs.  I'll never sleep till I
ken that the lost soul o' him is free o' the body."

"Another has told my tale."  Mark spoke in a voice out of which all
scorn had gone, a voice penetratingly quiet and solemn.  "I, too,
have seen him that once was Ephraim Caird, and I shudder at the
swiftness of the judgment.  There is no man or woman in Woodilee
that does not ken that he was the leader of the coven that practised
the devil's arts in the Wood, but he had a name for godliness, and
he had the measure of the blind fools that call themselves ministers
of God.--Sit still, sir!  I would be loth to draw on an unarmed man,
but my sword ere this has punished vermin. . . .  He has sworn
falsely against the innocent, and yestreen at Kirk Aller he
prevailed.  But in the night the Lord sent forth His vengeance--ask
me not how, for I do not know--and this day he is running demented
on the hills, pursued by the dogs of his own terrors.  Go and look
for him.  You will find him in a bog-hole or a pool in the burn.
Bury his body decently, but bury it face downward, so that you
speed him on his road."

There was such a silence that the rasp of a stool on the earthen
floor struck the hearers like a thunderclap.  One voice--it was
Amos Ritchie's--came out of the back of the kirk.

"Where is the minister?" it asked.

"He is gone where you will never see him more," said Mark.  "A
prophet came among you and you knew him not.  For the sake of that
witless thing that is now going four-foot among the braes you have
condemned the innocent blood.  He spent his strength for you and
you rejected him, he yearned for you and you repelled him, he would
have laid down his life for you and you scorned him.  He is now
beyond the reach of your ingratitude."

"Unless he be dead," said Mr. Proudfoot, "he is not beyond the
reach of the law, and if he be dead he has fallen into the hands of
a living and offended God."

"Man, man," said Mark gently, "you and your like have most
lamentably confounded God and Devil."

"And you yourself," cried the Moderator, struggling valiantly to
assert himself against an atmosphere which he felt inimical, "are
within a span of the gallows."

"We are all and at all times within a span of death. . . .  To you,
reverend sirs, I have no more to say.  You will gang your own ways,
and some day others will play the tyrant over you and give you your
ain kail through the reek.  In that day of humiliation you will
repent of what you did in your pride. . . .  To those who have been
partakers of the iniquity of the Wood I wish no less than the fate
that has overtaken their master. . . .  To the poor folk of
Woodilee I leave their minister's blessing, and may they have
whiles a kindly thought of one that loved them."

He turned at the door.  "You will bide here till you are released.
The ministers can while away the time excommunicatin' me.  Guid day
to you a'."

Amos Ritchie and Reiverslaw slipped out after him, and the key was
turned in the lock.  Amos wept bitterly, and Reiverslaw's dark face
was working with suppressed tears.

"You have to live on in this parish," Mark said.  "I need not
involve you in my own peril.  Let the bodies out in half an hour.
No one saw you enter, so you will get no discredit by this day's
work.  Say you found the key by the roadside."

Amos turned on him with a distraught eye.

"Where is Mr. David?  What have ye done with him? . . .  We ken
nocht o' you--ye come and gang like bog-fire--there's some says
ye're the Deil himsel'.  If ye've wiled a saunt doun the road to
Hell--"

"Be comforted," said Mark, laying a hand on Amos's arm.  "I think I
have helped to open for him the gates of Paradise."



EPILOGUE


The Reverend John Dennistoun, in his once-famous work, Satan's
Artifices against the Elect (written in the year 1719, but not
published till 1821, when the manuscript came into the hands of Sir
Walter Scott), has a chapter on the disturbances in Woodilee.  In
his pages can be found the tradition which established itself
during the next fifty years.  He has heard of the doings in
Melanudrigill, but he lays no blame for them on the parish.  The
power of the Kirk has been sufficient to sanctify Chasehope; in Mr.
Dennistoun's pages he appears as an elder of noted piety, who was
the chief mark for the enmity of the Adversary, and who was, as
that Adversary's last resort, driven crazy by hellish assaults on
his person till his life ended in a fall from the rocks in the
Garple Linn.  There is no mention of Reiverslaw, and Amos Ritchie
is treated with respect, for Amos carried his grandfather's
matchlock to Rullion Green, played a notable part in the Killing
Time, was an ally of the Black Macmichael, and has a paragraph to
himself in Naphtali.  Mr. Dennistoun represents the trouble as a
deliberate campaign of the Devil against a parish famed for its
godliness, and David as an unwitting instrument.  The minister of
Woodilee he portrays as a young man of good heart but of small
experience, unstable, puffed up in his own conceit.  He records
that there was a faction in the place that took his side, and that
his misfortunes, justly deserved as they were, were not unlamented.
He mentions as a foolish fable the belief of some that he had been
carried off by the Fairies; he notes, too, without approval, the
counter-legend that he had been removed bodily by the Devil.

On one matter Mr. Dennistoun has no doubts.  Mark Kerr is the
villain of his pages: the lieutenant of Satan, or, as many
believed, Satan himself; one at any rate who was sold irrevocably
to evil.  Of the real Mark Kerr's antecedents he is aware, but he
is inclined to the belief that the figure that appeared in Woodilee
was not Montrose's captain but another in his semblance.  He makes
a sinister tale of Mark's doings--his uncanny power over the minds
of the people, his necromancy in the case of the witch-pricker, his
devilries during the pest (these are explained as mere purposeless
cruelties), his crowning blasphemy in the kirk, when he outfaced
two godly ministers and spoke words of which the very memory made
honest folk tremble.  He is inclined to attribute to him also the
warlockries of the Wood.  When he disappeared on that April day he
returned to the place whence he had come.

On this point Mr. Dennistoun reflected faithfully the tradition in
Woodilee.  Old folks for generations, with sighs and a shaking of
the head, would tell of the departure of him who had so sorely
troubled the Elect.  The tale no doubt grew in the telling, and the
children would creep close to their mother's knee, and the goodman
would stir the peats into a glow, when grandfather with awe in his
voice recounted the stages in that journey of the lost. . . .
Sandy Nicoll saw him in the gloaming moving with leaps which were
beyond a mortal's power across Charlie's Moss.  Later, at the
little lonely ale-house of Kilwauk, he was observed by a drover to
cross the peat-road, and the drover--his name was Grieve--swore to
his dying day that beside the traveller moved a coal-black shadow.
There was a moon that night, and Robbie Hogg, herd in Glenwhappen,
saw the fearful twosome--man and shadow, man and devil--flitting
across the braes of Caerdrochit.  At one in the morning a packman,
late on the road, saw the figure on the Edinburgh highway, and,
though he had been drinking and was therefore a doubtful witness,
remembered that he could not be clear whether it was one man or
two, and had been sobered by the portent. . . .

At this point, when all that remained was an awful imagining, it
was the custom of a household where the tale was told to sing with
dry throats the twenty-third Psalm.



Three hours after the fuddled packman was left rubbing his eyes,
two men entered the back room of a little hostelry in Leith within
a stone's throw of the harbour.  The dust of moorburn and the April
roads was on them, and one of the two was limping and very weary.

The only occupant of the room was a man in a great seaman's coat
who was eating a hasty meal.  He rose to his feet with an
exclamation.

"Mark!" he cried.  "In the name of God, man . . ."

"When does the sloop sail?"

"In the next hour with the tide."

"The Lord be thanked! . . .  You'll have this gentleman and me as
fellow-passengers, Patie . . ."

"Wheesht, man.  They ken me in this place as Jens Gunnersen, a
skipper out of Denmark. . . .  I'm for Bergen."

"Bergen be it.  All roads are the same for us that lead forth of
this waesome land.  A bite and sup would be welcome, Patie, and two
ship's cloaks to cover our landward clothes. . . .  I'm for the
wars again, old friend, and I've gotten a braw recruit, but the
tale can bide till we're on shipboard."

But three hours later the telling had not begun.  Two men with
wistful eyes leaned over the stern bulwarks, and watched the hills
of Lothian dwindle in the bleak April dawn.



THE END



Project Gutenberg Australia

