

Project Gutenberg Australia



A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook

Title:      The Croquet Player (1937)
Author:     H. G. Wells
eBook No.:  0500411.txt
Edition:    1
Language:   English
Character set encoding:     Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted:          May 2005
Date most recently updated: May 2005

This eBook was produced by: Don Lainson dlainson@sympatico.ca

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


Title:      The Croquet Player (1937)
Author:     H. G. Wells




The Croquet Player Introduces Himself


I have been talking to two very queer individuals and they have
produced a peculiar disturbance of my mind.  It is hardly an
exaggeration to say that they have infected me and distressed me
with some very strange and unpleasant ideas.  I want to set down
what it is they have said to me in the first place for my own sake,
so as to clear up my thoughts about it.  What they told me was
fantastic and unreasonable but I shall feel surer about that if I
set it down in writing.  Moreover I want to get my story into a
shape that will enable one or two sympathetic readers to reassure
me about the purely imaginative quality of what these two men had
to say.

It is a sort of ghost story they unfolded.  But it is not an
ordinary ghost story.  It is much more realistic and haunting and
disturbing than any ordinary ghost story.  It is not a story of a
haunted house or a haunted churchyard or anything so limited.  The
ghost they told me about was something much larger than that, a
haunting of a whole countryside, something that began as an
uneasiness and grew into a fear and became by slow degrees a
spreading presence.  And still it grew--in size, in power and
intensity.  Until it became a continual overshadowing dread.  I do
not like this ghost that grows and spreads, even though it does so
only in the mind.  But I had better begin at the beginning and tell
about this story as far as I can, and the manner in which it came
to me.

But first I had better give a few particulars about myself.  Of
course I would rather I did not, but I doubt if you will realize my
position without it.  I am probably one of the best croquet players
alive, and that I am not a bit ashamed of saying.  I am also a
first-rate archer.  One is neither of these things without a
considerable amount of discipline and balance in one's make-up.
Many people, I know, find me a trifle effeminate and ridiculous
because I make croquet my game; they say as much behind my back and
at times they betray it to my face, and I admit there have been
moments when I have been inclined to agree with them.  But on the
other hand quite a lot of people seem to like me, everybody calls
me Georgie in an affectionate manner, and on the whole I am
inclined to like myself.  It takes all sorts to make a world and I
see no sense in pretending to be the human norm when one is not.
Regarded from a certain angle I am no doubt a soft, but all the
same I can keep my head and temper at croquet and make a wooden
ball perform like a trained animal.  Even at tennis I can make some
of the fiercer sort extremely cross and silly.  And I can do
sleight-of-hand tricks, for which you certainly need nerve and
complete self-possession, as well as most professionals.

As a matter of fact a lot of these tremendous sporting people,
record-breakers, gamblers, and so on, are much more akin to me than
they like to think.  There is a lot of sham in their pretension to
hairiness and virility.  At heart they are as tame as I am.  They
have chosen to be boxed up in games.  I suppose cricket and hockey
and so on are more gladiatorial than my sort of sport, aviation and
motoring more lethal, and gambling more vexatious, but I do not see
there is any greater reality in what they do than in what I do.
Risk is not reality.  They are players just as I am a player.  They
are enclosed with me in the same pleasant round of harmless and
fruitless activities.

I admit I have had an exceptionally uneventful life.  I missed the
experience of the Great War by a couple of years and my life has
always been an extremely sheltered and comfortable one.  I was
brought up by my paternal aunt, Miss Frobisher, THE Miss Frobisher
of the Barton Chapel Case and the Woman's World Humanity Movement,
and it is only slowly that I have come to realize that my
upbringing was--if I may be paradoxical--unusually banal.  I have
led a life largely of negatives and avoidances.  I have been
trained to keep calm and civil and not react excitedly to
surprises.  And above all to regard only ordinary decent everyday
things seriously.

My aunt took me over at the age of three when my parents divorced
and since then she has never let go of me.  She is a woman with
what, to be frank, one might call a natural hostility to sexual
facts, and my parents' misbehaviour--those were the days when the
papers published full reports of divorce cases--and some of the
details of the affair shocked her extremely.  When I went to school
at Harton, she took a house close by and entered me as a day-boy,
and she did practically the same thing while I was at Keeble.
Possibly I am naturally just a little inclined to be what the
Americans call a sissy, and this tendency has been favoured by
these circumstances.

I have soft hands and an ineffective will.  I prefer not to make
important decisions.  My aunt has trained me to be her constant
associate and, with displays and declarations on all possible
occasions of an immense maternal passion for me, she has--I know it
clearly--made me self-indulgent and dependent.  Yet I do not blame
her very much or resent it very much.  It is how we two have been
made.  She has always been rich and free to do as she liked, not
only with herself but with others, and I have always felt well off
and secure.  Our lives have been easy so far.  Like most well-born,
well-off people, we have taken inferiors for granted, servants for
granted, and the general good behaviour of the world towards us.  I
suppose there are still hundreds of thousands of people in the
world as sure of all the material best of life as we are and taking
it in the same matter-of-course fashion.

"What shall we do?" we ask.  "Where shall we go?"  Nobody compels
us.  We are the floating cream of humanity.

We have a house in Upper Beamish Street, a modest little place in
Hampshire, and we move about a lot.  My aunt, as many people know,
is a very temperamental woman--I do not mean temperamental in any
unpleasant sense--and sometimes we are as keen as mustard on this
Woman's World Humanity Movement--though I have never clearly
understood what it is all about--travelling over the world for it--
so far, that is, as there are bathrooms en suite, upon which my
aunt insists--"making contacts," usually until there is a
difficulty over the committee election or something of that sort
and my aunt gets disgusted, and then for a year or so we drop
Woman's World Humanity and go round wiping up the lawns with
croquet champions or winning tassels with our archery.  We are both
quite extraordinarily good at the long-bow, and my aunt has been
painted as Diana by Wilmerdings.  But croquet is our especial gift.
If we did not shrink from the publicity and vulgarity of it we
could certainly be champions.  We also play a pretty decent tennis
game and our golf might easily be worse, but the popular criticism
of tennis has been carried to such high levels that we do not care
to be seen playing, and golf we find mixes us up with all sorts of
people.  Sometimes we just recuperate.  Lately we have been
recuperating at Les Noupets after a rather discouraging conference
of the Woman's World Humanity Movement at Chicago.  (The less said
about those American delegates the better, but my aunt was fully
equal to them.)

That I think is a quite sufficient explanation of myself and my
atmosphere.  The two club lawns at Les Noupets were excellent, and
we found an admirable secretary typist who dealt with my aunt's
very extensive correspondence about the movement and particularly
with her libel case against Mrs. Glyco-Harriman, taking it all down
in shorthand, typing it in the afternoon, and bringing it for
revision after tea.  There were one or two sets of niceish people
with whom a little light conversation was possible without
entanglement.  Croquet an hour before lunch and perhaps in the
afternoon again and dinner at eight.  We never play bridge until
after dinner; it is our inflexible rule.  So that I had a certain
amount of time upon my hands while she wrote what would be in the
case of anyone without her provocation extremely abusive as well as
sarcastic letters, which I devoted chiefly to a morning's walk up
the hill to the Perona springs, where I took the waters, rather for
fun than with any idea of a cure, and then sat in a state of
wholesome idleness on the terrace of the Source Hotel removing the
inky taste by appropriately chosen refreshment.  My aunt is
inclined to a non-alcoholic attitude, but of late years I have
found the unobtrusive exercise of my private judgment in such
matters not only permissible but better for both of us.  I mean I
am a more cheerful companion.

I think all that gets me fairly well and now with your permission I
will put myself into the background, so to speak--or "frame"
perhaps is better--and tell you about the first of these two queer
men I met on the Perona terrace.



Haunting Fear in Cainsmarsh


It was while I was sitting out on the terrace in the sun, nibbling
a brioche and consuming a harmless vermouth and seltzer, that I
first set eyes on Dr. Finchatton.  He was two tables away and he
was having an almost violent quarrel with a number of books he had
got from the Les Noupets tea shop and lending library.  He was
opening them one after another, reading a few pages, turning them
over, muttering, and banging them down on the ground with an
emphasis that would have distressed the library people extremely.
He looked up and caught my reproving eye.  He stared and then
smiled.

"Scores of books," he said; "hundreds of books--and not one worth
reading!  They're all--OFF it."

There was something comical and irrational about his disgust that
amused me.  "Then why read them?" I asked.  "Reading crowds the
memory and prevents one thinking."

"Exactly what I want to do.  I came over here to stop thinking--and
forget.  And I can't."  His voice, which to begin with was clear
and distinct, rose to an angry note.  "Some of these books bore--
some irritate.  Some even remind me of just what I am trying to
forget."

Stepping over his heap of condemned volumes he came, glass and
carafe in hand, and without any invitation from me sat down at the
table beside me.  He looked me in the face with an expression that
was at once friendly and slightly quizzical.  I know my face is--
well, "cherubic"--for a man of thirty-three and it was very evident
he appreciated the fact.  "Do YOU do much thinking?" he asked.

"A fair amount.  I solve the Times Crossword Puzzle nearly every
day.  I play a lot of chess--by correspondence chiefly.  And I'm
not so bad at bridge."

"I mean real thinking.  About things that pursue and worry you and
cannot be explained."

"I don't let things worry me," I said.

"Do you happen to be interested in ghosts--and hauntings?"

"I'm neutral.  I don't believe in ghosts but I don't DIS-believe
in them.  If you follow me.  I've never seen a ghost.  I think
there is a lot to be said for spiritualism, quite a lot, in spite
of much imposture.  I suppose immortality has been proved now by
that sort of thing, and that is all to the good.  My aunt Miss
Frobisher is quite of that opinion.  But I feel that the necessary
table-rapping and cabinet séances and all that is a job for a
specialist."

"But suppose you found there were ghosts all about you?"

"I never have."

"And there's nothing--here for instance--that makes you feel
uneasy?"

"Where?" I asked.

"THERE," he said and waved a hand at the tranquil sea and the
innocent sky.

"Why should there be?"

"But IS there?"

"No."

"I envy your insensitiveness--or your imperturbability."  He
emptied his glass and ordered another half-litre of wine.  Either
out of ignorance or preference he was drinking red ordinaire.  "YOU
don't feel there is anything?  No danger?"

"I never saw a more tranquillizing view.  Not a cloud."

"It isn't so with me. . . .  I've had some very disturbing
experiences.  I'm still disturbed.  Curious!  You feel nothing.
Maybe it's just the aftermath of what has happened."

"What HAS happened?  And what is the aftermath?"

"I'd like to tell you," he said.  "It's rather a yarn, you know."

"Go ahead," said I.

And with that much introduction he began to tell me his story.  He
was rather disconnected at first and then he settled down to it.
He told it to me not as though he particularly wished to tell it to
me, but as though he wanted very badly to tell it to someone and
hear how it sounded.  After he had got started, I interrupted very
little.

It was indiscreet of me perhaps to let him begin upon me.  I knew
nothing of him.  I had to ask him for his name before he named
himself.  Evidently he was queer in some way--I should have
remembered that the big house above the town was supposed to be a
"Home" for mental cases, a psychotherapeutic institution as they
call them nowadays, and the discreet thing for me would have been
to have sheered off there and then upon some excuse before his
story began.

Yet there was nothing about him to warn me off him.  There was
nothing eccentric in his manner or indeed in his general
appearance.  He had the jaded look of a man who doesn't sleep well,
a little dark under the eyes, but apart from that he seemed quite
all right.  He was quietly dressed in the Englishman's usual grey;
he wore a coloured shirt and an unobtrusive tie.  It was a little
askew but that was nothing.  Plenty of men never put on their ties
straight--though how they can stand it I can't think.  It is so
easy to get a tie straight.  He was decidedly lean and fairly good-
looking, with what I suppose one would call a sensitive mouth below
his short moustache.  He leant forward most of the time with his
arms folded under his chest much as a cat folds up its paws.  He
talked perhaps just a little on the emphatic side but he seemed on
the watch to control himself.  And as I had a full hour or more to
dispose of, before I went down to Les Noupets again, I let him run
on, without any attempt to interrupt him or cut him short.

"At first," he said, "I thought it was the marshes."

"What marshes?"

"Cainsmarsh.  You have heard of Cainsmarsh?"

I used to be pretty good at geography at school but I could not
recall that name.  But I did not like to admit my ignorance on the
spur of the moment.  Something about the word seemed familiar.
"Marsh" seemed a clue.  Vague suggestions of fenny country, watery
expanses, a louring sky, dank black thatch, moored old barges, and
the hum of mosquitoes floated across my mind.

"A great district for malaria and rheumatic complaints," he said,
confirming my impression.  "I bought a practice there. . . .
Forgive a touch of autobiography.  I did so partly because it was
an exceptionally cheap practice and I had to earn a living somehow
with my small resources and partly because I wanted to leave the
hospital and London--and rest my brain.  I went there jaded and
disappointed.  It seemed likely to be an easygoing job.  There is
practically no competition in the marshes, not until you get
towards the part they call the Island, where the market-town
doctors come out in their cars.  The parishes up towards the hills,
such as they are, and out towards the saltings are quite beyond
their range except for special consultations.  I had to go into
practice with a minor qualification because of the need I was under
for tranquillizing surroundings. . . .  I threw up the prospect of
a medical degree."

He paused as though he found a difficulty.

"Were you ill?" I inquired, to help him out.  "Why DID you leave
the hospital with a minor qualification?  Forgive me making a
personal remark but you don't look the sort of man who muffs
exams."

"I didn't muff exams.  In fact I was more than usually ambitious.
I worked, I think, too hard.  And I was active mentally in other
directions.  I was keener on politics than most medical students.
And I got very keen on social justice and the prevention of war.
Very keen on the war question.  I had been working on gas.  Perhaps
I DID too much.  Perhaps I thought and felt too much. . . .
Yes. . . .  Yes, certainly I felt too much.  A time came when the
morning paper could upset me so as to spoil my work for the day.

"From the very beginning of my medical education you must know I
found myself under a strain.  I admit that.  I didn't like
dissection, I didn't like the damaged human stuff in the wards.
Some of it was pitiful; some of it horrified me."

I agreed with him.  "Doctoring has always terrified ME.  _I_
couldn't stand any of it."

"But the world must have doctors," he said.

"It won't have ME for a doctor.  I've never seen more than three
dead people, and they were all lying quietly laid out in bed."

"But on the road?  You come upon dreadful sights."

"We never travel by road.  All sane people are giving it up."

"You, I see, have avoided the ugly side of life from the first.
Well--I didn't.  I walked right into it when I chose medicine.  I
thought of the good I could do and I never thought of the harsh red
realities I should have to face.  You avoided.  I tried not to
avoid and then I ran away.  I went to that district with the full
idea of escape.  This, I told myself, will be away from any war
there is or any bombing.  Here I can recover myself.  Here, I said,
there will be nothing except normal cases I can really face and
help.  Cainsmarsh is far from any main roads.  There won't be even
motor casualties, which are often so frightful to encounter.  You
see my point?  It looked as good as any possible world for me, and
going there in summertime with the wild flowers out and a hundred
sorts of butterfly about, dragon-flies and an abundance of summer
birds, let alone a lot of summer visitors, mostly houseboat and
fishing people with children and their small ailments, there didn't
seem to be very much wrong with it.  I would have laughed if you
had told me that I had come into a haunted land.

"I did all I could to protect myself from over-stimulation.  I did
not have a newspaper in the house.  I relied on a weekly news
summary with no illustrations but diagrams.  I wouldn't open a book
later than Dickens.

"The native population seemed at first just a trifle stupid and
reserved but quite kindly.  I saw nothing wrong with them to begin
with.  Old Rawdon, the vicar of Cross in Slackness, that landmark
church of the levels, told me that there was a good deal of furtive
drugging because of the ague and that he suspected the genuineness
of their amiability.  I went to pay my respects to him as soon as I
was able.  He was an elderly man and rather deaf and he had
exchanged to the Cross in Slackness living because of his
infirmity.  His church and vicarage were stranded, so to speak,
with one or two cottages on a sort of crocodile back of land, and
they were overgrown with elm trees.  I doubt if even as many
as a score of people came to his services.  He was not very
communicative, his old bent wife was even less so, he had trouble
with gallstones and an ulcerated contusion of the ankle, and his
chief preoccupation seemed to be with the high-church tendencies of
his fellow-priest, a newly arrived curate at Marsh Havering.
Apparently he himself was low church and Calvinistic, but at first
I could not understand the mixture of fear and resentment with
which he spoke of the younger man.  There were no landed gentry in
Cainsmarsh, and, except for a veterinary surgeon, a few elementary
teachers, one or two publicans, and some middle-class boarding-
house keepers towards Beacon Ness, the population was entirely a
population of farmers and farm workers.  They had no folk-lore, no
songs, no arts, and no special costume.  A more improbable soil for
anything you could call psychic it would be hard to imagine.  And
yet you know--"

He frowned and spoke in measured words, as if he was doing his
utmost to be explicit and was reasoning against the possible
objections I might presently make to what he had to tell me.

"After all . . .  It is in just such a flat, still atmosphere
perhaps--translucent, gentle-coloured--that things lying below the
surface, things altogether hidden in more eventful and colourful
surroundings, creep on our perceptions. . . ."

He paused, drank a glass of his wine, reflected for a moment, and
resumed.

"There can be no disputing the stillness of that district.
Sometimes I would stop my car on one of the winding dike roads and
stand listening before I went on again.  One would hear the sheep
upon the lavender-coloured hills, four or five miles away, or the
scream of some distant water fowl, like a long, harsh scratch of
neon light across the silent blue, or the sound of the wind and the
sea, a dozen miles away at Beacon Ness, like the world breathing in
its sleep.  At night of course there were more noises: dogs howled
and barked in the distance, corncrakes called, and things rustled
in the reeds.  And yet the nights too could sometimes have a
stillness. . . .

"At first it did not seem to be of any particular significance that
the traceable consumption of soporifics and opiates by this
apparently insensitive population was not only quite remarkably
high but increasing, nor that the proportion of suicides and
inexplicable crimes--inexplicable as distinguished from normally
motivated offences--over this part of the world was exceptional and
apparently rising.  Dealing with such a small population, however,
a murder more or less could upset the percentage altogether.  Face
to face in the daylight there was nothing at all murderous in the
bearing of these people.  They did not look you in the eye--but
that may have been their idea of good manners.  It just happened
that there had been no less than three crazy murders of relations
and neighbours in Cainsmarsh in the past five years, and of two of
them the perpetrators were still undiscovered.  The other was a
fratricide.  The vicar, when I spoke about this, said something
about 'degenerate race--too inbred' and changed the subject, as
though it was an unpleasant topic of no particular importance for
him.

"The first real intimation I had in my own person, of the brooding
strangeness that hangs over Cainsmarsh, was an attack of insomnia.
Hitherto I had been a fairly sound sleeper but before I had settled
in the Marsh for a couple of months my nights began to be troubled.
I would wake up in a state of profound uneasiness, and without any
physiological cause that I could trace I fell a prey to evil
dreams.  They were quite peculiar dreams, like none I had ever
dreamt before.  They were dreams of menace, of being waylaid,
stalked, and pursued and of furious struggles to defend myself,
dreams out of which I would wake shouting--you know those faint
shadowy shouts of dreamland conflicts--sweating and trembling in
every limb.  Some of these dreams had so strong a flavour of horror
that they would leave me afraid to go to sleep again.  I would try
to read, and whatever I read in the night watches an eerie
discomfort hung over me.

"I adopted all the expedients that would naturally occur to a young
medical man to end these enervating experiences, but without avail.
I dieted.  I exercised.  I would get up and dress, go out either on
foot or in my car, in spite of a strong fear resistance.  Fear
pursued me out of those dreams.  The nightmare quality hung about
me and could not be shaken off.  I was awake and still dreaming.
Never have I seen such sinister skies as I did on those night
excursions.  I felt such a dread of unfamiliar shadows as I had not
known even in childhood.  There were times on those nocturnal
drives when I could have shouted aloud for daylight as a man
suffocating in a closed chamber might shout for air.

"Very naturally this inability to sleep began presently to
undermine my daily life.  I became nervous and fanciful.  I found I
was giving way to minor hallucinations, rather, I suppose, after
the pattern of delirium tremens.  But with more menace in them.  I
would turn convulsively under the impression that a silent hound
was creeping up to attack me from behind, or I would imagine a
black snake wriggling out from under the valance of an arm-chair.

"Presently came other symptoms of relaxing mental control.  I found
myself suspecting the Island doctors of a combination against me.
The most petty incidents, small slights, breaches of etiquette,
fancied imputations, had been seized upon by my imagination and
worked up into the fabric of a conspiracy mania.  I had to restrain
myself from writing foolish letters or making challenges and asking
questions.  Then I began to find something evil in the silence or
in the gestures of some of my patients.  And while I sat by their
bedsides, I fancied that there were hostile goings-to-and-fro and
malignant whisperings and conspirings just outside the door.

"I could not understand what was the matter with me.  I searched my
mind for nervous stresses and I could find none.  I had surely left
all that behind in London.  Temperature and so forth remained
normal.  But clearly there was something askew in my adjustment
to these new surroundings.  Cainsmarsh was disappointing my
expectations.  There was no healing in it for me.  I had to pull
myself together.  I had sunk all my little capital in the practice
and I had to stick it.  There was nowhere else for me to go.  I had
to keep my head and grapple with this trouble and beat it before it
became too much for me.

"Was it just my own trouble?  Was something specially wrong with me
or was it something wrong with the countryside?  Were there other
people in the Marsh having dreams and fancies like mine, or maybe
was this a trouble that came to newcomers and passed away?  Was it
something I should get over?  A sort of acclimatization.  I had to
be careful with my inquiries because it is not well for a doctor to
admit he is out of sorts.  I began to watch my patients, my old
servant, and anyone with whom I came in contact for any betrayal of
symptoms similar to mine.  And I found what I looked for.  Beneath
the superficial stolidity a number of these people were profoundly
uneasy.  There was fear in the Marsh for them as for me.  It was an
established habitual fear.  But it was not a definite fear.  They
feared something unknown.  It was a sort of fear that might
concentrate at any time upon anything whatever and transform it
into a thing of terror.

"Let me give you some instances.

"One evening I found an old lady stiff with dread at a shadow in a
corner, and when I moved her candle and the shadow moved, she
screamed aloud.  'But it can't hurt you,' I argued.  'I'm afraid,'
she answered, as though that was a sufficient answer.  And suddenly
before I could prevent her she had seized a little clock on the
night table beside her and flung it at that dark and dreadful
nothingness, and buried her head under the clothes.  I will confess
that for a moment or so I stood rigid and expectant staring at the
broken clock in the corner.

"And one day I saw a farmer who was rabbit shooting pause, stare
aghast at a fluttering scarecrow, and then, unaware of my presence,
suddenly raise his gun and blow the poor dangling old rapscallion
to bits.

"There was an unusual terror of the dark.  My old servant, I found,
would not venture out after twilight to the pillar box a hundred
yards away.  She would make every sort of excuse and when she was
cornered she refused absolutely to go.  I had to go myself or leave
my letters until the morning.  Even sweethearting, I learnt, would
not tempt the young people abroad after sundown.

"I can't tell you," he said, "how the perception of the presence of
fear grew upon me and grew upon me--how it infected me--until at
last the flap of a window blind in the breeze or the fall of a
cinder in the fireplace would set my nerves aquiver.

"I could not shake this off; my nights got worse.  I determined to
have a real talk about this queer uneasiness of the mind, with the
old vicar.  In his way, you see, the district was his business, as
in my way it was mine.  He ought to know whatever was to be known.
By this time the disorder was getting a strong hold upon me.  I
made up my mind to go to him after a night of exceptional horror
and dismay.  I was indeed already pretty bad. . . .

"I can recall here and now the unprotected feeling of my drive to
him across the open marshes.  They seemed to me far too open, bare
to endless dangers.  And yet when I came near a clump of trees or
bushes it took on the quality of an ambush.  The normal confidence
of a living creature was deserting me.  I felt not simply exposed
to incalculable evils, I felt threatened by them.  In broad
daylight, mind you; in the sunshine.  With nothing but a few birds
in sight. . . .

"As it happened I caught the old man in a communicative mood.  I
put my questions plainly to him.  'I'm a newcomer in this country,'
I said.  'Is there something--something PECULIARLY wrong about it?"

"He stared at me and scratched his cheek, weighing what he should
tell me.  'Yes,' he said, 'there is.'

"He led me into his study, listened for a moment as if to make sure
that everyone was out of earshot, and then closed the door
carefully.  'You're sensitive,' he said.  'You're getting it sooner
than I did.  Something--wrong--wrong and getting worse.  Something
evil.'

"I remember those opening words very plainly and his bleary old
eyes and the bad teeth in his sagging mouth.  He came and sat down
quite close to me with one long bony hand cupping his hairy ear.
'Don't speak too loud,' he said.  'If you speak distinctly, I can
hear.'

"He said he was glad to have someone to talk it over with at last.
He told me how he had hoped to end his days in the Marsh quietly
and how gradually this shadowy discomfort had come over him,
deepening slowly into fear.  He could never afford another
exchange.  He too was fixed.  It was hard to talk about.  His wife
would never talk to him about it.  Before they came to Cross in
Slackness, they had been the best of friends and gossips.  'Now,'
he said, 'it is pushing us apart.  I have to talk to myself.  I
don't know what's come over her.'

"'What is pushing you apart?' I asked.

"'The Evil.'

"That was his name for it.

"Everyone, he said, was being pushed apart.  You began to find
sinister possibilities in the most ordinary relations.  Lately he
had had a curious suspicion of his food--had fancied a queer taste
in it and queer feelings after it.  'It makes me fear for my
reason,' he said.  'My reason or hers.'  Yet all the same, it was
queer about the food.  Why should anyone--?  He left it at that.
At his first coming the common people had seemed simply dull to
him.  Then he had begun to realize that they were not so much dull
as reserved and suspicious.  You would catch a glance in their eyes
like a dog that may snap.  Even the children, when you came to
watch them, were furtively defensive.  For no reason.  For no
reason at all.  He told me that, sitting very close to me, not
speaking too loud.

"He came closer.  'They are cruel to animals,' he told me.  'They
beat their dogs and horses.  Not regularly.  By fits.

"'The children come to school with marks on them,' he said. . . .
'You can't get them to say anything. . . .  They are afraid.'

"I asked him if he felt that this thing, whatever it was, was
increasing.  Had it always been there?  There was very little
recorded history of the region.  He thought it was increasing.
Things had not always been like this.  I suggested that it may have
always been in the atmosphere of the place and that we became more
aware of it as we fell under the spell.

"'Maybe.  Partly that,' said the old vicar.

"He gave some broken fragments of a story about a former incumbent.
He and his wife had been sent to prison for cruelty to a servant
girl.  Prison!  They said she told lies and had dirty habits.  As
an excuse.  They wanted to cure her, they said.  But really they
just hated her. . . .  Never anything against them before they came
into the Marsh.

"'It's always been here,' whispered the old vicar.  'Always.  Below
the surface.  An unhappy, wicked spirit that creeps into us all.  I
pray.  I do not know what would happen to me if I did not pray.
What with the waste of money and the rudeness of everybody and the
malicious mischief they do me and the stone-throwing.  Let alone
the poison.  It is the poisoning hurts me most.'

"We talked like that in his big shabby, sparely furnished study in
the broad daylight, like men who cower in a cave.

"And then he began to talk less sanely.  The evil was in the soil,
he declared, UNDERGROUND.  He laid great stress on the word
'underground.'  He made a downward gesture with his quivering hand.
There was something mighty and dreadful, buried in Cainsmarsh.
Something colossally evil.  Broken up.  Scattered all over the
Marsh.  'I think I know what it is,' he whispered darkly, but for a
time he would not explain.

"They kept on stirring it up, he said, they would not let it rest.

"Whom did he mean by THEY?  That was difficult.  There had been
road-making, there have been drainage works and now 'those
archæologists'!  And that was not all.  There had been a ploughing
of old pastures during the war.  Opening old sores.  'You see over
all the place was once a wilderness of graves.'

"'Tumuli?' I questioned.

"'No,' he insisted.  'Graves--graves everywhere!'  And some of the
ancient people, he said, were 'petrified.'  You found stones of the
strangest shapes.  Abominable shapes.  'They keep on bringing
things up,' he said.  'Things that had better be let alone.  Ought
to be let alone.  Making doubts and puzzles--destroying faith.'

"At a jump he was denouncing Darwinism and evolution.  It was
remarkable how life-long controversies had interwoven with his
Cainsmarsh distresses!  Had I seen the museum at Eastfolk? he
asked.

"He talked of the great bones exhibited there.  But I protested he
was thinking of the bones of mammoths and dinosaurs and suchlike
things.  Giants, he insisted.  Look at what they call implements
there!  Too big and clumsy for any living man to handle.  Axes,
spears--nothing but huge weapons for killing and killing!  'MURDER
STONES' he called them.  The murder stones of giants.

"He clenched his bony fist, his quavering voice rose, and real
hatred came into his eyes.

"'Nothing is too bad,' he said, 'for the men who dig up those
bones.  Tearing up dark secrets.  Seeming to confute. . . .  A
grave's a grave and a dead man's a dead man, even if he's been dead
a million years.  Let the evil creatures lie!  Let them lie!  Let
their dust lie!'  He ceased to be furtively confidential; his anger
rose and thrust his fear aside.  He no longer troubled to listen to
anything I had to say in reply to him.

"He was soon launched upon the wildest diatribe.  He was
transfigured by an anger that shook his feeble frame.  He had fixed
upon the local archæologists and naturalists as the chief objective
for his tirade, but mixed up with that in the oddest and most
illogical way was his detestation of the high-church practices that
had been introduced by the new man at Marsh Havering.  Just when
this Evil was being released and rising like an exhalation from the
earth, when the one supreme need of the time was religion straight
and stern--'STRAIGHT AND STERN,' he repeated and shook his fingers
in my face--this man must come with his vestments and images and
music and mummery!

"But I will not give you, if I could, an imitation of that poor old
wreck as he grew fiercer and louder and hoarser.  He wanted
suppression, he wanted persecution of Science, of Rome, of every
sort of immorality and immodesty, of every sort of creed except his
own, persecution, enforced repentance, to save us from the Wrath
that was coming steadily upon us.  'They turn up the soil, they
strip things bare, and we breathe the dust of long-dead men.'  It
was as if he was trying to escape from our common marshland
obsession by sheer screaming violence.  'The doom of Cain!' he
shouted.  'The punishment of Cain!'

"'But WHY Cain?' I managed to insert.

"'He ended his days here,' the old man declared.  'Oh, I know!  Is
this called Cainsmarsh for nothing?  He wandered over the face of
the earth and at last he came here, he and the worst of his sons.
They poisoned the earth.  Age after age of crime and cruelty, and
then the Flood buried them under these marshes--and there they
ought to be buried for ever.'

"I tried to argue against this fantasy--Cainsmarsh is just a
corruption of Gaynes Marsh, as all the guide books say; it is
written Gaynes in Domesday Book--but the old man bore me down.  My
voice had no chance now amidst his croaking assertions.  His
deafness was a shield against all argument.  His voice filled the
room.  He poured out the festering accumulations of his brooding
solitude.  His sentences had the readiness of long-matured
expression.  I guess most of it had been uttered, time and again,
to the faithful remnant of Cross in Slackness church.  He had got
the children of Cain and the cave men and the mammoths and
megatheria and dinosaurs all jumbled up in the wildest confusion.
It was a storm of preposterous nonsense.  And yet--and yet, you
know--"

Dr. Finchatton regarded the bay of Les Noupets in silence for a few
moments.

"Out of it all came a suggestion.  I doubt if it will seem even
remotely sane to you--in this clear air.  But it was the suggestion
that this haunting something was something remote, archaic,
bestial. . . ."

He nodded his head in doubtful confirmation of what he was saying.

"You see . . .  It's bad enough to be haunted by Georgian ghosts,
Stuart ghosts, Elizabethan ghosts, ghosts in armour and ghosts in
chains.  Yet anyhow, one has a sort of fellow-feeling for them.
They aren't just spirits of cruelty, suspicion, and ape-like
malice.  But the souls of a tribe of cave men might be. . . .
Grisly ghosts. . . .  What do YOU think?"

"One may be as possible as the other," I said.

"Yes.  And yet, if cave men, why not apes?  Suppose all our
ancestors rose against us!  Reptiles, fish, amoebæ!  The idea was so
fantastic that, as I drove away from Cross in Slackness, I tried to
laugh."

Dr. Finchatton stopped short and looked at me.

"I COULDN'T LAUGH," he said.

"I don't think _I_ could have done," I said.  "It's a frightful
idea.  I'd rather be haunted by a man than an ape any day."

"I drove back home more saturated with terror than I came.  I was
beginning to see visions now everywhere.  There was an old man
bending down in a ditch doing something to a fallen sheep and he
became a hunched, bent, and heavy-jawed savage.  I did not dare
look to see what he was doing and, when he called something to me--
maybe only a good-day-to-you--I pretended not to hear.  Whenever a
clump of bushes came near the road, my heart sank and I slackened
pace and, as soon as I was past, I jammed down the accelerator.

"I got drunk, Sir, for the first time in my life that night.  You
see, it was either getting drunk or running away.  Maybe I'm still
a young doctor, but that's my code.  A doctor who quits his
practice without notice is as bad as a sentinel who bolts.  So you
see, I had to get drunk.

"Before I went to bed I found I was funking opening the front
door to look out.  So with a convulsive effort I flung it open
wide. . . .

"There crouched the marshes under the moonlight and the long low
mists seemed to have stayed their drifting at the slam of the door
against the wall.  As if they paused to listen.  And over it all
was something, a malignant presence such as I had never apprehended
before.

"Nevertheless I stuck to my doorstep.  I did not retreat.  I
attempted even a drunken speech.

"I forget what I said.  Maybe I myself went far enough back to the
Stone Age to make mere inarticulate sounds.  But the purport was
defiance--of every evil legacy the past has left for man."



The Skull in the Museum


At this point in his narrative Dr. Finchatton stopped abruptly.
"This sounds a crazy story to you?" he said.  "Do you want me to go
on with it?"

"Not in the least," I spluttered.  "I mean, yes, please.  I mean,
do PLEASE go on.  I'm tremendously interested.  But sitting here at
this table with everything bright and clear and definite, there is
a certain unreality . . .  If you understand me?"

"_I_ understand you," he said without returning my smile.  He
looked round.  "It does seem here as though nothing except vermouth
and seltzer and lunchtime presently, and things like that, could
ever happen any more."

A look of extreme weariness came over him.  "I'm resting," he said.
"Yes.  But sooner or later I shall have to go back to it all.  I'd
like to go on talking about it a bit--to you.  If you don't mind.
There's something--if I might say so--so refreshingly unimaginative
about you.  Like white paper."

At the time I was quite prepared to go on listening.  I was
oblivious then of the possibility that this story might ever
disturb my own slumbers.  I keep dreams for waking moments but I
like them then.  Fancies and reveries.  I welcome them.  One dreams
then but one feels quite safe.  There may be shivers in it but no
real fear.  It is just because they ARE impossible that I like
impossible stories.  Ever since I discovered Edgar Allan Poe in my
early boyhood I have had a taste for the weird and the eerie, and
in spite of my aunt's opposition--she flies into a regular passion
at the suggestion that anything irregular or unusual can ever occur--
I have--in an unobtrusive way--indulged it pretty freely.  Her
imagination, I think, was killed long ago, but mine I've made into
a domestic pet that I like to play with.  I do not think it will
ever claw me seriously; it's a pussy now which knows where to stop.
Though I am not so sure of that as I was.  But it was very pleasant
to be there, safe and solid, in the clear Normandy sunshine, and
hear about those terror-stricken marshes.  "Go on, my dear Sir,"
said I.  "Go on."

"Well," said Dr. Finchatton, "I put up as much fight as my training
and quality permitted.  Getting drunk and that speech of defiance,
even if in fact I imagined it rather than made it, did me good.  I
slept that night, good forgetful sleep, for the first time for
weeks, and next day rose refreshed to reckon with my situation.
Trained as I was, it was natural for me to assume that this common
ailment of fear and fantasy, this sickness of a whole region, must
be due to some virus in the air or the water or the soil.  I made a
private resolution to drink water only after it had been boiled and
eat only well-cooked food.  But also I was quite open to the idea
that something less material might be at work.  I am no prejudiced
materialist.  I was quite prepared to believe in purely psychic
infection--though not of course in these Sons of Cain of the
vicar's.  I decided next morning that I would investigate that high-
church curate at Marsh Havering, the Reverend Mortover, the object
of the vicar's peculiar detestation, and find what HE might have to
say about it.

"But I found the young man as mad as his Calvinistic colleague.  If
the old man mixed the trouble up with science and excavations and
Romanism, the young man blamed the Reformation and made great play
with the Puritan witch mania of the sixteenth century.  Some
spiritual control was broken then, he assured me with the utmost
confidence.  Diabolism had returned to the earth.  It was not the
ghost of Cain and his wicked sons that was troubling us, according
to him; it was diabolical possession.  We have to restore the unity
of Christendom and exorcize these devils.

"He was a very pale, clean-shaven young man, with a fine clear-cut
face, burning dark eyes, and high-pitched tenor voice.  He made few
gestures and he kept his thin hands clenched as he talked.  If he
had been in the Roman Catholic Church instead of being just a high
Anglican, they would have set him to conduct missions.  He had just
that sort of eloquent intensity.  And there he sat in his cassock,
looking up and away over my shoulder and expounding the exorcism of
the marshes.

"As he talked I could see that his head was full of long, slow
processions winding across the marshes with banners, canopies,
vestments, boys chanting, censers swinging, priests asperging.  I
thought of the old vicar peering out of his dirty study window and
I had a vision of him running out hoarse and stumbling, with murder
in his eyes.

"'But,' I told him, 'there will be opposition!' and at that the
manner of Mr. Mortover changed.  He stood up and threw out a stiff
hand like an eagle's claw.  'It must be overcome!' said he, and in
that instant I understood why men are killed in Belfast and
Liverpool and Spain."

That was queer.  I interrupted.  "But, Dr. Finchatton, what have
Belfast and Liverpool and Spain to do with Cainsmarsh?" I asked.

That brought him to a stop for a moment.  He looked at me with a
very peculiar expression, something between suspicious scrutiny and
obstinacy.  "I was talking of Cainsmarsh," he said after
deliberation.

"Then what have Belfast and Spain to do with it?"

"Nothing.  I mentioned them, I suppose--by way of illustration. . . .
Let me get it!  Let me get it!  What I was thinking of was
fanaticism.  Both these men, the vicar and the priest, had their
convictions--yes.  High and noble convictions, no doubt, as they
professed them.  But what they really wanted to do was to fight.
They wanted to be at each other's throats.  That was where the
haunting poison of the Marsh came in.  It wasn't their beliefs
that stirred them; it was their fears.  He wanted to shout and
provoke. . . .

"Well--so for that matter did I.  Why had I bawled and raved at the
Marsh out of my door over night?  And shaken my fist?"

He looked at me almost as if he expected me to answer.

"The Greeks had a word for it," he said.  "Panic.  Endemic panic,
that was the contagion of the marshes."

"That may be a name for it," I said.  "But how much does that
explain?"

"You realize," said Dr. Finchatton, "that by this time I was in a
headlong panic against panic.  I felt that my time was running
short.  If I did not do something to exorcize it, the spirit of the
Marsh would get me--surely.  I should break.  I should do something
violent.  I happened to have nothing very pressing just then to tie
me, and I determined to play hookey from my consulting room for
half a day and go over to Eastfolk museum.  I would have a good
reassuring look at those mammoth bones, which under the vicar's
suggestion were beginning to take on far too human a form in my
memory, and perhaps have a chat with the curator, who, I had heard,
was an archæologist of considerable ability.

"I found him a very pleasant little man, with a broad bland bare
face and spectacles and a sort of watchfulness.  He had that sort
of watchfulness good photographers and portrait painters have, and
it was the only thing that was not altogether comfortable about
him.  I caught him looking at me whenever I turned away from
him. . . .

"I professed a great interest in the flint implements which are so
abundant in the low hills above the marshlands and about the series
of human remains that had been unearthed there.  He was an
enthusiast and he found me intelligent.  He embarked upon quite a
history of the region.  'It must have been inhabited,' I said, 'for
thousands of years.'

"'Hundreds of thousands,' he told me.  'There were Neanderthalers
and--But let me show you our special glory!'

"He led me to a locked glass cupboard in which was a thick louring
beetle-browed skull, that still seemed to scowl from its empty
sockets.  Beside it was its under jaw.  This dirty rusty-brown
treasure, he said, was the completest specimen of its kind in the
world.  It was almost unbroken.  It had already settled a dozen
controversies arising out of the fragmentary nature of its fellows.
There were also a few vertebræ from the neck and a curved thigh
bone and a lot of smaller fragments in a case close by, but the
entire fissure in which these remains had been found had not yet
been cleaned up, because the bones were half dissolved and very
brittle and had to be extracted very carefully.  The fissure was
being worked with elaborate care.  In the end they hoped to get
almost an entire skeleton.  Two or three very primitive and clumsy
artifacts had also been found in this same cleft in the chalk, down
which maybe the brute had slipped and been jammed and covered up.
The little curator watched me as I surveyed his prize specimen and
marked the snarling grin of its upper jaw and the shadowy vitality
that still lurked in the caverns whence its eyes had once glared
upon the world.

"'That might, I suppose, be our ancestor?' I said.

"'More probable than not.'

"'That in our blood!' I said.

"I turned half round and looked at the monster askance and, when I
spoke again, I spoke as if he also might be listening.  I asked a
score of amateurish questions.  There had been countless
generations of him and his kind, I learnt.  His sort had slouched
and snarled over the marshes for a hundred times the length of all
recorded history.  In comparison with HIS overlordship our later
human rule was a thing of yesterday.  Millions of these brutish
lives had come and passed, leaving fragments, implements, stones
they had chipped or reddened by their fires, bones they had gnawed.
Not a pebble in the marsh, not an inch of ground, their feet had
not pressed or their hands gripped a myriad times.

"'Just something a little bit dreadful about him,' I said, talking
vacuously while I made up my mind.  Then I decided to put a
question point-blank.  I asked the curator had he heard--had he
ever met the idea that the Marsh was haunted?

"The scrutiny in the magnified eyes behind the glasses intensified.
He had heard something.

"'WELL?' said I.

"But he wanted me to speak first.  He waited silently, and so I was
forced to go on.  I told him practically all that I have told you.
'The marshes have got hold of me,' I said.  'And if I do not do
something about it, they will drive me mad.  I can't stand them and
I have to stand them.  Tell me why it is one dreams there so
dismally, why one is haunted by fear in the daylight and horrible
fears in the night?'

"'You're not the first who has come to me with that question,' he
said, still watching me.

"'And you can tell me,' I said, 'what it is?'

"'No,' he said.

"He was a careful man with his words as well as a watchful one with
his eyes.  He explained he went into the marsh to excavate and so
he saw something of the people.  'They don't like these
excavations,' he said.  'I have never heard of so much distrust of
digging in any other part of the world.  Maybe it is a strong local
superstition.  Maybe fear is contagious.  They certainly fear.  And
I think they fear more today than they used to do.  It is often
very hard now to get permission to dig on private land.'

"I could see he was not telling me all he had in mind.  He seemed
to be saying things to me experimentally, as if he was trying out
his ideas on me.  He remarked that he never slept in the marsh even
in the daytime.  At times when he was sifting earth he would stop
to listen, and resume sifting, and then stop still again.  'Nothing
to hear,' he said, 'and yet one gets strung up like that.'

"He came to a pause.  I saw him looking very hard and with a
peculiar expression at the cave man's skull against the wall
between us.

"'You don't think an ugly beast like that could really leave a
ghost?' I asked.

"'It's left its bones,' he said.  'Do you think it had anything you
could call a spirit?  Something that might still be urgent to hurt
and torment and frighten?  Something profoundly suspicious and
easily angered?'

"It was my turn to stare at him.

"'You do not really believe that.  You are suggesting that to me.
For some purpose.'

"He laughed, still with a steady eye on me.  'If so, I have
failed,' he said.  'But I did want to suggest it to you.  If we can
make a ghost of this fear of yours--well, ghosts can be laid.  If
we make a fever of it, fever can be cured.  But while this remains
merely panic fear and a smouldering rage, what can we do about it?'

"Very kind of you,' said I, 'to try and pull me together in that
fashion, truss my mind, so to speak, for exorcism.  It isn't so
easy as that.'

"And then," said Dr. Finchatton, "he switched off that hypnotic
bespectacled stare of his and began to talk to me more frankly.

"What he said was rather metaphysical," Dr. Finchatton said, "and I
am not much of a metaphysician.  It was queer theoretical stuff and
yet, in a way, it had a sort of air of explanation.  I will try and
tell it you as well as I can.  The expression he used was that we
were breaking the frame of our present--the Frame of our Present?"

Dr Finchatton looked at me enquiringly.  I remained judicial.  I
had not the remotest idea what the frame of our present might be.
"Go on," I said.

"He stood with his profile to me, no longer watching me, looking
out of the window and saying what was in his mind.  'A century or
so ago,' he said, 'men lived in the present far more than they do
now.  Their past went back four or five thousand years, their
future hardly went as far; they lived for NOW.  And what they
called the eternities.  They knew nothing of the remote real past.
They cared nothing for the real future.  THAT'--and he nodded at
the cave-man's skull, 'just wasn't there.  All that was buried and
forgotten and out of life.  We lived in a magic sphere and we felt
taken care of and safe.  And now in the last century or so, we have
broken that.  We have poked into the past, unearthing age after age
and we peer more and more forward into the future.  And that's
what's the matter with us.'

"'In the marsh?' said I.

"'Everywhere.  Your vicar and priest know that by instinct though
they don't know how to express it--or anyhow they don't express it
as you and I do.  Sometimes it's nearer the surface in the marsh--
but its everywhere.  We have broken the frame of the present, and
the past, the long black past of fear and hate that our
grandfathers never knew of, never suspected, is pouring back upon
us.  And the future opens like a gulf to swallow us up.  The animal
fears again and the animal rages again and the old faiths no longer
restrain it.  The cave-man, the ancestral ape, the ancestral brute
have returned.  So it is.  I can assure you I am talking realities
to you.  It is going on now everywhere.  You have been in the
marsh.  You have felt them in the marsh, but I tell you these
resurrected savageries are breathing now and thrusting everywhere.
The world is full of menace--not only here.'  He stopped short and
his spectacles flashed as he looked at me and then stared again out
of the window.

"'But,' said I, 'this is all very fine and mystical but how does it
help me?  What am I to do?'

"He said this was a mental thing and it had to be fought out in the
mind.

"'I have to go back to the marsh this evening.'

"He went on saying that the frame of the present was shattered and
could never be restored.  I had to open out--'open out', he said--
and enlarge my mind to a vaster world where the cave-man was as
present as the daily paper and a thousand years ahead was on the
doorstep.  'That is all very well,' I said, 'but what does it mean?
What am _I_ to do now?  I am asking you; what am _I_ to do now?'

"His regard came back to me.  'Fight it out if you can,' he said.
'Go back.  You won't escape by running away.  Go back and have one
more round with whatever you choose to fancy it, the Evil, the
Fear, the Ghost of Cain or THAT fellow's ghost--'

"He paused and we both looked round at the clumsy skull as though
we felt it might have something to say in the matter.

"'Broaden your mind to the new scale,' he resumed, rather more
confidentially.  'Face it if you can.  And then if you still find
you are slipping, you must try to get help.  You should go off to
London and have a definite treatment.  The man you should see is
Norbert, of--I think it is 391 Harley Street, but I can get that
for you.  He has been one of the first men to realize this
spreading miasma of the mind of which you are suffering and devise
some sort of treatment for it.  To tell you the truth, he has
helped me.  Though his methods are rough and strange.  I had some
slight touch of your trouble, and as I happened to know about him I
called him in.  And early.  He flies over to Les Noupets once or
twice a week.  There's a clinic over there. . . .'

"So much for the curator of the Eastfolk museum.  For the time he
pulled me together.  His modern scientific lingo was something I
could understand.  I felt that I was no longer being hunted darkly
and strangely and beyond any possibility of help; I was just an
experimentalist facing a disagreeable and risky but by no means
impossible challenge.

"But I had no luck in that last round with the ghosts of the cave-
men," said Dr Finchatton.  "I went back while it was still
daylight.  At the very outset before I reached my house I came upon
something dreadful.  It was a dog that had been beaten to death.
Yes; beaten to death!  You may think that in this world where so
many terrible things are happening a cruelly ill-treated dog was no
great matter.  It was to me.

"I saw it lying among the nettles by the roadside.  I thought some
motorist must have run over it and thrown it aside.  I got down to
look at it and make sure that it was dead.  It wasn't simply dead;
it was battered to a pulp.  With some blunt heavy instrument.
There couldn't have been a whole bone left in it.  Somebody must
have rained blows upon it, a frantic whirlwind of blows.

"For a medical man I know I am over-sensitive.  At any rate I went
on through the sunshine in a state of horror, at nature, at the
deep fountains of cruelty in the human make-up.  What frantic
outburst had destroyed that poor brute?  And then I had hardly been
back in my house ten minutes when another shock arrived.  This
again may seem a small matter to you.  To me it was overwhelming.
A breathless messenger came on a bicycle from the vicarage of Cross
in Slackness.  He was so scared that for some moments I could not
understand what he was telling me, and then I realized that old
Rawdon had set upon his poor old wife and done his best to kill
her.  He had knocked her down and beaten her.  'The poor old lady!'
gasped the boy.  'You better come soon.  We got him tied up in the
outhouse and she's on the bed upstairs scared to death--too
frightened to speak.  He's raving something frightful.  Frightful.
Says she tried to poison him. . . .  The language! . . .'

"I brought out my car again and went over.  I managed what I could
to make the poor old thing comfortable; he hadn't hurt her so much
as I feared, a few bruises but no bones broken, and it was chiefly
shock and amazement she suffered from; and presently two policemen
came and carried off old Rawdon to the police station at
Holdingham.  I wouldn't go down to see him.  She spoke just a word
or two as she lay there.  'Edward!' she muttered and then in
amazement 'Oh EDWARD!'  And then sharply with a note of terror
'EDWARD!' and a weak scream.  I gave her a sleeping-draught and
arranged for a woman to stay the night with her and then I went
back to my own place.

"So long as I was actively employed I kept going, but as soon as I
got home I found myself slumping.  I could eat nothing.  I drank a
lot of whisky and instead of going to bed I fell asleep in an arm-
chair by the fire.  I awoke in terror and found the fire nearly
out.  I went to bed and when at last I got to sleep the dreams
closed in on me and I sat up again starkly awake.  I got up and put
on an old dressing-gown and went downstairs and made up the fire,
determined to keep awake at any cost.  But I dozed there and then
went back to bed.  And so between the bed and the fireside I
dragged through the night.  My dreams were all a mix-up of the poor
scared old lady, the almost as pitiful old man, the ideas the
museum custodian had put in my head and, brooding over it all, that
infernal palaeolithic skull.

"More and more did the threat of that primordial Adamite dominate
me.  I could not banish that eyeless stare and that triumphant grin
from my mind, sleeping or waking.  Waking I saw it as it was in the
museum, as if it was a living presence that had set us a riddle and
was amused to hear our inadequate attempts at a solution.  Sleeping
I saw it released from all rational proportions.  It became
gigantic.  It became as vast as a cliff, a mountainous skull in
which the orbits and hollows of the jaw were huge caves.  He had an
effect--it is hard to convey these dream effects--as if he was
continually rising and yet he was always towering there.  In the
foreground I saw his innumerable descendants, swarming like ants,
swarms of human beings hurrying to and fro, making helpless
gestures of submission or deference, resisting an overpowering
impulse to throw themselves under his all-devouring shadow.
Presently these swarms began to fall into lines and columns, were
clad in uniforms, formed up and began marching and trotting towards
the black shadows under those worn and rust-stained teeth.  From
which darkness there presently oozed something--something winding
and trickling, and something that manifestly tasted very agreeably
to him.  Blood."

And then Finchatton said a queer thing.  "Little children killed by
air-raids in the street."

I made no comment.  I remained quietly attentive.  It was an
"aside", as actors used to say.  He took up his story where he had
left it.

"Morning," he resumed after an introspective pause, "found me
frantic at the telephone.  At great pains and what I am afraid will
prove ruinous expense to me, I managed to secure a locum-tenens and
forthwith I bolted off to London, gripping my sanity so to speak
with both hands, to see this man Norbert.  And it is Norbert who
has sent me here. . . .  Norbert you know is a very extraordinary
man.  He was not at all what I had expected."

Dr Finchatton stopped short.  He looked at me.  "That's all."

I nodded silently.

"Well," he said, "what do you make of it?"

"In a day or so, perhaps, I shall begin to think something about
it.  At present I don't know what to say.  It's incredible and yet--
you almost make me believe it.  I mean I don't think it really
happened--I wouldn't go so far as that--but I believe it happened
to you."

"Exactly.  I'm glad to be able to talk to a man like you.  It's
what Norbert wants me to do.  He wants me to familiarize myself
with what has just happened to me, just in the spirit in which you
have taken it, so as to be able to distinguish between the
realities of my experience, the realities of life, he calls them,
and the fears and fancies and dreams I have wrapped about them.
His idea is that I ought to see things UNFEELINGLY.  Because after
all--what do you think?"  He looked at me very earnestly.

"How much of what I have been telling you is actual concrete
happening and how much--what shall I call it?--mental reaction?
Old Rawdon attacking his wife--that was real.  That broken-up dog
was real. . . .  Norbert's idea, you know, is that I should talk it
quietly over with anyone who--who seems reasonably balanced and not
too worried about the past or the future.  So as to get these facts
as facts and not as dreads and horrors.  He wants to bring me back
so to speak to what he calls a rational insensitiveness, rational
insensitiveness, that's his formula, and so get a firmer foothold
for--whatever I have to do next."

He gulped down his wine.  "It's very good of you to have listened
to me," he said, and then as a shadow fell across the terrace
before us:  "HULLO!"



The Intolerable Psychiatrist


I disliked the shadow of Dr Norbert even before I looked up and saw
him.  He was and he meant to be an overwhelming sort of man, and
though I am indolent, self-indulgent and unenterprising I can be as
obstinate as a whole team of mules.  I braced myself for opposition
to whatever he wanted or had to say before he opened his mouth.

He was not at all the sort of person I should have expected a
psychotherapeutist to be.  A psychotherapeutist I think ought to
have calm eyes and a reassuring manner--and a certain general
neatness of self-control.  He ought to look fresh and healthy and
this fellow was distinctly cadaverous.  He was large and expansive
and untidy with lots of undisciplined black hair and thick
eyebrows, and his large dark and flashing eyes either rolled about
in his more voluble moments or came to a focus in a dramatic pause
and glared at you--not a steady look but a glare that pushed at
your face and was supported by an immense frown.  His features were
uniformly large, and he had the loose mouth of an orator and a
voice of remarkable amplitude.  He wore an old-fashioned upstanding
white collar and a loose black bow tie very much under one ear.  It
was as if he had dressed himself once for all in some remote pre-
war fashion and never changed it since.  He looked much more like
an actor on vacation than a psychotherapeutist.  He made me think
of the old Punch pictures of the Grand Old Man, or Henry Irving or
Thomas Carlyle.  A more unsuitable figure to interrupt a couple of
decent-looking modern Englishmen sitting over their apéritifs on
the terrace of the Perona Source Hotel it would be hard to imagine.

But there he was, entirely unlike anything I could have foreseen,
the great Dr Norbert, Finchatton's mental healer, hands on hips,
looking down on me in his most impressive manner.  Finchatton had
described him as unexpected, but the last thing I should have
expected was anything so large, so oracular and so antique.

"I have been watching you from above," he said as though he was God
Almighty.  "I didn't want to interrupt while Finchatton was telling
his tale.  But now I perceive you have got through with it and I
pounce."

Finchatton looked at me with a sort of silent entreaty to bear with
Norbert's extraordinary manner and hear him out.

"You've heard his story?" Norbert demanded of me.

His manner did nothing to veil the fact that he was the
psychotherapeutist and Finchatton was his "case".  "He told you
about how the cave-man dawned upon his mind?  He talked about that
terror in Cainsmarsh.  Good!  And the growing realization of evil?
Well,--how have you reacted to that?  What do you, with your
manifestly very normal mind, make of it?"

He thrust his great face, all interrogation, some inches towards
me.  "Tell me in your own words," he said, and waited like a
teacher examining a child.

"Dr Finchatton," said I, "has been relating some very extraordinary
things.  Yes.  But I should have to think them over a lot before I
could pass judgment upon them."

Norbert made the grimace of a teacher dealing with a stupid child.

"But _I_  want your reactions now.  Before you think."

"You MAY want," said I to myself.  "I can't," I said aloud.

"But it will be of very great importance to Dr Finchatton for you
to tell me now.  Never mind why."

Suddenly I heard a clock striking.  "Good heavens!" I cried,
standing up and throwing a ten-franc note to the hovering waiter.
"I shall keep my aunt waiting for lunch!  That will NEVER do."

"But you CAN'T leave this business like this!" said Norbert,
featuring an incredulous amazement.  "You can't.  It's your duty to
a fellow-creature in trouble to hear this case out and help to
rationalize it.  You MUST help us."  Glare.  "Positively I CAN'T
release you."

I turned to Finchatton.  "If Dr Finchatton," I said, "would like to
talk about it some more . . ."

"Of course he wants to talk to you some more."

I kept my eyes on Finchatton, who nodded with an intensified
appeal.

"I'll come again," I said.  "Tomorrow.  About this time.  But I
can't stay now. . . .  It's impossible."

I went down the winding road at something between a walk and a trot--
really concerned to be so late, because you know my aunt is simply
awful if anyone keeps her waiting for lunch.  I was already
doubtful about the promise I had given and a little angry at having
been forced to make it.  It was as if I had admitted some
preposterous claim upon my attention and had bought myself off.

I turned my head and saw the two men among those above me, side by
side, Norbert overshadowing Finchatton.

"Tomorrow," I called--though I suppose I was well out of earshot.

Norbert made a large gesture.

Now I did not want in the least to see this Dr Norbert any more.  I
had indeed conceived a violent antipathy for him.  I did not like
his "You-and-Finchatton-are-rabbits-and-now-I-am-going-to-dissect-
you" style.  I did not like his large enveloping voice nor the way
his brow and purpose seemed to overhang the rest of him.  And I
detest angular commanding gestures made with arms that are much too
long.  But on the other hand I had taken a real liking to Dr
Finchatton and developed a very lively interest in his story.  I
thought he had told it very vividly.  I wish I could convey the
conviction of his manner in this transcript.  Directly I got away
from him I began to think of questions I might have asked him and
to want to see him again.  I regarded Norbert as a nuisance who had
just butted in upon an interesting tale.  I dismissed Norbert from
my mind and went on thinking of Finchatton.

There was something about this story of a magic marshland into
which a man might go sane and confident, admiring the butterflies
and the flowers, and out of which presently he would come running
again frantic with fear and rage, that had seized hold upon my
imagination very strongly.  And the way in which that evil old
skull, that ancestral skull, lurking unseen at first in the
background, had slowly become visible--!  It was like something
being lit up behind a transparency.  It was an explanation that was
itself an enigma.  And now, degree by degree, those bare jaws were
being clad and covered until a phantom lip framed the grinning
teeth, and there were dark aggressive bloodshot eyes below the
beetling brows.  The caveman was becoming more and more plainly a
living presence as the story germinated in my mind.

It was a face at last and not a skull that watched me out of that
dream story.  It was absurd, but indeed it seemed to be watching
me.  It watched me all that evening and it mopped and mowed in the
night.  It made me inattentive so that in the afternoon my
combinations at croquet were unusually shortsighted and poor, and
in the evening I offended my aunt deeply by failing to play up to
my usual form.  She was against me, but as she reckoned on my
playing up to my usual form, she was surprised and perplexed by the
things I did and put quite off her game, so that she and her
partner lost heavily.  But I scarcely heeded her reproaches and I
undressed slowly, my mind full of that distant marshland so
mysteriously accursed, so monstrously overshadowed now by that
brutish revenant.  I sat for quite a long time thinking it over
before I went to bed.

Next day I got up to the Perona Source Hotel rather late.  I had
meant to be early.  I would have taken a tram but an AGENT
explained they were not running.  There had been a lightning strike
organized by the Communists and there had been a fight at the depot
in which several people had been injured.  'One must be firm these
days,' said the agent.  Consequently I had to walk the whole way.
And it was bad luck I thought, to find Dr Norbert stretching out
his long legs under a table umbrella on the terrace and no signs of
Dr Finchatton.  Norbert motioned for me to join him and I sat down
on a green chair beside his table.  I did so reluctantly.  I wanted
to make it plain that it was Finchatton I wanted to see.  I wanted
more of the story and I did not want any mental probing, judgment
dissection, earnest invasion of my private thoughts by this
pretentious individual.

"Where's your friend?" I asked.

"He cannot come down today.  It is just as well."

"I thought he had arranged--"

"HE thought he had arranged--.  But he was prevented.  As I say, it
is just as well."

"I don't see that."

"From MY point of view.  I want very much to get a common-sense
outside view of this story that fills his mind.  I want it for my
own sake as well as his."

"But how can you expect me to contribute?"

"Well--for one simple thing; do you know any part of the world
called Cainsmarsh?"

He turned round to look at me as he might have looked at an animal
he had just given an injection.

"I imagined it was somewhere in fenland."

"There is no such district in the world."

"It is a pseudonym?"

"It is a myth."

He surveyed me for a moment and then decided that for the present I
was not worth watching.  He put his two long hands palm to palm in
front of him and spoke with great deliberation staring out to sea.
"Our friend," he said, "WAS a doctor near Ely.  Everything he told
you was true and everything he told you was a lie.  He is troubled
beyond reason by certain things and the only way in which he can
express them even to himself is by a fable."

"But some of these things--really happened?"

"Oh yes.  There WAS a case of gross cruelty to a dog.  There WAS a
poor old drunken parson who beat his wife.  Things of that sort are
happening all over the world every day.  They are in the nature of
things.  If you cannot accept things like that, sir, YOU CANNOT
LIVE.  And Finchatton really went to the Tressider Museum at Ely,
and Cunningham, the custodian, had the sense to spot his condition
and send him on to me.  But the mischief was already done to him
before he went into the marsh.  He's told you practically
everything--but as though he showed it through bottle glass that
distorted it all.  And the reason why he has made it all up into
that story--"

Dr Norbert turned upon me, putting his arms akimbo and glaring at
my face.  He spoke with slow deliberation, as if he was speaking in
capital letters, "--is because the realities that are overwhelming
him are so monstrous and frightful that he has to transform them
into this fairy tale about old skulls and silences in butterfly
land, in the hope of getting them down to the dimensions of an
hallucination and so presently expelling them from his thoughts."

The expression of his face made me uncomfortable.  I turned and
beckoned the waiter for another vermouth in order to recover my
composure.  "And what," I asked offhandedly, "may those more
terrible realities be?"

"Do you never read a daily newspaper?" asked Dr Norbert.

"Not very intently.  Most of the stuff seems to me to be either
pompous or wilfully disagreeable.  But I do The Times Cross-Word
Puzzle nearly every day.  And I read most of the tennis and croquet
stuff and so on.  Have I missed much?"

"You've missed the things that have made Finchatton mad."

"Mad?"

"Didn't he repeat my phrase?--endemic panic?  A contagion in our
atmosphere.  A sickness in the very grounds of our lives, breaking
out here and there and filling men's minds with a paralysing,
irrational fear?"

"He did use that expression."

"Yes, sir.  And it is what I am dealing with here.  It is what even
I am only beginning to realize.  A new Plague--of the soul.  A
distress of the mind that has long lurked in odd corners of the
mind, an endemic disorder, rising suddenly and spreading into a
world epidemic.  The story our friend put away into a sort of
fairyland fenland is really the story of thousands of people today--
and it will be the story of hundreds of thousands tomorrow.  You
are untroubled.  As yet. . . .  Maybe you are immune. . . .  It is
most important to me just now in my study of this increasing
malaise that I should realize the reaction of an uninfected mind."

"I've never been good soil for out-of-the-way ideas," I said.
"Still I don't want to take any risks.  You don't think that
presently I too shall begin to be frightened of the dark and scared
in the open, and see ancestral apes and savages looming up over the
world?"

He put his big hand across the table and pressed my arm for a
moment.  "If you do," he said, glaring portentously, "have
courage."

It flashed into my mind abruptly that this man was really as mad or
madder than Finchatton.  I put the question to him pat.

"Dr Norbert, have YOU by any chance--got infected?"

The glare became intensified.  He lifted up his face so to speak
and then brought it down like a hammer on the word.

"Yes."

He spoke with such emphasis that my face was bedewed.

"I was an early case," he said.  "I had to deal with myself.  There
was nobody to help me.  I had to study myself.  I have been through
it all, sir.  And crawled out on the other side.  A salted man,
immunized.  At the price of a monstrous struggle. . . ."

And with that he launched out upon the most astonishing
dissertation I have ever heard.  He made a little pause before the
discourse came.  What he had to say couldn't be said very well from
a lounge chair.  Presently he was sitting up and gripping his chair
with both hands.  Then he stood up and talked and walked about the
terrace in front of me--no longer talking so much as orating.  I
have a fairly retentive memory but it would be impossible for me
now to give you a full report of all the strange tissue of
assertion and arguments he poured forth.  Some of his phrases and
terms of thought I will quote.  Finchatton's story had sounded like
fantasy.  This had no quality of fantasy about it at all.  It began
like pseudo-science and philosophy, but gradually it became more
and more a booming, disconcerting exhortation.  We were to take
hold of life--GRIP it.  Some of his ideas Finchatton had already
handed on to me.  I recognized the phrases.  There was that about
'breaking the Frame of the Present'.

"But what does that MEAN?" I said almost irritably.

"Animals," he said, "live wholly in the present.  They are framed
in immediate things.  So are really unsophisticated people.
Israeli, Sands, Murphy, a crowd of people have been working on
that."  He rattled off a score of names but these are all that I
remember.  "But we men, we have been probing and piercing into the
past and future.  We have been multiplying memories, histories,
traditions, we have filled ourselves with forebodings and plannings
and apprehensions.  And so our worlds have become overwhelmingly
vast for us, terrific, appalling.  Things that had seemed forgotten
for ever have suddenly come back into the very present of our
consciousness."

"In other words," said I, trying to keep him moored to current
realities, "we have found out about the cave-man."

"Found out about him!" he shouted.  "We live in his presence.  He
has never died.  He is anything but dead.  Only--"

He came close and tapped my shoulder.

"--Only he was shut off from us and hidden.  For a long time.  And
now we see him here face to face and his grin derides us.  Man is
still what he was.  Invincibly bestial, envious, malicious, greedy.
Man, sir, unmasked and disillusioned is the same fearing, snarling,
fighting beast he was a hundred thousand years ago.  These are no
metaphors, sir.  What I tell you is the monstrous reality.  The
brute has been marking time and dreaming of a progress it has
failed to make.  Any archaeologist will tell you as much; modern
man has no better skull, no better brain.  Just a cave-man, more or
less trained.  There has been no real change, no real escape.
Civilization, progress, all THAT, we are discovering, was a
delusion.  Nothing was secured.  Nothing.  For a time man built
himself in, into his neat little PRESENT world of Gods and
Providences, rainbow promises and so forth.  It was artificial, it
was artistic, fictitious.  We are only beginning to realize HOW
artificial.  Now it is breaking down, Mr Frobisher.  It is breaking
down all about us and we seem unable to prevent it.  We SEEM. . . .
No escape appears.  No, sir.  Civilization so far has been a
feeble, inadaptable falsity.  And now it is found out; Fate has
been too much for it.  A stunning realization, sir!  And when
sensitive, unprepared men like our poor friend Finchatton become
aware of it, they show themselves too weak to face it.  They refuse
to face a world so grim and great as this world really is.  They
take refuge in stories of hauntings and personal madness--in the
hope of some sort of exorcism, something they think will be a
cure. . . .  There is no such cure.  There is no such way now of
dressing up these facts and putting them aside.

"So, sir, they have to be faced," he roared.  "They have to be
faced."  He seemed to be addressing himself not simply to me but to
some large public meeting.  His vast gestures ignored me.  "The
time when men could be put in blinkers to save them from seeing too
much is past.  Past for ever!  There can be no more religions of
reassurance.  No churches of 'There--there!'  THAT sort of thing is
at an end."

"And then?" said I very quietly.  Because the louder he shouted,
the more coldly resistant I became.

He sat down and gripped my arm again.  He became persuasively
confidential.  From bawling, his voice sank to a deep heavy
undertone.  "Madness, sir, from the mental side, is poor Nature's
answer to overwhelming fact.  It is flight.  And today all over the
world, INTELLECTUAL MEN ARE GOING MAD!  They are dithering, because
they realize that the fight against this cave-man who is over us,
who is in us, who is indeed US, is going against these imaginary
selves.  The world is no longer safe for anything.  It was sheer
delusion that we had Him under.  Him!  The pursuing brute who never
desists."

By a movement that I hoped seemed inadvertent, I freed my arm from
his clutch.  I had an absurd feeling that I was like that wedding
guest who was gripped by the Ancient Mariner.  "But then," I said,
putting my hands in my pockets and leaning back so as to be out of
reach of any fresh attempt to grab me; "What do you think you are
doing with Finchatton?  What do you think has to be done?"

Dr Norbert waved his arms about and then stood up.  "I tell you,
sir," he said, shouting down at me as though I was a score of yards
off, "in the end he has to do what we all have to do.  Face the
facts!  Face the facts, sir!  Go through with it.  Survive if you
can and perish if you can't.  Do as I have done and shape your mind
to a new scale.  Only giants can save the world from complete
relapse and so we--we who care for civilization--have to become
giants.  We have to bind a harder, stronger civilization like steel
about the world.  We have to make such a mental effort as the stars
have never witnessed yet.  Arise, O mind of Man!"  (He called me
that!)  "Or be for ever defeated."

I wanted to say I preferred to be defeated without making any fuss
about it, but he gave me no chance to say that.

For now indeed he was fairly raving.  There was even a touch of
froth on his lips.  He paced up and down and talked on and on, in a
fine frenzy.

I suppose from first to last throughout the ages decent people of
my sort have had to listen to this kind of thing, but it seemed to
me beyond all reason that I should have to listen to it on the
terrace of the Source Hotel at Perona above Les Noupets on a lovely
morning in this year of grace nineteen hundred and thirty-six.  He
was striding up and down now like a Hebrew prophet.  It may look
all right as a part of history, this sort of rhetoric, this epoch-
making and all that, but in real life it is hoarse and outrageous.
It's damned bad manners--to be plain about it.  I ceased to mark or
remember half the things he said.

There was no answering it.  One could as soon swim up the falls of
Niagara.

He made it more and more plain that he was exhorting me.  Me
personally.  I never had such a ballyragging.  He was warning me to
brace my mind to escape from the Wrath to Come.  He called it that--
'Wrath to Come'.  He made me think of Peter the Hermit raging
through the quiet cities of eleventh-century Christendom and
starting all that trouble about the Crusades.  He made me think of
Savonarola and John Knox and all the disturbing people who have
rushed shouting across history--leaving it very much as they found
it, telling people to give up their lives, go to their tents, O
Israel, take up arms, storm the Tuileries, smash the Winter Palace,
and a score of such outrageous things.  At little old Les Noupets,
mind you.

He reeled off a list of atrocities, murders and horrors all over
the world.  I suppose there IS a rather unusual amount of massacre
and torture going on nowadays.  I suppose the outlook IS pretty
black.  I suppose there may be frightful wars, air raids and
pogroms ahead of us.  But what am _I_  to do about it?  What was
the good of bow-wow-wowing at me?  The intensity of his manner
could not hide the fact that he had no certitude even in his own
mind, that at best he was struggling with only the blank shadows of
ideas.  Whenever I tried to get in an enquiring word, he would
raise his voice and boom over me.  "I tell you!" he would roar up.

But that was just what he didn't do--and apparently couldn't do.

"In a little while," he said, "there will be no ease, no security,
no comfort any more."  (Thank Heaven! he did not say I was 'living
on the brink of a volcano'.)  "There will be no choice before a
human being but to be either a driven animal or a stern devotee to
that true civilization, that disciplined civilization, that has
never yet been achieved.  Victim or Vigilante.  And that, my
friend, means you!  I say it to YOU!  YOU!"  And he pointed a lean
forefinger.

As there was no one else present--for the waiter had gone inside--
there was no reason whatever for that 'you' and that pointing
finger.  Just want of proportion. . . .

Yet--.  It is a most unpleasant thing to admit but these two men
HAVE in a sort of way hypnotized me after all, and put something of
this anxiety and something of this haunting of theirs upon me.  I
try and get them in a proper perspective by writing down this
story, but the mere writing of it makes me realize how much I can't
detach myself.  I can no more get rid of it by telling it to you
than Finchatton could get rid of it by telling it to me.  I did not
know that one could be hypnotized in this fashion, by people just
sitting about or talking to you.  I thought you had to sit still
and give yourself up to hypnotism or else there was nothing doing.
But now I find I don't sleep as well as I used to do, I catch
myself anxious about world affairs, I read evil things between the
lines in the newspapers, and usually very faintly but sometimes
quite plainly I see, behind the transparent front of things, that
cave-man face. . . .  How was it Finchatton put it?--"continually
rising and yet always towering up there".  And I have to admit I am
not so even-tempered as I was in conversation.  The other day I
even contradicted my aunt with some asperity, to our mutual
astonishment.  And I snapped at a waiter. . . .

I did not realize the seriousness of this business until I had this
scene with Norbert.  That was what made me so restive and after I
broke away from him I took care to see no more of him or
Finchatton.  Yet all the same the mischief had been started in me
and it grows.  In those two brief mornings, I got myself infected,
fool that I was to listen to them! and now the infection is working
in me.

I resent the whole business.  What is the good of putting this
horror of Cainsmarsh upon a man and not telling him exactly what to
do about it?  I DO realize that our present world is going to
pieces.  I quite see that we are still under the sway of the cave-
man and that he is staging a tremendous come-back.  I am surprised
I didn't see all that before.  Already I have dreams about that
giant skull, quite unpleasant dreams.  But what is the good of
talking about them?  If I told my aunt any of this, she would say I
was off my head.  What can a fellow like me do about it all?

Study it up--enlarge my mind to a new scale?  Become "giant-
minded"?  WHAT a phrase!  Build up a new civilization of steel and
power in the place of the one that is collapsing? . . .  Me? . . .
Look at my bringing up?  Is it IN me?

It is too much to expect of our sort of people.

I'm ready to fall in with anything that seems promising.  I'm all
for peace, order, social justice, service and all that.  But if I'm
to THINK!  If I'm to find out what to do with myself!

That's too much.

I made my break-away from Norbert's flooding eloquence that morning
with some considerable difficulty.  I stood up.  "I must be going,"
I said.  "I have to play croquet with my aunt at half-past twelve."

"But what does croquet matter," he cried in that intolerable voice
of his, "if your world is falling in ruins about you?"

He made a move almost as though he would impede my retreat.  He
just wanted to go on being apocalyptic.  But I had had enough of
this apocalyptic stuff.

I looked him in the face, firmly but politely.  I said, "I don't
care.  The world MAY be going to pieces.  The Stone Age may be
returning.  This may, as you say, be the sunset of civilization.
I'm sorry, but I can't help it this morning.  I have other
engagements.  All the same--laws of the Medes and Persians--I am
going to play croquet with my aunt at half-past twelve today."



End of this Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook
The Croquet Player by H. G. Wells




Project Gutenberg Australia


