
Project Gutenberg Australia

A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook

Title:      The Shadow of the Wolf
Author:     R Austin Freeman
eBook No.:  0500491.txt
Date first posted:          May 2005
Date most recently updated: August 2018

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

*

CONTENTS

I: In which Two Men go forth and One Arrives
II: In which Margaret Purcell receives a Letter
III: In which Margaret Purcell consults Mr. Penfield
IV: In which Margaret confers with Dr. Thorndyke
V: In which Thorndyke makes a Few Inquiries
VI: In which Mr. Varney prepares a Deception
VII: The Flash Note Factory
VIII: In which Thorndyke tries over the Moves
IX: In which Mr. Penfield receives a Shock
X: In which Thorndyke sees a New Light
XI: In which Varney has an Inspiration
XII: In which Varney once more Pulls the Strings
XIII: In which the Medico-Legal Worm Arrives
XIV: In which Mr. Varney is Disillusioned
XV: In which Thorndyke opens the Attack
XVI: In which John Rodney is Convinced
XVII: In which there is a Meeting and a Farewell

*

I: In which Two Men go forth and One Arrives

ABOUT half-past eight on a fine, sunny June morning a small yacht crept
out of Sennen Cove, near the Land's End, and headed for the open sea. On
the shelving beach of the Cove two women and a man, evidently visitors
(or "foreigners," to use the local term), stood watching her departure
with valedictory waving of cap or handkerchief; and the boatman who had
put the crew on board, aided by two of his comrades, was hauling his boat
up above the tide-mark.

A light northerly breeze filled the yacht's sails and drew her gradually
seaward. The figures of her crew dwindled to the size of a doll's, shrank
with the increasing distance to the magnitude of insects, and at last,
losing all individuality, became mere specks merged in the form of the
fabric that bore them. At this point the visitors turned their faces
inland and walked away up the beach, and the boatman, having opined that
"she be fetchin' a tidy offing," dismissed the yacht from his mind and
reverted to the consideration of a heap of netting and some invalid
lobster-pots.

On board the receding craft two men sat in the little cockpit. They
formed the entire crew, for the Sandhopper was only a ship's lifeboat,
timber and decked, of light draught, and, in the matter of spars and
canvas, what the art critics would call "reticent."

Both men, despite the fineness of the weather, wore yellow oilskins and
sou'westers, and that was about all they had in common. In other respects
they made a curious contrast: the one small, slender, sharp-featured,
dark almost to swarthiness, and restless and quick in his movements; the
other large, massive, red-faced, blue-eyed, with the rounded outlines
suggestive of ponderous strength--a great ox of a man, heavy, stolid,
but much less unwieldy than he looked.

The conversation incidental to getting the yacht under way had ceased,
and silence had fallen on the occupants of the cockpit. The big man
grasped the tiller and looked sulky, which was probably his usual aspect,
and the small man watched him furtively. The land was nearly two miles
distant when the latter broke the silence with a remark very similar to
that of the boatman on the beach.

"You're not going to take the shore on board, Purcell. Where are we
supposed to be going to?"

"I am going outside the Longships," was the stolid answer.

"So I see," rejoined the other. "It's hardly the shortest course for
Penzance, though."

"I like to keep an offing on this coast," said Purcell; and once more the
conversation languished.

Presently the smaller man spoke again, this time in a more cheerful and
friendly tone.

"Joan Haygarth has come on wonderfully the last few months; getting quite
a fine-looking girl. Don't you think so?"

"Yes," answered Purcell, "and so does Phil Rodney."

"You're right," agreed the other. "But she isn't a patch on her sister,
though, and never will be. I was looking at Maggie as we came down the
beach this morning and thinking what a handsome girl she is. Don't you
agree with me?"

Purcell stooped to look under the boom, and answered without turning his
head:

"Yes, she's all right."

"All right!" exclaimed the other. "Is that the way?"

"Look here, Varney," interrupted Purcell, "I don't want to discuss my
wife's looks with you or any other man. She'll do for me, or I shouldn't
have married her."

A deep coppery flush stole into Varney's cheeks. But he had brought the
rather brutal snub on himself, and apparently had the fairness to
recognize the fact, for he mumbled an apology and relapsed into silence.

When he next spoke he did so with a manner diffident and uneasy, as
though approaching a disagreeable or difficult subject.

"There's a little matter, Dan, that I've been wanting to speak to you
about when we got a chance of a private talk." He glanced a little
anxiously at his stolid companion, who grunted, and then, without
removing his gaze from the horizon ahead, replied: "You've a pretty fair
chance now, seeing that we shall be bottled up together for another five
or six hours. And it's private enough, unless you bawl loud enough to be
heard at the Longships."

It was not a gracious invitation. But that Varney had hardly expected;
and if he resented the rebuff he showed no signs of annoyance, for
reasons which appeared when he opened his subject.

"What I wanted to say," he resumed, "was this. We're both doing pretty
well now on the square. You must be positively piling up the shekels, and
I can earn a decent living, which is all I want. Why shouldn't we drop
this flash note business?"


Purcell kept his blue eye fixed on the horizon, and appeared to ignore
the question; but after an interval, and without moving a muscle, he said
gruffly, "Go on," and Varney continued:

"The lay isn't what it was, you know. At first it was all plain sailing.
The notes were first-class copies, and not a soul suspected anything
until they were presented at the bank. Then the murder was out, and the
next little trip that I made was a very different affair. Two or three of
the notes were suspected quite soon after I had changed them, and I had
to be precious fly, I can tell you, to avoid complications. And now that
the second batch has come into the bank, the planting of fresh specimens
is no sinecure. There isn't a money changer on the Continent of Europe that
isn't keeping his weather eyeball peeled, to say nothing of the
detectives that the bank people have sent abroad."

He paused and looked appealingly at his companion. But Purcell, still
minding his helm, only growled: "Well?"

"Well, I want to chuck it, Dan. When you've had a run of luck and
pocketed your winnings is the time to stop play."

"You've come into some money then, I take it," said Purcell.

"No, I haven't. But I can make a living now by safe and respectable
means, and I'm sick of all this scheming and dodging with the gaol
everlastingly under my lee."

"The reason I asked," said Purcell, "is that there is a trifle
outstanding. You hadn't forgotten that, I suppose?"

"No, I hadn't forgotten it, but I thought that perhaps you might be
willing to let me down a bit easily."

The other man pursed up his thick lips, but continued to gaze stonily
over the bow.

"Oh, that's what you thought, hey?" he said; and then, after a pause, he
continued: "I fancy you must have lost sight of some of the facts when
you thought that. Let me just remind you how the case stands. To begin
with, you start your career with a little playful forgery and
embezzlement; you blue the proceeds, and you are mug enough to be found
out. Then I come in. I compound the affair with old Marston for a couple
of thousand, and practically clean myself out of every penny I possess,
and he consents to regard your temporary absence in the light of a
holiday.

"Now why do I do this? Am I a philanthropist? Devil a bit. I'm a man of
business. Before I ladle out that two thousand, I make a business
contract with you. I happen to possess the means of making and the skill
to make a passable imitation of the Bank of England paper; you are a
skilled engraver and a plausible scamp. I am to supply you with paper
blanks; you are to engrave plates, print the notes, and get them changed.
I am to take two-thirds of the proceeds, and, although I have done the
most difficult part of the work, I agree to regard my share of the
profits as constituting repayment of the loan. Our contract amounts to
this: I lend you two thousand without security--with an infernal amount
of insecurity, in fact--you 'promise, covenant, and agree,' as the
lawyers say, to hand me back ten thousand in instalments, being the
products of our joint industry. It is a verbal contract which I have no
means of enforcing; but I trust you to keep your word, and up to the
present you have kept it. You have paid me a little over four thousand.
Now you want to cry off and leave the balance unpaid. Isn't that the
position?"

"Not exactly," said Varney. "I'm not crying off the debt; I only want
time. Look here, Dan: I'm making about five-fifty a year now. That isn't
much, but I'll manage to let you have a hundred a year out of it. What do
you say to that?"

Purcell laughed scornfully. "A hundred a year to pay off six thousand!
That'll take just sixty years, and as I'm now forty-three, I shall be
exactly a hundred and three years of age when the last instalment is
paid. I think, Varney, you'll admit that a man of a hundred and three is
getting a bit past his prime."

"Well, I'll pay you something down to start. I've saved about eighteen
hundred pounds out of the note business. You can have that now, and I'll
pay off as much as I can at a time until I'm clear. Remember that if I
should happen to get clapped in chokee for twenty years or so you won't
get anything. And, I tell you, it's getting a risky business."

"I'm willing to take the risk," said Purcell.

"I dare say you are!" Varney retorted passionately, "because it's my
risk. If I am grabbed, it's my racket. You sit out. It's I who passed the
notes, and I'm known to be a skilled engraver. That'll be good enough for
them. They won't trouble about who made the paper."

"I hope not," said Purcell.

"Of course they wouldn't, and you know I shouldn't give you away."

"Naturally. Why should you? Wouldn't do you any good."

"Well, give me a chance, Dan," Varney pleaded. "This business is getting
on my nerves. I want to be quit of it. You've had four thousand; that's a
hundred per cent. You haven't done so badly."

"I didn't expect to do badly. I took a big risk. I gambled two thousand
for ten."

"Yes, and you got me out of the way while you put the screw on to poor
old Haygarth to make his daughter marry you."

It was an indiscreet thing to say, but Purcell's stolid indifference to
his danger and distress had ruffled Varney's temper somewhat.

Purcell, however, was unmoved. "I don't know," he said, "what you mean by
getting you out of the way. You were never in the way. You were always
hankering after Maggie, but I could never see that she wanted you."

"Well, she certainly didn't want you," Varney retorted, "and, for that
matter, I don't much think she wants you now."

For the first time Purcell withdrew his eye from the horizon to turn it
on his companion. And an evil eye it was, set in the great sensual face,
now purple with anger.

"What the devil do you mean?" he exclaimed furiously, "you infernal
sallow-faced little whipper snapper! If you mention my wife's name again
I'll knock you on the head and pitch you over board."

Varney's face flushed darkly, and for a moment he was inclined to try the
wager of battle. But the odds were impossible, and if Varney was not a
coward, neither was he a fool. But the discussion was at an end. Nothing
was to be hoped for now. Those indiscreet words of provocation had
rendered further pleading impossible; and as Varney relapsed into sullen
silence, it was with the knowledge that, for weary years to come, he was
doomed, at best, to tread the perilous path of crime, or, more probably,
to waste the brightest years of his life in a convict prison. For it is a
strange fact, and a curious commentary on our current ethical notions,
that neither of these rascals even contemplated as a possibility the
breach of a merely verbal covenant. A promise had been given. That was
enough. Without a specific release, the terms of that promise must be
fulfilled to the letter. How many righteous men--prim lawyers or
strait-laced, church-going men of business--would have looked at the
matter in the same way?

The silence that settled down on the yacht and the aloofness that
encompassed the two men were conducive to reflection. Each of the men
ignored the presence of the other. When the course was altered southerly,
Purcell slacked out the sheets with his own hand as he put up the helm.
He might have been sailing single-handed. And Varney watched him askance,
but made no move, sitting hunched up on the locker, nursing a slowly
matured hatred and thinking his thoughts.

Very queer thoughts they were, rambling, but yet connected and very
vivid. He was following out the train of events that might have happened,
pursuing them to their possible consequences. Supposing Purcell had
carried out his threat? Well, there would have been a pretty tough
struggle, for Varney was no weakling. But a struggle with that solid
fifteen stone of flesh could end only in one way. He glanced at the great
purple, shiny hand that grasped the knob of the tiller. Not the sort of
hand that you would want at your throat! No, there was no doubt; he would
have gone overboard.

And what then? Would Purcell have gone back to Sennen Cove, or sailed
alone into Penzance? In either case, he would have had to make up some
sort of story, and no one could have contradicted him, whether the story
was believed or not. But it would have been awkward for Purcell.

Then there was the body: That would have washed up sooner or later, as
much of it as the lobsters had left. Well, lobsters don't eat clothes or
bones, and a dent in the skull might take some accounting for. Very
awkward, this, for Purcell. He would probably have had to clear out--to
make a bolt for it, in short.

The mental picture of this great bully fleeing in terror from the
vengeance of the law gave Varney appreciable pleasure. Most of his life
he had been borne down by the moral and physical weight of this
domineering brute. At school Purcell had fagged him; he had even bullied
him up at Cambridge; and now he had fastened on for ever like the Old Man
of the Sea. And Purcell always got the best of it. When he, Varney, had
come back from Italy after that unfortunate little affair, behold! the
girl whom they had both wanted (and who had wanted neither of them) had
changed from Maggie Haygarth into Maggie Purcell. And so it was even unto
this day. Purcell, once a book-keeper in a paper-mill, now a prosperous
"financier"--a money-lender, as Varney more than suspected--spent a
part of his secret leisure making, in absolute safety, those paper
blanks, which he, Varney, must risk his liberty to change into money.
Yes, it was quite pleasant to think of Purcell sneaking from town to
town, from country to country, with the police at his heels.

But in these days of telegraphs and extradition there isn't much chance
for a fugitive. Purcell would have been caught to a certainty, and he
would have been hanged; no doubt of it. And, passing lightly over less
attractive details, Varney considered luxuriously the circumstances of
the execution. What a figure he would have made, that great human ox,
turning round and round at the end of a taut rope, like a baron of beef
on a colossal roasting-jack! Varney looked gloatingly at his companion,
considered his large sullen face, and thought how it would swell and grow
purple as the rope tightened round the thick crimson neck.

A disagreeable picture, perhaps, but not to Varney, who saw it through
the distorting medium of years of accumulated dislike. Then, too, there
was the consideration that in the very moment that those brawny limbs had
ceased to twitch Maggie would have been free--would have been a widow.
Not that that would have concerned him, Varney: he would have been in
some Cornish churchyard, with a dent in his skull. Still, it was a
pleasant reflection.

The imagined picture of the execution gave him quite a lengthy
entertainment. Then his errant thoughts began to spread out in search of
other possibilities. For, after all, it was not an absolute certainty
that Purcell could have got him overboard. There was just the chance that
he might have gone overboard himself. That would have been a very
different affair.

Varney settled himself composedly to consider the new and interesting
train of consequences that would thus have been set going. They were more
agreeable to contemplate than the others, because they did not include
his own demise. The execution scene made no appearance in this version.
The salient fact was that his oppressor would have vanished; that the
intolerable burden of his servitude would have been lifted for ever; that
he would have been free.

The thought of his regained freedom set him dreaming of the future--the
future that might have been if he could have been rid of this monstrous
parasite; the future that might even have held a place for Maggie--for
she would have been free, too. It was all very pleasant to think about,
though rather tantalizing. He almost wished he had let Purcell try to put
him over.

Of course, some explanation would have to be given, some sort of story
told, and people might not have believed him. Well, they could have
pleased themselves about that. To be sure, there would have been the
body; but if there were no marks of violence, what of it? Besides, it
really need never have washed ashore: that could easily have been
prevented, and if the body had never been found, who was to say that the
man had gone overboard at all?

This, again, was a new view of the case, and it set his thoughts
revolving afresh. He found himself roughly sketching out the conditions
under which the body might have vanished for ever. It was mere idle
speculation to while away a dull hour with an uncongenial companion, and
he let his thoughts ramble at large. Now he was away in the imagined
future, a future of peace and prosperity and honourable effort; and now
his thoughts came back unbidden to fill in some forgotten detail. One
moment he was dreamily wondering whether Maggie would ever have listened
to him, ever have come to care for him; the next, he was back in the
yacht's cabin, where hung from a hook on the bulkhead the revolver that
the Rodneys used to practise at floating bottles. It was usually loaded,
he knew, but if not, there was a canvas bag full of cartridges in the
starboard locker. Again he found himself dreaming of the home that he
would have had, a home very different from the cheerless lodgings in
which he moped at present; and then his thoughts had flitted back to the
yacht's hold, and were busying themselves with the row of
half-hundredweights that rested on the on either side of the kelson.

It was a curious mental state, rambling, seemingly incoherent, yet quite
purposeful, the attention oscillating between the great general idea and
its various component details. He was like a painter roughing the
preliminary sketch of a picture, at first carelessly smearing in the
general effect, then pausing from time to time to sharpen an edge, to
touch in a crisp light, to define the shape of a shadow, but never losing
sight of the central motive. And as in the sketch definable shapes begin
to grow out of the formless expanse, and a vague suggestion crystallizes
into an intelligible composition, so in Varney's mind a process of
gradual integration turned a vague and general idea into a clear picture,
sharp, vivid, complete.

When Varney had thus brought his mental picture, so to speak, to a
finish, its completeness surprised him. It was so simple, so secure. He
had actually planned out the scheme of a murder; and behold! there was
nothing in it. Anyone could have done it, and no one could have been any
the wiser. Here he found himself wondering whether many murders passed
undetected. They well might if murders were as easy and as safe as this.
A dangerous reflection for an injured and angry man. And at this critical
point his meditations were broken in on by Purcell, continuing the
conversation as if there had been no pause.

"So you can take it from me, Varney, that I expect you to stick to your
bargain. I paid down my money, and I'm going to have my pound of flesh."

"You won't agree to any sort of compromise?"

"No. There are six thousand pounds owing. If you've got the money you can
hand it over. If you haven't, you'll have to go on the lay and get it.
That's all I've got to say. So now you know."

It was a brutal thing to say, and it was brutally said. But more than
that: it was inopportune--or opportune, as you will. For it came as a
sort of infernal doxology to the devil's anthem that had been, all
unknown, ringing in Varney's soul.

Purcell had spoken without looking round. That was his unpleasant habit.
Had he looked at his companion, he might have been startled. A change in
Varney's face might have given him pause: a warm flush, a sparkle of the
eye, a look of elation, of settled purpose, deadly, inexorable. The look
of a man who has made a fateful resolution. But he never looked, and the
warning of the uplifted axe passed him by.

It was so simple, so secure! That was the burden of the song that echoed
in Varney's brain. So safe! And there abroad were the watchful
money-changers waiting for the clever forger to come once too often.
There were the detectives lurking in ambush for him. No safety there!
Rather the certainty of swift disaster, with the sequel of judge and
jury, the clang of an iron door, and thereafter the dreary prison eating
up the years of his life.

He glanced over the sea. They had opened the South Coast now, and he
could see, afar off, a fleet of black-sailed luggers heading east. They
wouldn't be in his way. Nor would the big four-master that was creeping
away to the west, for she was hull down already; and other ships there
were none. There was one hindrance, though. Dead ahead the Wolf Rock
lighthouse rose from the blue water, its red-and-white-ringed tower
looking like some gaudily painted toy. The keepers of lonely light houses
have a natural habit of watching the passing shipping through their
glasses, and it was possible that one of their telescopes might be
pointed at the yacht at this very moment. That was a complication.

Suddenly there came down the wind a sharp report like the firing of a
gun, quickly followed by a second. Both men recognized the duplicate
report and both looked round. It was the explosive signal from the
Longships lighthouse; but when they looked there was no lighthouse to be
seen, and the dark blue heaving water faded away at the foot of an
advancing wall of vapour.

Purcell cursed volubly. A pretty place, this, to be caught in a fog! And
then, as his eye lighted on his companion, he demanded angrily: "What the
devil are you grinning at?" For Varney, drunk with suppressed excitement,
snapped his fingers at rocks and shoals; he was thinking only of the
light-keeper's telescope and of the revolver that hung on the bulkhead.
He must make some excuse presently to go below and secure that revolver.

But no excuse was necessary. The opportunity came of itself. After a
hasty glance at the vanishing land and another at the compass, Purcell
put up the helm to jibe the yacht round on to an easterly course. As she
came round, the single headsail that she carried in place of jib and
foresail shivered for a few seconds and then filled suddenly on the
opposite tack. And at this moment the halyard parted with a loud snap,
the end of the rope flew through the blocks, and, in an instant, the sail
was down and its upper half trailing in the water alongside.

Purcell swore furiously, but kept an eye to business. "Run below,
Varney," said he, "and fetch up that coil of new rope out of the
starboard locker while I haul the sail on board. And look alive. We don't
want to drift down on to the Wolf."

Varney obeyed with silent alacrity and a curious feeling of elation. It
was going to be even easier and safer than he had thought. He slipped
through the hatch into the cabin, and, as he heard Purcell scrambling
along the side-deck overhead, he quietly took the revolver from its hook
and examined the chambers. Finding them all loaded, he cocked the hammer
and slipped the weapon carefully into the inside breast-pocket of his
oilskin coat. Then he took the coil of rope from the locker and went on
deck.

As he emerged from the hatch he perceived that the yacht was already
enveloped in fog, which drifted past in steamy clouds and swirling
streamers, and that she had come up head to wind. Purcell was kneeling on
the forecastle, tugging at the sail, which had caught under the forefoot,
and punctuating his efforts with deep-voiced curses.

Varney stole silently along the deck, steadying himself by mast and
shroud, softly laid down the coil of rope, and approached. Purcell was
quite engrossed with his task; his back was towards Varney, his face over
the side, intent on the entangled sail. It was a chance in a thousand.

With scarcely a moment's hesitation Varney stooped forward, steadying
himself with a hand on the little windlass, and, softly drawing forth the
revolver, pointed it at the back of Purcell's head, at the spot where the
back seam of his sou'wester met the brim. The report rang out, but weak
and flat in that open space, and a cloud of smoke mingled with the fog;
but it blew away immediately, and showed Purcell almost unchanged in
posture, crouching on the sail with his chin resting on the little rim of
bulwark, while behind him his murderer, as if turned into bronze, still
stood stooping forward, one hand grasping the windlass, the other still
pointing the revolver.

Thus the two figures remained for some seconds motionless like some
horrible waxworks, until the little yacht, lifting to the swell, gave a
more than usually lively curvet, when Purcell rolled over on to his back,
and Varney relaxed the rigidity of his posture like a golf player who has
watched his ball drop. He bent over the prostrate figure with no emotion
but curiosity. Looked into the wide-open, clear blue eyes, noted how the
great red face had faded to a pallid mauve, against which the blood on
lips and chin stood out like the painted patches on a clown's face; but
he felt not a single twinge of compunction.

Purcell was dead. That was the salient fact. The head wagged to and fro
as the yacht pitched and rolled, the limp arms and legs seemed to twitch,
the limp body to writhe uneasily. But Varney was not disturbed. Lifeless
things will move on an unsteady deck. He was only interested to notice
how the passive movements produced the illusion of life. But it was only
illusion. Purcell was dead. There was no doubt of that.

The double report from the Longships came down the wind, and then, as if
in answer, a prolonged deep bellow. That was the fog-horn of the
lighthouse on the Wolf Rock, and it sounded surprisingly near. But, of
course, these signals were meant to be heard at a distance. Then a stream
of hot sunshine, pouring down on deck, startled him and made him hurry.
The body must be got overboard before the fog lifted. With an uneasy
glance at the clear sky over head, he hastily cast off the broken halyard
from its cleat and cut off a couple of fathoms. Then he hurried below
and, lifting the trap in the cabin floor, hoisted out one of the iron
half-hundredweights with which the yacht was ballasted. As he stepped on
deck with the weight in his hand the sun was shining overhead; but the
fog was still thick below, and the horn sounded once more from the Wolf.
And again it struck him as surprisingly near. He passed the length of
rope that he had cut off twice round Purcell's body, hauled it tight, and
secured it with a knot. Then he made the ends fast to the handle of the
iron weight.

Not much fear of Purcell drifting ashore now! That weight would hold him
as long as there was anything to hold. But it had taken some time to do,
and the warning bellow from the Wolf seemed to draw nearer and nearer. He
was about to heave the body over when his eye fell on the dead man's sou'
wester, which had fallen off when the body rolled over. That hat must be
got rid of, for Purcell's name was worked in silk on the lining, and
there was an unmistakable bullet-hole through the back. It must be
destroyed, or, which would be simpler and quicker, lashed securely on the
dead man's head.

Hurriedly, Varney ran aft and descended to the cabin. He had noticed a
new ball of spun-yarn in the locker when he had fetched the rope. This
would be the very thing.

He was back again in a few moments with the ball in his hand, unwinding
it as he came, and without wasting time he knelt down by the body and
fell to work. There was a curious absence of repugnance in his manner,
horrible as his task would have seemed. He had to raise the dead man's
head to fit on the hat, and in so doing covered his left hand with blood.
But he appeared to mind no more than if he had been handling a seal that
he had shot or a large and dirty fish. Quite composedly, and with that
deftness in the handling of cordage that marks the sailor-man, whether
amateur or professional, he proceeded with his task, intent only on
making the lashing secure and getting it done quickly.

And every half minute the deep-voiced growl of the Wolf came to him out
of the fog, and each time it sounded nearer and yet nearer.

By the time he had made the sou'wester secure, the dead man's face and
chin were encaged in a web of spun-yarn that made him look like some
old-time, grotesque-vizored Samurai warrior. But the hat was now
immovable. Long after that burly corpse had dwindled to a mere skeleton
it would hold, would still cling to the dead head when the face that
looked through the lacing of cords was the face of a bare and grinning
skull.

Varney rose to his feet. But his task was not finished yet. There was
Purcell's suitcase. That must be sunk, too; and there was something in it
that had figured in the detailed picture that his imagination had drawn.
He ran to the cockpit, where the suitcase lay, and having tried its
fastenings and found it unlocked, he opened it and took out with his
right hand--the clean one--a letter that lay on top of the other
contents. This he tossed through the hatch into the cabin. Then his eye
caught Purcell's fountain-pen, slipped neatly through a loop in the lid.
It was filled, he knew, with the peculiar black ink that Purcell always
used. The thought passed swiftly through his mind that perchance it might
be of use to him. In a moment he had drawn it from its loop and slipped
it into his pocket. Then, having closed and fastened the suit case, he
carried it forward and made it fast to the iron weight with a half-dozen
turns of spun-yarn.

That was really all, and, indeed, it was time. As he rose, once more, to
his feet, the growl of the fog horn burst out, as it seemed, right over
the stern of the yacht, and she was drifting stern foremost, who could
say how fast? Now, too, he caught a more ominous sound, which he might
have heard sooner had he listened--the wash of water, the boom of
breakers bursting on a rock.

A revulsion came over him. He burst into a wild sardonic laugh. And had
it come to this, after all? Had he schemed and laboured only to leave
himself alone on an unmanageable craft drifting down to shipwreck and
certain death? Had he taken all this thought and care to secure Purcell's
body, when his own might be resting beside it on the sea bottom within an
hour?

But his reverie was brief. Suddenly from the white void over his very
head, as it seemed, there issued a stunning, thunderous roar that shook
the very deck-under his feet. The water around him boiled into a foamy
chaos, the din of bursting waves was in his ears, the yacht plunged and
wallowed amidst clouds of spray, and, for an instant, a dim; gigantic
shadow loomed through the fog and was gone.

In that moment his nerve had come back. Holding on, with one hand, to the
windlass, he dragged the body to the edge of the forecastle, hoisted the
weight out-board, and then, taking advantage of a heavy lurch, gave the
corpse a vigorous shove. There was a rattle and a hollow splash, and
corpse and weight and suitcase had vanished into the seething water.

He clung to the swinging mast and waited. Breathlessly he told out the
allotted seconds until, once again, the invisible Titan belched forth his
thunderous warning. But this time the roar came over the yacht's bow. She
had drifted past the Rock, then. The danger was over, and Purcell would
have to go down to Davy Jones's Locker companionless after all.

Very soon the water around ceased to boil and tumble, and as the yacht's
wild plunging settled down once more into the normal rise and fall on the
long swell, Varney turned his attention to the refitting of the halyard.
But what was this on the creamy duck sail? A pool of blood and a gory
imprint of his own hand! That wouldn't do at all. He would have to clear
that away before he could hoist the sail, which was annoying, as the
yacht was helpless without her head-sail and was evidently drifting out
to sea.

He fetched a bucket, a swab, and a scrubbing brush, and set to work. The
bulk of the large blood stain cleared off pretty completely after he had
drenched the sail with a bucketful or two and given it a good scrubbing.
But the edge of the stain, where the heat of the deck had dried it,
remained like the painted boundary on a map; and the hand-print, which
had also dried, though it faded to a pale buff, continued clearly
visible.

Varney began to grow uneasy. If those stains would not come out,
especially the hand-print, it would be very awkward; they would take such
a deal of explaining. He decided to try the effect of marine soap, and
fetched a cake from the cabin; but even this did not obliterate the
stains completely, though it turned them a faint greenish brown, very
unlike the colour of blood. Still he scrubbed on, until at last the
hand-print faded away entirely and the large stain was reduced to a faint
green wavy line, and that was the best he could do; and quite good
enough, for if that faint line should ever be noticed, no one would ever
suspect its origin.

He put away the bucket and proceeded with the refitting. The sea had
disengaged the sail from the forefoot, and he hauled it on board without
difficulty. Then there was the reeving of the new halyard--a
troublesome business, involving the necessity of his going aloft, where
his weight, small man as he was, made the yacht roll most infernally, and
set him swinging to and fro like the bob of a metronome. But he was a
smart yachtsman and active, though not powerful, and a few minutes'
strenuous exertion ended in his sliding down the shrouds with the new
halyard running fairly through the upper block. A vigorous haul or two at
the new hairy rope sent the head of the dripping sail aloft, and the
yacht was once more under control.

The rig of the Sandhopper was not smart, but it was handy. She carried a
short bowsprit to accommodate the single head-sail and a relatively large
mizzen, of which the advantage was that by judicious management of the
mizzen-sheet the yacht would sail with very little attention to the helm.
Of this advantage Varney was keenly appreciative just now, for he had
several things to do before entering port. The excitement of the last
hour and the bodily exertions had left him shaky and faint. He wanted
refreshment, he wanted a wash, and the various traces of recent events
had to be removed. Also, there was that letter to be attended to. So that
it was convenient to be able to leave the helm in charge of a lashing for
a minute now and again.

When he had washed he put the kettle on the spirit-stove, and, while it
was heating, busied himself in cleaning the revolver, flinging the empty
cartridge-case overboard, and replacing it with a cartridge from the bag
in the locker. Then he picked up the letter that he had taken from
Purcell's suitcase and examined it. It was addressed to "Joseph Penfield,
Esq., George Yard, Lombard Street," and was unstamped, though the
envelope was fastened up. He affixed a stamp from his pocket-book, and,
when the kettle began to boil, he held the envelope in the steam that
issued from spout. Very soon the flap of the envelope loosened and curled
back, when he laid it aside to mix himself a mug of hot grog, which,
together with the letter and a biscuit-tin, he took out into the cockpit.
The fog was still dense, and the hoot of a steamer's whistle from
somewhere to the westward caused him to reach the fog-horn out of the
locker and blow a long blast on it. As if in answer to his treble squeak
came the deep bass note from the Wolf, and, unconsciously, he looked
round. He turned automatically, as one does towards a sudden noise, not
expecting to see anything but fog, and what he did see startled him not a
little.

For there was the lighthouse--or half of it, rather--standing up above
the fogbank, clear, distinct, and hardly a mile away. The gilded vane,
the sparkling lantern, the gallery, and the upper half of the
red-and-white-ringed tower, stood sharp against the pallid sky, but the
lower half was invisible. It was a strange apparition--like half a
lighthouse suspended in mid-air--and uncommonly disturbing, too. It
raised a very awkward question. If he could see the lantern the
light-keepers could see him. But how long had the lantern been clear of
the fog? That was the question, and the answer to it might come in a
highly disagreeable form.

Thus he meditated as, with one hand on the tiller, he munched his biscuit
and sipped his grog. Presently he picked up the stamped envelope and drew
from it a letter, which he tore into fragments and dropped overboard.
Then, from his pocket-book, he took a similar but unaddressed envelope,
from which he drew out its contents, and very curious those contents
were. There was a letter, brief and laconic, which he read thoughtfully.
"These," it ran, "are all I have by me, but they will do for the present,
and when you have planted them I will let you have a fresh supply." There
was no date and no signature, but the rather peculiar handwriting, in
jet-black ink, was similar to that on the envelope addressed to Joseph
Penfield, Esq.

The other contents consisted of a dozen sheets of blank paper, each of
the size of a Bank of England note. But they were not quite blank, for
each bore an elaborate water-mark, identical with that of a twenty-pound
banknote. They were, in fact, the "paper blanks" of which Purcell had
spoken. The envelope with its contents had been slipped into his hand by
Purcell, without remark, only three days ago.

Varney refolded the "blanks," enclosed them within the letter, and
slipped letter and "blanks" together into the stamped envelope, the flap
of which he licked and reclosed.

"I should like to see old Penfield's face when he opens that envelope,"
was his reflection as, with a grim smile, he put it away in his
pocket-book "And I wonder what he will do," he added mentally; "however,
I shall see before many days are over."

Varney looked at his watch. He was to meet Jack Rodney on Penzance Pier
at a quarter to three. He would never do it at this rate, for when he
opened Mount's Bay, Penzance would be right in the wind's eye. That would
mean a long beat to windward. Then Rodney would be there first, waiting
for him. Deuced awkward, this. He would have to account for his being
alone on board, would have to invent some lie about having put Purcell
ashore at Mousehole or Newlyn. But a lie is a very pernicious thing. Its
effects are cumulative. You never know when you have done with it. Apart
from moral considerations, lies should be avoided at all cost of present
inconvenience; that is, unless they are absolutely unavoidable, and then
they should be as probable as can be managed, and not calculated to
provoke inquiry. Now, if he had reached Penzance before Rodney, he need
have said nothing about Purcell--for the present, at any rate, and that
would have been so much safer.

When the yacht was about abreast of Lamorna Cove, though some seven miles
to the south, the breeze began to draw ahead, and the fog cleared off
quite suddenly. The change of wind was unfavourable for the moment, but
when it veered round yet a little more until it blew from
east-north-east, Varney brightened up considerably. There was still a
chance of reaching Penzance before Rodney arrived; for now, as soon as he
had fairly opened Mount's Bay, he could head straight for his destination
and make it on a single board.

Between two and three hours later the Sandhopper entered Penzance
Harbour, and, threading her way among an assemblage of luggers and small
coasters, brought up alongside the Albert Pier, at the foot of a vacant
ladder.

Having made the yacht fast to a couple of rings, Varney divested himself
of his oilskins, locked the cabin scuttle, and climbed the ladder. The
change of wind had saved him after all, and as he strode away along the
pier he glanced complacently at his watch. He still had nearly half an
hour to the good.

He seemed to know the place well and to have a definite objective, for he
struck out briskly from the foot of the pier into Market Jew Street, and
from thence, by a somewhat zigzag route, to a road which eventually
brought him out about the middle of the esplanade. Continuing westward,
he entered the Newlyn Road, along which he walked rapidly for about a
third of a mile, when he drew up opposite a small letter-box, which was
let into a wall. Here he stopped to read the tablet, on which was printed
the hours of collection, and then, having glanced at his watch, he walked
on again, but at a less rapid pace.

When he reached the outskirts of Newlyn, he turned and began slowly to
retrace his steps, looking at his watch from time to time with a certain
air of impatience. Presently a quick step behind him caused him to look
round. The newcomer was a postman, striding along, bag on shoulder, with
the noisy tread of a heavily shod man and evidently collecting letters.
Varney let him pass, watched him halt at the little letter-box, unlock
the door, gather up the letters, and stow them in his bag, heard the
clang of the iron door, and finally saw the man set forth again on his
pilgrimage. Then he brought forth his pocket-book, and drawing from it
the letter addressed to Joseph Penfield, Esq., stepped up to the
letter-box. The tablet now announced that the next collection would be at
8.30 p.m. Varney read the announcement with a faint smile, glanced again
at his watch, which stood at two minutes past four, and dropped the
letter into the box.

As he walked up the pier with a large paper bag under his arm, he became
aware of a tall man who was doing sentry-go before a Gladstone bag that
stood on the coping opposite the ladder, and who, observing his approach,
came forward to meet him.

"Here you are, then, Rodney," was Varney's rather unoriginal greeting.

"Yes," replied Rodney, "and here I've been for nearly half an hour.
Purcell gone?"

"Bless you! yes, long ago," answered Varney.

"I didn't see him at the station. What train was he going by?"

"I don't know. He said something about taking Falmouth on the way; had
some business or other there. But I expect he's gone to have a feed at
one of the hotels. We got hung up in a fog; that's why I'm so late. I've
been up to buy some grog."

"Well," said Rodney, "bring it on board. It's time we were under way. As
soon as we are outside I'll take charge, and you can go below and stoke
up at your ease."

The two men descended the ladder and proceeded at once to hoist the sails
and cast off the shore ropes. A few strokes of an oar sent them clear of
the lee of the pier, and in a few minutes the yacht Sandhopper was once
more outside, heading south with a steady breeze from east-north-east.

II: In which Margaret Purcell receives a Letter

DAYLIGHT dies hard in the month of June, and Night comes but tardily into
her scanty reversion. The clock on the mantelpiece stood at half-past
nine, and candles twinkled on the supper table, but even now the
slaty-grey band of twilight was only just stealing up behind the horizon
to veil the fading glories of the western sky.

Varney sat at the old-fashioned, oval, gate-legged table with an air of
placid contentment, listening to and joining in the rather disconnected
talk (for hungry people are poor conversationalists) with quiet geniality
but with a certain remoteness and abstraction. From where he sat he could
see out through the open window the great ocean stretching away to the
south and west, the glittering horizon, and the gorgeous evening sky.
With quiet pleasure he had watched the changing scene--the crimson disc
of the setting sun, the flaming gold softening down into the sober tints
of the afterglow--and now, as the grey herald of the night spread
upwards, his eye dwelt steadily on one spot away in the south-west. At
first faintly visible, then waxing as the daylight waned, a momentary
spark flashed in the heart of the twilight grey, now white like the
sparkle of a diamond, now crimson like the flash of a ruby. It was the
light on the Wolf Rock.

He watched it thoughtfully as he talked: white--red, white--red,
diamond--ruby, so it would go on every fifteen seconds through the short
summer night--to mariners a warning and a guide; to him, a message of
release; for another, a memorial.

As he looked at the changing light, he thought of his enemy lying out
there in the chilly depths on the bed of the sea. It was strange how
often he thought of Purcell. For the man was dead; had gone out of his
life utterly. And yet, in the two days that had passed, every trivial
incident had seemed to connect itself and him with the man who was gone.
And so it was now. All roads seemed to lead to Purcell. If he looked out
seaward, there was the lighthouse flashing its secret message, as if it
should say, "We know, you and I; he is down here." If he looked around
the table, still everything spoke of the dead man. There was Philip
Rodney--Purcell and he had talked of him on the yacht. There was Jack
Rodney, who had waited on the pier for the man who had not come. There,
at the hostess's right hand, was the quiet, keen-faced stranger whom
Purcell, for some reason, had not wished to meet; and there, at the head
of the table, was Margaret herself, the determining cause of it all. Even
the very lobsters on the table (lobsters are plentiful at the Land's End)
set him thinking of dark crawling shapes down in that dim underworld,
groping around a larger shape tethered to an iron weight.

He turned his face resolutely away from the sea. He would think no more
of Purcell. The fellow had dogged him through life, but now he was gone.
Enough of Purcell. Let him think of something more pleasant.

The most agreeable object of contemplation within his field of vision was
the woman who sat at the head of the table, his hostess. And, in fact,
Margaret Purcell was very pleasant to look upon, not only for her
comeliness--though she was undoubtedly a pretty, almost a beautiful,
woman--but because she was sweet-faced and gracious, and what men
compliment the sex by calling "womanly." She was evidently under thirty,
though she carried a certain matronly sedateness and an air of being
older than she either looked or was, which was accentuated by the fashion
in which she wore her hair, primly parted in the middle; a rather big
woman, quiet and reposeful, as big women often are.

Varney looked at her with a kind of wonder. He had always thought her
lovely, and now she seemed lovelier than ever. And she was a widow,
little as she suspected it, little as anyone but he suspected it. But it
was a fact. She was free to marry, if she only knew it.

He hugged himself at the thought and listened dreamily to the mellow
tones of her voice. She was talking to her guest and the elder Rodney,
but he had only a dim idea of what she was saying; he was enjoying the
music of her speech rather than attending to the matter. Suddenly she
turned to him and asked:

"Don't you agree with me, Mr. Varney?"

He pulled himself together, and, after a momentarily vacant look,
answered:

"I always agree with you, Mrs. Purcell."

"And so," said Jack Rodney, "as the greater includes the less, he agrees
with you now. I am admiring your self-possession, Varney; you haven't the
least idea what we were talking about."

Varney laughed and reddened, and Margaret looked at him with playful
reproach.

"Haven't you?" she asked. "But how deceitful of you to answer so readily!
I was remarking that lawyers have a way of making a solemn parade of
exactness and secrecy when there is no occasion. That was my statement."

"And it is perfectly correct," said Varney. "You know it is, Rodney.
You're always doing it. I've noticed it constantly."

"Oh, this is mere vindictiveness, because he unmasked your deceit. I
wasn't alluding to Mr. Rodney or anyone in particular. I was just
speaking generally."

"But," said Varney, "something must have suggested the reflection."

"Certainly. Something did: a letter that I have just received from Mr.
Penfield; a most portentous document, and all about nothing."

At the mention of the lawyer's name Varney's attention came to a sharp
focus.

"It seems," Margaret continued, "that Dan, when he wrote to Mr. Penfield
the other day, put the wrong letter in the envelope--a silly thing to
do, but we all do silly things sometimes."

"I don't," said Rodney.

"Well, ordinary persons, I mean. Then Mr. Penfield, instead of simply
stating the fact and returning the letter, becomes mysterious and
alarming. He informs me that the envelope was addressed in Dan's
handwriting, that the letter was posted at Penzance at eight-thirty p.m.,
that it was opened by him in person, and that the contents, which have
been seen by no one but himself, are at present reposing in his private
safe, of which he alone has the key. What he does not tell us is what the
contents of the envelope were, which is the only thing that matters. It
is most extraordinary. From the tone of his letter one would think that
the envelope had contained something dreadful and incriminating."

"Perhaps it did," said Varney. "Dan's political views are distinctly
revolutionary, and he is as secret as a whole barrel of oysters. That
letter may have contained particulars of some sort of Guy Fawkes
conspiracy, enclosing samples of suitable explosives. Who knows?"

Margaret was about to reply, when her glance happened to light on Jack
Rodney, and something in that gentleman's expressive and handsome face
gave her pause. Had she been chattering indiscreetly? And might Mr.
Penfield have meant something after all? There were some curious points
about his letter. She smilingly accepted the Guy Fawkes theory and then
adroitly changed the subject.

"Speaking of Penzance, Mr. Varney, reminds me that you haven't told us
what sort of voyage you had. There was quite a thick fog wasn't there?"

"Yes. It delayed us a lot. Purcell would steer right out to sea for fear
of going ashore. Then the breeze failed for a time, and then it veered
round easterly and headed us, and, as a wind up to the chapter of
accidents, the jib-halyards carried away and we had to reeve a new one.
Nice crazy gear you keep on your craft, Rodney."

"I suspected that rope," said Rodney--"in fact, I had meant to fit a
new halyard before I went up to town. But I should have liked to see
Purcell shinning up aloft."

"So should I--from the shore," said Varney. "He'd have carried away the
mast or capsized the yacht. No, my friend; I left him below as a
counterpoise and went aloft myself."

"Did Dan go straight off to the station?" Margaret asked.

"I should say not," replied Varney. "He was in a mighty hurry to be
off--said he had some things to see to; I fancy one of them was a
grilled steak and a bottle of Bass. We were both pretty ravenous."

"But why didn't you go with him if you were ravenous too?"

"I had to snug up the yacht and he wouldn't wait. He was up the ladder
like a lamplighter almost before we had made fast. I can see him now,
with that great suitcase in his hand, going up as light as a feather. He
is wonderfully active for his size."

"Isn't he?" said Rodney. "But these big men often are. Look at the way
those great lumping pilots will drop down into a boat: as light as cats."

"He is a big fellow, too," said Varney. "I was looking at him as he
stopped at the top of the ladder to sing out 'So long.' He looked quite
gigantic in his oilskins."

"He actually went up into town in his oilskins, did he?" exclaimed
Margaret. "He must have been impatient for his meal! Oh, how silly of me!
I never sewed on that button that had come off the collar of his oilskin
coat. I hope you didn't have a wet passage."

"You need not reproach yourself, Mrs. Purcell," interposed Philip Rodney.
"Your neglect was made good by my providence. I sewed on that button when
I borrowed the coat on Friday evening to go to my diggings in."

"You told me you hadn't a spare oilskin button," said Margaret.

"I hadn't, but I made one--out of a cork."

"A cork?" Margaret exclaimed, with an incredulous laugh.

"Not a common cork, you know," Philip explained. "It was a flat circular
cork from one of my collecting jars, waterproofed with paraffin wax; a
most superior affair, with a beautiful round label--also waterproofed by
the wax--on which was typed 'Marine Worms.' The label was very
decorative. It's my own invention, and I'm rather proud of it."

"You may well be. And I suppose you sewed it on with rope-yarn and a
sail-needle?" Margaret suggested.

"Not at all. It was secured with catgut, the fag end of an E string that
I happened to have in my pocket. You see, I had no needle or thread, so I
made two holes in the cork with the marlin-spike in my pocket-knife, two
similar holes in the coat, poked the ends of the fiddlestring through,
tied a reef-knot inside, and there it was, tight as wax--paraffin wax."

"It was very ingenious and resourceful of you," Varney commented, "but
the product wasn't very happily disposed of on Dan's coat--I mean as to
your decorative label. I take it that Dan's interest in marine worms is
limited to their use as bait. Now if you could have fitted out Dr.
Thorndyke with a set there would have been some appropriateness in it,
since marine worms are the objects of his devotion--at least, so I
understand," and he looked interrogatively at Margaret's guest.

Dr. Thorndyke smiled. "You are draping me in the mantle of my friend,
Professor D'Arcy," he said. "He is the real devotee. I have merely come
down for a few days to stay with him and be an interested spectator of
the chase. It is he who should have the buttons."

"Still," said Varney, "you aid and abet him. I suppose you help him to
dig them up."

Philip laughed scornfully. "Why, you are as bad as Dan, Varney. You are
thinking in terms of bait. Do you imagine Dr. Thorndyke and the professor
go a-worming with a bully-beef tin and a garden fork as you do when you
are getting ready for a fishing jaunt?"

"Well, how was I to know?" retorted Varney. "I am not a naturalist. What
do they do? Set traps for 'em with bits of cheese inside?"

"Of course they don't," laughed Margaret. "How absurd you are, Mr.
Varney! They go out with a boat and a dredge, and very interesting it
must be to bring up all those curious creatures from the bottom of the
sea."

She spoke rather absently, for her thoughts had gone back to Mr.
Penfield's letter. There was certainly something a little cryptic in its
tone, which she had taken for mere professional pedantry, but which she
now recalled with vague uneasiness. Could the old lawyer have stumbled on
something discreditable and written this ambiguously worded letter as a
warning? Her husband was not a communicative man, and she could not
pretend to herself that she had an exalted opinion of his moral
character. It was all very disquieting.

The housekeeper, who had been retained with the furnished house, brought
in the coffee, and as Margaret poured it out she continued her
reflections, watching Varney with unconscious curiosity as he rolled a
cigarette. The ring-finger of his left hand had a stiff joint, the result
of an old injury, and was permanently bent at a sharp angle. It gave his
hand an appearance of awkwardness, but she noted that he rolled his
cigarette as quickly and neatly as if all his fingers were sound. The
stiff finger had become normal to him. And she also noted that Dr.
Thorndyke appeared quite interested in the contrast between the
appearance of awkwardness and the actual efficiency of the maimed finger.

From Varney her attention--or inattention--wandered to her guest.
Absently she dwelt on his powerful, intellectual face, his bold,
clean-cut features, his shapely mouth, firm almost to severity; and all
the time she was thinking of Mr. Penfield's letter.

"Have we all finished?" she asked at length; "and if so, where are we
going to smoke our pipes and cigars?"

"I propose that we go into the garden," said Philip. "It is a lovely
evening, and we can look at the moonlight on the sea while we smoke."

"Yes," Margaret agreed, "it will be more pleasant out there. Don't wait
for me. I will join you in a few minutes, but I want first to have a few
words with Mr. Rodney."

Philip, who, like the others, understood that this was a consultation on
the subject of Mr. Penfield's letter, rose and playfully shepherded
Varney out of the door which his brother held invitingly open. "Now then,
Varney, out you go. No lagging behind and eavesdropping. The
pronouncements of the oracle are not for the likes of you and me."

Varney took his dismissal with a smile and followed Dr. Thorndyke out,
though, as he looked at the barrister's commanding figure and handsome
face, he could not repress a twinge of jealousy. Why could not Maggie
have consulted him? He was an old friend, and he knew more about old
Penfield's letter than Rodney did. But, of course, she had no idea of
that.

As soon as they were alone, Margaret and Rodney resumed their seats, and
the former opened the subject without preamble.

"What do you really think of Mr. Penfield's letter?" she asked.

"Could you give me, in general terms, the substance of what he says?"
Rodney answered cautiously.

"I had better show you the letter itself," said Margaret.

She rose and left the room, returning almost immediately with an
official-looking envelope, which she handed to Rodney. The letter, which
he extracted from it and spread out on the table, was not remarkably
legible; an elderly solicitor's autograph letters seldom are. But
barristers, like old-fashioned druggists, are usually expert decipherers,
and Rodney read the letter without difficulty. It ran thus:

"GEORGE YARD,

"LOMBARD STREET, E.C.

"2 June, 1911.

"DEAR MRS. PURCELL,

"I have just received from your husband a letter with certain enclosures,
which have caused me some surprise. The envelope is addressed to me in
his handwriting, and the letter, which is unsigned, is also in his hand;
but neither the letter nor the other contents could possibly have been
intended for me, and it is manifest that they have been placed in the
wrong envelope.

"The postmark shows that the letter was posted at Penzance at 8.30 p.m.
on the 23rd instant. It was opened by me, and the contents, which have
been seen by no one but me, have been deposited in my private safe, of
which I alone have the key.

"Will you very kindly acquaint your husband with these facts and request
him to call on me at his early convenience?

"I am,

"Dear Mrs. Purcell,

"Yours sincerely,
"JOSEPH PENFIELD."

"MRS. DANIEL PURCELL,
"SENNEN,
"CORNWALL."

Rodney read the solicitor's letter through twice, refolded it, replaced
it in its envelope, and returned it to Margaret.

"Well, what do you think of it?" the latter asked.

Rodney reflected for some moments.

"It's a very careful letter," he replied at length.

"Yes, I know; and that is a very careful answer, but not very helpful.
Now do drop the lawyer and tell me just what you think like a good
friend."

Rodney looked at her quickly with a faint smile and yet very earnestly.
He found it strangely pleasant to be called a good friend by Margaret
Purcell.

"I gather," he said slowly, "from the tone of Mr. Penfield's letter, that
he found something in that envelope that your husband would not have
wished him to see--something that he had reasons for wishing no one to
see but the person for whom it was meant."

"Do you mean something discreditable or compromising?"

"We mustn't jump at conclusions. Mr. Penfield is very reticent, so,
presumably, he has some reasons for reticence, otherwise he would have
said plainly what the envelope contained. But why does he write to you?
Doesn't he know your husband's address?"

"No, but he could have got it from Dan's office. I have been wondering
myself why he wrote to me."

"Has your husband arrived at Oulton yet?"

"Heavens! Yes. It doesn't take two days and a half to get to Norfolk."

"Oh, then he wasn't staying at Falmouth?"

Margaret stared at him. "Falmouth!" she exclaimed. "What do you mean?"

"I understood Varney to say that he was going to call at Falmouth."

"No, certainly not. He was going straight to London and so on to Oulton
the same night. I wonder what Mr. Varney can have meant."

"We must find out presently. Have you heard from your husband since he
left?"

"No. Oddly enough, he hasn't written, which is unlike him. He generally
sends me a line as soon as he arrives anywhere."

"You had better send him a telegram in the morning to make sure of his
whereabouts, and then let him have a copy of Mr. Penfield's letter at
once. And I think I wouldn't refer to the subject before any of our
friends if I were you."

"No. I oughtn't to have said what I did. But, of course, I didn't dream
that Mr. Penfield really meant anything. Shall we go out into the
garden?"

Rodney opened the door for her, and they passed out to where their three
companions sat in deck-chairs facing the sea. Two chairs had been placed
for them, and, as they seated themselves, Varney remarked:

"I take it that the oracle has spoken, and I hope he was more explicit
than oracles are usually."

"He was explicit and discreet--especially discreet," Margaret replied.

"Oh, they are always that," said Varney; "discretion is the oracular
speciality. The explicitness is exceptional."

"I believe it is," replied Margaret, "and I am glad you set so much value
on it because I am coming to you now for information. Mr. Rodney tells me
that Dan said something to you about Falmouth. What was it?"

"He said he was going to call in there--at least, so I understood."

"But he wasn't, you know. He was going direct to London and straight on
to Oulton the same night. You must have misunderstood him."

"I may have done, but I don't think I did. Still, he only mentioned the
matter casually, and I wasn't paying particular attention."

Margaret made no rejoinder, and the party became somewhat silent. Philip,
realizing Margaret's uneasy preoccupation, engaged Dr. Thorndyke in an
animated conversation respecting the natural history of the Cornish coast
and the pleasures of dredging.

The other three became profoundly thoughtful. To each the solicitor's
letter had its special message, though to one only was that message
clearly intelligible. Rodney was puzzled and deeply suspicious. To him
the letter had read like that of a man washing his hands of a
disagreeable responsibility. The curious reticence as to the nature of
the enclosures and the reference to the private safe sounded ominous. He
knew little of Purcell--he had been a friend of the Haygarths'--and had
no great opinion of him. Purcell was a financier, and financiers
sometimes did queer things. At any rate, Penfield's excessive caution
suggested something fishy--possibly something illicit. In fact, to speak
colloquially, Rodney smelt a rat.

Margaret also was puzzled and suspicious, but, womanlike, she allowed her
suspicions to take a more special form. She, too, smelt a rat, but it was
a feminine rat. The lawyer's silence as to the contents of that
mysterious envelope seemed to admit of no other interpretation. It was so
pointed. Of course he could not tell her, though he was an old friend and
her trustee, so he had said nothing.

She reflected on the matter with lukewarm displeasure. Her relations with
her husband were not such as to admit of jealousy in the ordinary sense;
but still, she was married to him, and any affair on his part with
another woman would be very disagreeable and humiliating to her. It
might lead to a scandal, too, and from that her ingrained delicacy
revolted.

Varney, meanwhile, sat with his head thrown back wrapped in thought of a
more dreamy quality. He knew all about the letter, and his mind was
occupying itself with speculation as to its effects. Rodney's view of it
he gauged pretty accurately, but what did she think of it? Was she
anxious--worried at the prospect of some unpleasant disclosure? He hoped
not. At any rate, it could not be helped. And she was free, if she only
knew it.

He had smoked out his cigarette, and now, as he abstractedly filled his
pipe, his eye insensibly sought the spot where the diamond and ruby
flashed out alternately from the bosom of the night. A cloud had crept
over the moon, and the transitory golden and crimson gleam shone out
bright and clear amidst the encompassing darkness, white--red, white--red,
diamond--ruby, a message in a secret code from the tall, unseen
sentinel on that solitary, wave-washed rock, bidding him be of good
cheer, reminding him again and again of the freedom that was his--and
hers, made everlastingly secure by a friendly iron sinker.

The cloud turned silvery at the edge and the moon sailed out into the
open. Margaret looked up at it thoughtfully.

"I wonder where Dan is to-night," she said; and in the pause that
followed a crimson spark from the dim horizon seemed to Varney to signal,
"Here," and instantly fade into discreet darkness.

"Perhaps," suggested Philip, "he is having a moonlight sail on the Broad,
or, more probably, taking a whisky-and-soda with Bradford in the inn
parlour where the stuffed pike is. You remember that stuffed pike, Jack?"

His brother nodded. "Can I ever forget it, or the landlord's interminable
story of its capture? I wonder why people become so intolerably boresome
about their fishing exploits. The angler is nearly as bad as the golfer."

"Still," said Varney, "he has more excuse. It is more of an achievement
to catch a pike or a salmon than merely to whack a ball with a stick."

"Isn't that rather a crude description of the game?" asked Margaret. "It
is to be hoped that Dr. Thorndyke is not an enthusiast."

"I am not," he assured her--"in fact, I was admiring Mr. Varney's
simplification. His definition of the game is worthy of Dr. Johnson. But
I must tear myself away. My host is an early bird, and I expect you are,
too. Good-night, Mrs. Purcell. It has been very delightful to meet you
again. I am only sorry that I should have missed your husband."

"So am I," said Margaret, shaking his hand warmly, "but I think it most
kind of you to have remembered me after all these years."

As Dr. Thorndyke rose, the other three men stood up. "It is time for us
to go, too," said Rodney, "so we will see you to the end of the road,
Thorndyke. Good-night, Mrs. Purcell."

"Good-night, gentlemen all," she replied. "Eight o'clock breakfast,
remember."

The four men went into the house to fetch their hats and took their
departure, walking together as far as the cross-roads, where Thorndyke
wished the other three "good-night" and left them to pursue their way to
the village.

The lodging accommodation in this neighbourhood was not sumptuous, but
our three friends were not soft or fastidious. Besides, they only slept
at their "diggings," taking their meals and making their home at the
house which Purcell had hired, furnished, for the holiday. It was a
somewhat unconventional arrangement, now that Purcell had gone, and spoke
eloquently of his confidence in the discretion of his attractive wife.

The three men were not in the same lodgings. Varney was "putting up" at
the "First and Last" inn in the adjoining village--or "church-town," to
give it its local title--of Sennen, while the Rodneys shared a room at
the "Ship" down in Sennen Cove, more than a mile away. They proceeded
together as far as Varney's hostel, when, having wished him "good-night,"
the two brothers strode away along, the moonlit road towards the Cove.

For a while neither spoke, though the thoughts of both were occupied by
the same subject, the solicitor's letter. Philip had fully taken in the
situation, although he had made no remark on it, and the fact that his
brother had been consulted quasi-professionally on the subject made him
hesitate to refer to it. For in spite of his gay, almost frivolous,
manner, Philip Rodney was a responsible medical practitioner, and really
a man of sound judgment and discretion.

Presently his scruples yielded to the consideration that his brother was
not likely to divulge any confidence, and he remarked:

"I hope Purcell hasn't been doing anything shady. It sounded to me as if
there was a touch of Pontius Pilate in the tone of Penfield's letter."

"Yes, a very guarded tone, with a certain note of preparation for
unpleasant possibilities. So it struck me. I do sincerely hope there
isn't anything in it."

"So do I, by Jove! but I shouldn't be so very astonished. Of course we
don't know anything against Purcell--at least, I don't--but somehow he
doesn't strike me as a very scrupulous man. His outlook on life jars a
bit; don't you feel that some times?"

"The commercial standard isn't quite the same as the professional, you
know," Jack Rodney answered evasively, "and financial circles are not
exactly of the higher morality. But I know of nothing to Purcell's
discredit."

"No, of course not. But he isn't the same class as his wife; she's a lot
too good for a coarse, bucolic fellow like that. I wonder why the deuce
she married him. I used to think she rather liked you."

"A woman can't marry every man she rather likes, you know, Phil, unless
she happens to live in Ladak; and even there I believe there are limits.
But to come back to Purcell, we may be worrying ourselves about nothing.
To-morrow we shall get into touch with him by telegraph, and then we may
hear something from him."

Here the consideration of Purcell and his affairs dropped so far as
conversation went; but in the elder man's mind certain memories had been
revived by his brother's remark and occupied it during the remainder of
the walk. For he, too, had once thought that Maggie Haygarth rather liked
him, and he now recalled the shock of disagreeable surprise with which he
had heard of her marriage. But that was over and done with long ago, and
the question now was, how was the Sandhopper, at present moored in
Whitesand Bay, to be got from the Land's End to her moorings above
Westminster Bridge?--a problem that engaged the attention of the two
brothers until they turned into their respective beds and the laggard,
according to immemorial custom, blew out the light.

In spite of Mrs. Purcell's admonition they were some minutes late on the
following morning. Their two friends were already seated at the breakfast
table, and it needed no extraordinary powers of observation to see that
something had happened. Their hostess was pale and looked worried and
some what frightened, and Varney was preternaturally grave. A telegram
lay open on the table by Margaret's place, and as Rodney advanced to
shake hands, she held it out to him without a word. He took the paper and
read the brief but ominous message that confirmed but too plainly his
misgivings of the previous night.

"Where is Dan? Expected him here Tuesday night. Hope nothing
wrong.--BRADFORD, Angler's Hotel, Oulton."

Rodney laid down the telegram and looked at Margaret. "This is a queer
business," said he. "Have you done anything?"

"No," she replied. "What can we do?" Rodney took a slip of paper and a
pencil from his pocket. "If you will write down the name of the partner
or clerk who is attending at the office and address, and that of the
caretaker of your flat, I will go and send off reply-paid telegrams to
them asking for information as to your husband's whereabouts, and I will
also reply to Mr Bradford. It is just possible that Purcell may have gone
home after all."

"It's very unlikely," said Margaret. "The flat is shut up, and he would
surely have written. Still, we may as well make sure, if you will be so
kind. But won't you have your breakfast first?"

"We'd better waste no time," he answered, and, pocketing the paper,
strode away on his errand.

Little was said until he returned, and even then the breakfast proceeded
in a gloomy silence that contrasted strangely with the usual vivacity of
the gatherings around that hospitable table. A feeling of tense
expectation pervaded the party and a vivid sense of impending disaster.
Dreary efforts were made to keep some kind of conversation going, but the
talk was colourless and disjointed with long and awkward pauses.

Varney especially was wrapped in deep meditation. Outwardly he preserved
an appearance of sympathetic anxiety, but inwardly he was conscious of a
strange, rather agreeable excitement, almost of elation. When he looked
at Margaret's troubled face he felt a pang of regret, of contrition; but
principally he was sensible of a feeling of power, of knowledge. He sat
apart, as it were, Godlike, omniscient. He knew all the facts that were
hidden from the others. The past lay clear before him to the smallest
detail; the involved present was as an open book which he read with ease,
and he could even peer confidently into the future.

And these men and the woman before him, and those others afar off--the
men at the office, the caretaker, Penfield the lawyer, and Bradford at
his inn in Norfolk--what were they but so many puppets, moving
feverishly hither and thither as he, the unseen master-spirit, directed
them by a pull at the strings? It was he who had wound them up and set
them going; and here he sat, motionless and quiet, watching them do his
bidding. He was reminded of an occasion when he had been permitted for a
short time to steer a five-thousand-ton steamer. What a sense of power it
had given him to watch the stupendous consequences of his own trifling
movements! A touch of the little wheel, the movement of a spoke or two to
right or left, and what a commotion followed! How the steam gear had
clanked with furious haste to obey, and the great ship had presently
swerved round, responsive to the pressure of his fingers! What a
wonderful thing it had been! There was that colossal structure with its
enormous burden of merchandise, its teeming population sweating in the
stokehold or sleeping in the dark forecastle, its unconscious passengers
chatting on the decks, reading, writing, or playing cards in saloon or
smoking-room; and he had had it all in the grasp of one hand, had moved
it and turned it about with the mere touch of a finger.

And so it was now. The magical pressure of his finger on the trigger, a
few turns of a rope, the hoisting of an iron weight, and behold! the
whole course of a human life--probably of several human lives--was
changed utterly.

It was a tremendous thought.

In a little over an hour the replies to Rodney's discreetly worded
inquiries had come in. Mr. Purcell had not been home nor had he been
heard of at the office. Mr. Penfield had been inquiring as to his
whereabouts and so had Mr. Bradford. That was all. And what it amounted
to was that Daniel Purcell had disappeared.

"Can't you remember exactly what Dan said about going to Falmouth, Mr.
Varney?" Margaret asked.

"I am sorry to say I can't," replied Varney. "You see, he just threw the
remark off casually, and I didn't ask any questions. He isn't very fond
of being questioned, you know."

"I wonder what he could have been going to Falmouth for," she mused. In
reality she did not wonder at all. She felt pretty certain that she knew.
But pride would not allow her publicly to adopt that explanation until it
was forced on her. "It seems to me that there is only one course," she
continued. "I must go up to town and see Mr. Penfield. Don't you think
so, Mr. Rodney?"

"Certainly. He is the only one who knows anything and is able to advise."
He hesitated a moment, and then added: "Hadn't we better come up with
you?"

"Yes," said Varney eagerly; "let us all go up."

Margaret considered for a few moments. "It is excessively kind and
sympathetic of you all, and I am glad you offered, because it makes me
feel that I have good loyal friends, which is a great deal to know just
now. But, really, there would be no use in breaking up your holidays.
What could you do? We can't make a search in person. Why not take over
the house and stay on here?"

"We don't want the house if you're not in it," said Philip.

"No," agreed Jack Rodney; "if we can't be of use to you we shall get
afloat and begin to crawl round the coast homewards."

"I think I shall run over to Falmouth and see if I can pick up any news,"
said Varney.

"Thank you," said Margaret. "I think that would be really useful," and
Rodney agreed heartily, adding: "Why not come round in the yacht, Varney?
We shall probably get there to-morrow night."

Varney reflected. And suddenly it was borne in upon him that he felt an
unspeakable repugnance to the idea of going on board the yacht, and
especially to making the voyage from Sennen to Penzance. The feeling came
to him as an utter surprise, but there was no doubt of its reality.

"I think I'll go over by train," he said. "It will save a day, you know."

"Then we will meet you there," said Rodney; "and, Mrs. Purcell, will you
send us a letter to the Green Banks Hotel, Falmouth, and let us know what
Mr. Penfield says, and if you would like us to come up to town to help
you?"

"Thank you, yes, I will," Margaret replied heartily. "And I promise that,
if I want your help, I will ask for it."

"That is a solemn promise, mind," said Rodney.

"Yes, I mean it--a solemn promise."

So the matter was arranged. By twelve o'clock, the weather being calm,
the yacht was got under way for Penzance. And even as on that other
occasion, she headed seaward with her crew of two, watched from the shore
by a woman and a man.

III: In which Margaret Purcell consults Mr. Penfield

MR. JOSEPH PENFIELD was undeniably in a rather awkward dilemma. For he
had hooked the wrong fish. His letter to Maggie Purcell had been designed
to put him immediately in touch with Purcell himself, whereas it had
evoked an urgent telegram from Maggie announcing her intention of calling
on him "on important business" and entreating him to arrange an
interview.

It was really most unfortunate. There was no one in the world whom he had
less desire to see, at the present moment, than Margaret Purcell. And yet
there was no possible escape; for not only was he her solicitor and her
trustee, but he was an old family friend, and not a little attached to
her in his dry way. But he didn't want her just now. He wanted Purcell,
and he wanted him very badly.

For a solicitor of irreproachable character and spotless reputation his
position was highly unpleasant. As soon as he had opened the letter from
Penzance he had recognised the nature of the enclosures, and had
instantly connected them with the forgeries of Bank of England notes of
which he had heard. The intricate water-marks on the "blanks" were
unmistakable. But so was the handwriting of the accompanying letter. It
was Daniel Purcell's beyond a doubt, and the peculiar, intensely black
ink was equally characteristic. And, short as the note was, it made
perfectly clear its connection with the incriminating enclosures. It
wrote down Daniel Purcell a banknote forger.

Now Mr. Penfield was, as we have said, a man of irreproachable character.
But he was a very secretive and rather casuistical old gentleman; and his
regard for Margaret had led him to apply his casuistry to the present
case, pretending to himself that his discovery of the illicit blanks came
within the category of "clients' secrets," which he need not divulge. But
in his heart he knew that he was conniving at a felony, that he ought to
give information to the police or to the Bank, and that he wasn't going
to. His plan was to get hold of Purcell, make him destroy the blanks in
his presence, and deliver such a warning as would put a stop to the
forgeries.

But if he did not propose to give Purcell away, neither did he intend
to give himself away. He would share his compromising secret with
no one--especially with a lady. And this consideration raised the
difficult question, What on earth was he to say to Margaret Purcell
when she arrived? A question which he was still debating, with her
telegram spread out before him and his silver snuff-box in his hand,
when a clerk entered his private office to announce the unwelcome
visitor.

Fortifying himself with a pinch of snuff, he rose and advanced towards
the door to receive her, and as she entered he made a quick mental note
of her anxious and troubled expression.

"How do you do, Mrs. Purcell?" said he, with a ceremonious bow. "You have
had a long journey and rather an early one. How very unfortunate that
this business, to which you refer in your telegram, should have arisen
while you were on holiday so far away!"

"You have guessed what the business is, I suppose?" said Margaret.

Mr. Penfield smiled deprecatingly. "We lawyers," said he, "are not much
addicted to guessing, especially when definite information is available.
Pray be seated. And now," he continued, as Margaret subsided into the
clients' chair and he resumed his own, resting his elbows on the arms and
placing his finger-tips together, "let us hear what this new and
important business is."

"It is about that mysterious letter that you had from my husband," said
Margaret.

"Dear, dear!" said Mr. Penfield. "What a pity that you should have taken
this long journey for such a trifling affair! And I thought I gave you
all the particulars."

"You didn't mention whom the letter was from."

"For several excellent reasons," replied Mr. Penfield, checking them off
on his fingers. "First, I don't know; second, it is not my business;
third, your husband, whose business it is, does know. My object in
writing to you was to get into touch with him so that I could hand back
to him this letter, which should never have come into my possession.
Shall I take down his address now?"

"I haven't it myself," Margaret replied with a faint flush. "I have no
idea where he is at present. He left Sennen on the 2nd to go to Oulton
via Penzance. But he never arrived at Oulton. He has not been home, he
has not been to the office, and he has not written. It is rather
alarming, especially in connection with your mysterious letter."

"Was my letter mysterious?" said Mr. Penfield, rapidly considering this
new but not very surprising development. "I hardly think so. It was not
intended to be. What was there mysterious about it?"

"Everything," she replied, producing the letter from her bag and glancing
at it as she spoke. "You emphasise that Dan's letter and the other
contents have been seen by no eye but yours, and that they are in a
receptacle to which no one has access but yourself. There is a strong
hint of something secret and compromising in the nature of Dan's letter
and enclosures."

"I would rather say 'confidential,'" murmured Mr. Penfield.

"And," Margaret continued, "you must see that there is an evident
connection between this misdirected letter and Dan's disappearance."

Mr. Penfield saw the connection very plainly, but he was admitting
nothing. He did, indeed, allow that "it was a coincidence," but would not
agree to "a necessary connection."

"Probably you will hear from your husband in a day or two, and then
the letter can be returned."

"Is there any reason why you should not show me Dan's letter?" Margaret
demanded. "Surely I am entitled, as his wife, to see it."

Mr. Penfield pursed up his lips and took a deliberate pinch of snuff.

"We must not confuse," said he, "the theological relations of married
people with their legal relations. Theologically they are one; legally
they are separate persons subject to a mutual contract. As to this
letter, it is not mine, and consequently I can show it to no one; and I
must assume that if your husband had desired you to see it he would have
shown it to you himself."

"But," Margaret protested impatiently, "are not my husband's secrets my
secrets?"

"That," replied the lawyer, "is a delicate question which we need not
consider. There is the question of the secrets of a third party. If I had
the felicity to be a married man, which unfortunately I have not, you
would hardly expect me to communicate your private, and perhaps secret,
affairs to my wife. Now would you?"

Margaret had to admit that she would not. But she instantly countered the
lawyer by inquiring:

"Then I was apparently right in inferring that this letter and the
enclosures contained matter of a secret and compromising character?"

"I have said nothing to that effect," replied Mr Penfield uncomfortably;
and then, seeing that he had no choice between a downright lie and a flat
refusal to answer any questions, he continued "The fact is that it is not
admissible for me to make any statement. This letter came to me by an
error, and my position must be as if I had not seen it."

"But it can't be," Margaret persisted, "because you have seen it. I want
to know if Dan's letter was addressed to anyone whom I know. You could
tell me that, surely?"

"Unfortunately, I cannot," replied the lawyer, glad to be able to tell
the literal truth for once. "The letter was without any formal opening.
There was nothing to indicate the identity or even the sex of the person
to whom it was addressed."

Margaret noted this curious fact and then asked:

"With regard to the enclosures. Did they consist of money?"

"They did not," was the reply, "nor cheques." A brief silence followed,
during which Margaret reflected rapidly on what she had learned and what
she had not learned. At length she looked up with a somewhat wry smile
and said: "Well, Mr. Penfield, I suppose that is all I shall get out of
you?"

"I am afraid it is," he replied. "The necessity of so much reservation is
most distasteful, I assure you; but it is the plain duty of a lawyer to
keep not only his own counsel but other people's."

"Yes, of course, I quite understand that. And now, as we have finished
with the letter, there is the writer to consider. What had I better do
about Dan?"

"Why do anything? It is only four days since he left Sennen."

"Yes, but something has evidently happened. He may have met with an
accident and be in some hospital. Do you think that I ought to notify the
police that he is missing?"

"No; certainly not," Mr. Penfield replied emphatically, for, in his mind,
Purcell's disappearance was quite simply explained. He had discovered the
mistake of the transposed letter, and knew that Penfield held the means
of convicting him of a felony, and he had gone into hiding until he
should discover what the lawyer meant to do. To put the police on his
track would be to convince him of his danger and drive him hopelessly out
of reach. But Mr. Penfield could not explain this to Margaret, and to
cover his emphatic rejection of police assistance he continued: "You see,
he can hardly be said to be missing; he may merely have altered his plans
and neglected to write. Have patience for a day or two, and if you still
hear no tidings of him, send me a line, and I will take what measures
seem advisable for trying to get into touch with him."

"Thank you," said Margaret, not very enthusiastically, rising to take her
departure. She was in the act of shaking Mr. Penfield's hand when, with a
sudden afterthought, she asked: "By the way, was there anything in Dan's
letter that might account for his disappearance in this fashion?"

This was rather a facer for Mr. Penfield, who, like many casuists, hated
telling a direct lie. For the answer was clearly "Yes," whereas the sense
that he was compelled to convey was "No."

"You are forgetting that the letter was not addressed to me," he said.
"And that reminds me that there must have been another letter--the one
that was addressed to me and that must have been put into the other
person's envelope. May I ask if that letter has been returned?"

"No, it has not," replied Margaret.

"Ha!" said Mr. Penfield. "But it probably will be in the course of a day
or two. Then we shall know what he was writing to me about and who is the
other correspondent. Good-day, good-day, Mrs. Purcell."

He shook her hand warmly, and hastened to open the door for her in the
hope, justified by the result, that she would not realize until she had
left that her very significant question had not been answered.

Indeed, she did not realize how adroitly the old solicitor had evaded
that question until she was too far away to return and put it afresh,
even if that had seemed worth while; for her attention was occupied by
the other issue that he had so artfully raised. She had overlooked the
presumable existence of the second transposed letter, the one that should
have been in Mr. Penfield's envelope. It ought to have been returned at
once. Possibly it was even now waiting at Sennen to be forwarded. If it
arrived, it would probably disclose the identity of the mysterious
correspondent. On the other hand, it might not; and if it were not
returned at all, that would confirm the suspicion that there was
something gravely wrong. And it was at this point that Margaret became
conscious of Mr. Penfield's last evasion.

Its effect was to confirm the generally disagreeable impression that she
had received from the interview. She was a little resentful of the
lawyer's elaborate reticence, which, coupled with the strange
precautionary terms of his letter to her, convinced her that her husband
had embarked on some questionable transaction, and that Mr. Penfield knew
it and knew the nature of that transaction. His instant rejection of the
suggestion that an accident might have occurred and that the police
should be notified seemed to imply that he had some inkling of Purcell's
proceedings, and his final evasion of her question strongly suggested
that the letter, or the enclosures, or both, contained some clue to the
disappearance.

Thus, as she took her way home, Margaret turned over again and again the
puzzling elements of the mystery, and at each reshuffling of the scanty
facts the same conclusion emerged: her husband had absconded, and he had
not absconded alone. The secret that Mr. Penfield was guarding was such a
secret as might, if divulged, have pointed the way to the divorce court.
And with this conclusion and a frown of disgust, she turned into the
entry of her flat and ascended the stairs.

As she let herself in, the maid met her in the hakl. "Mr. Varney is in
the drawing-room, ma'am," she said. "He came about ten minutes ago. I am
getting tea for him."

"Thank you, Nellie," said Margaret, "and you might get me some, too."

She passed on to her bedroom for a hasty wash and change, and then joined
her visitor in time to pour out the tea.

"How good of you, Mr. Varney," she said warmly, as they shook hands, "to
come to me so quickly! You must have only just arrived."

"Yes," he replied, "I came straight on from the station. I thought you
would be anxious to know if I had heard anything."

"And have you?"

"Well," Varney replied, hesitatingly, "I'm rather afraid not. I seem to
have drawn a blank."

Margaret looked at him critically. There was something in his manner
suggestive of doubt and reservation.

"Do you mean an absolute blank? Did you find out nothing at all?"

Again Varney seemed to hesitate, and Margaret's attention sharpened.

"There isn't much use in making guesses," said he. "I found no definite
traces of Dan. He hadn't been at the 'Ship,' where I put up and where he
used to stay when he went to Falmouth, and of course I couldn't go round
the other hotels making inquiries. But I went down the quay-side and
asked a few discreet questions about the craft that had left the port
since Monday, especially the odd craft, bound for small ports. I felt
that if Dan had any reason for slipping off quietly he wouldn't go by a
passenger boat to a regular passenger port. He would go on a cargo boat
bound to some out-of-the-way place. So I found out what I could about the
cargo boats that had put out of Falmouth; but I didn't have much luck."

Again he paused irresolutely, and Margaret asked, with a shade of
impatience:

"Did you find out anything at all?"

"Well, no; I can't say that I did," Varney replied, in the same slow,
inconclusive manner. "It's disappointing in a way, especially as I really
thought at one time that I had got on his track. But that turned out a
mistake after all."

"You are sure it was a mistake," said Margaret eagerly. "Tell me about
it."

"I picked up the clue when I was asking about a Swedish steamer that had
put out on Tuesday morning. She had a lading of china clay and was bound
for Malmo, but she was calling at Ipswich to pick up some other cargo. I
learned that she took one or two passengers on board, and one of them was
described to me as a big red-faced man of about forty, who looked like a
pilot or a ship's officer. That sounded rather like Dan, and when I heard
that he was carrying a biggish suitcase and had a yellow oilskin coat on
his arm, I made pretty sure that it was."

"And how do you know that it was not Dan?"

"Why," replied Varney, "it turned out that this man had a woman with
him."

"I see," said Margaret hastily, flushing scarlet and turning her head
away. For a while she could think of nothing further to say. To her, of
course, the alleged disproof of the passenger's identity was
"confirmation strong as Holy Writ." But her pride would not allow her to
confess this--at any rate to Varney--and she was in difficulties as to
how to pursue the inquiry without making the admission. At length she
ventured: "Do you think that is quite conclusive? I mean, is it certain
that the woman belonged to the man? There is the possibility that she may
have been merely a fellow-passenger whom he had casually accompanied to
the ship. Or did you ascertain that they were actually--er--companions?"

"No, by Jove!" exclaimed Varney. "I never thought of any other
possibilities. I heard that the man went on board with a woman, and at
once decided that he couldn't be Dan. But you are quite right. They may
have just met at the hotel or elsewhere and walked down to the ship
together. I wonder if it's worth while to make any further inquiries
about the ship--I mean at Ipswich, or, if necessary, at Malmo."

"Do you remember the ship's name?"

"Yes; the Hedwig of Hernosand. She left Falmouth early on Tuesday
morning, so she will probably have got to Ipswich some time yesterday.
She may be there now, or, of course, she may have picked up her stuff and
gone to sea the same day. Would you like me to run down to Ipswich and
see if I can find out anything?"

Margaret turned on him with a look that set his heart thumping and his
pulses throbbing.

"Mr. Varney," she said, in a low, unsteady voice, "you make me ashamed
and proud--proud to have such a loyal, devoted friend, and ashamed to be
such a tax on him."

"Not at all," he replied. "After all"--here his voice, too, became a
little unsteady--"Dan was my pal, is my pal still," he added huskily.
He paused for a moment, and then concluded: "I'll go down to-night and
try to pick up the scent while it is fresh."

"It is good of you!" she exclaimed; and as she spoke her eyes filled, but
she still looked at him frankly as she continued: "Your faithful
friendship is no little compensation for "--she was going to say "his
unfaithfulness," but altered the words to "the worry and anxiety of this
horrid mystery. But I am ashamed to let you take so much trouble, though
I must confess that it would be an immense relief to me to get some news
of Dan. I don't hope for good news, but it is terrible to be so
completely in the dark."

"Yes, that is the worst part of it," Varney agreed; and then, setting his
cup on the table, he rose. "I had better be getting along now," he said,
"so that I can catch the earliest possible train. Good-bye, Mrs. Purcell,
and good luck to us both."

The leave-taking almost shattered Varney's self possession, for Margaret,
in the excess of her gratitude, impulsively grasped both his hands and
pressed them warmly as she poured out her thanks. Her touch made him
tingle to the finger-ends. Heavens! how beautiful she looked, this
lovely, unconscious young widow! And to think that she might in time be
his own! A wild impulse surged through him to clasp her in his arms, to
tell her that she was free and that he worshipped her. Of course, that
was a mere impulse that interfered not at all with his decorous,
deferential manner. And yet a sudden, almost insensible change in her
made him suspect that his eyes had told her more than he had meant to
disclose. Nevertheless, she followed him to the lobby to speed him on his
errand, and when he looked back from the foot of the stairs, she was
standing at the open door, smiling down on him.

The thoughts of these two persons, when each was alone, were strangely
different. In Margaret's mind there was no doubt that the man on the
steamer was her unworthy husband. But what did Varney think? That a man
of the world should have failed to perceive that an unexplained
disappearance was most probably an elopement seemed to her incredible.
Varney could not be such an innocent as that. The only alternative was
that he, like Mr. Penfield, was trying to shield Dan; to hush up the
disreputable elements of the escapade. But whereas the lawyer's obstinate
reticence had aroused some slight resentment, she felt no resentment
towards Varney. For he was Dan's friend first of all, and it was proper
that he should try to shield his "pal." And he was really serving husband
and wife equally. To hush things up would be the best for both. She
wanted no scandal. Loyal and faithful wife as she had been, her feelings
towards her husband were of that some what tepid quality that would have
allowed her to receive him back without reproaches, and to accept the
lamest explanations without question or comment. Varney's assumed policy
was as much to her interest as to Dan's, and he was certainly playing the
part of a devoted friend to them both.

One thing did, indeed, rather puzzle her. Her marriage had been, on her
husband's side, undoubtedly a love-match. It was for no mercenary reasons
that he had forced the marriage on her and her father, and up to the last
he had seemed to be, in his rather brutal way, genuinely in love with
her. Why, then, had he suddenly gone off with another woman? To her
constant, faithful nature the thing was inexplicable.

Varney's reflections were more complex. A vague consciousness of the
cumulative effects of actions was beginning to steal into his mind, a
faint perception that he was being borne along on the current of
circumstance. He had gone to Falmouth with the express purpose of losing
Purcell. But it seemed necessary to pick up some trace of the imaginary
fugitive; for the one essential to Varney's safety was that Purcell's
disappearance must appear to date from the landing at Penzance. That
landing must be taken as an established fact. There must be no inquiry
into or discussion of the incidents of that tragic voyage. But to that
end it was necessary that Purcell should make some reappearance on shore,
must leave some traces for possible pursuers to follow. So Varney had
gone to Falmouth to find such traces--and to lose them. That was to have
been the end of the business so far as he was concerned.

But it was not the end; and as he noted this, he noted, too, with a
curious interest unmixed with any uneasiness, how one event generates
others. He had invented Purcell's proposed visit to Falmouth to give a
plausible colour to the disappearance and to carry the field of inquiry
beyond the landing at Penzance. Then the Falmouth story had seemed to
commit him to a visit to Falmouth to confirm it. That visit had committed
him to the fabrication of the required confirmatory traces, which were to
be found and then lost. But he had not quite succeeded in losing them.
Margaret's question had seemed to commit him to tracing them further, and
now he had got to find and lose Purcell at Ipswich. That, however, would
be the end. From Ipswich Purcell would have to disappear for good.

The account that he had given Margaret was founded on facts. The ship
that he had described was a real ship, which had sailed when he had said
that she sailed and for the ports that he had named. Moreover, she had
carried one or two passengers. But the red-faced man with the suitcase
and his female companion were creatures of Varney's imagination.

Thus we see Varney already treading the well-worn trail left by
multitudes of wrong-doers; weaving around him a defensive web of illusory
appearances, laying down false tracks that lead always away from himself,
never suspecting that the web may at last become as the fowler's snare,
that the false tracks may point the way to the hounds of destiny. It is
true that, as he fared on his way to Ipswich, he was conscious that the
tide of circumstance was bearing him farther than he had meant to travel;
but not yet did he recognize in this hardly perceived compulsion the
abiding menace of accumulating consequences that encompasses the
murderer.

IV: In which Margaret confers with Dr. Thorndyke

THE sun was shining pleasantly on the trees of King's Bench Walk, Inner
Temple, when Margaret approached the handsome brick portico of No. 5A and
read upon the jamb of the doorway the name of Dr. John Thorndyke under
the explanatory heading "First Pair." She was a little nervous of the
coming interview, partly because she had met the famous criminal lawyer
only twice before, but more especially by reason of a vague fear that her
uneasy suspicions of her husband might presently be turned into something
more definite and disagreeable. Her nervousness on the first score was
soon dispelled, for her gentle summons on the little brass knocker of the
inner door--the "oak" was open--was answered by Dr. Thorndyke himself,
who greeted her as an old friend and led her into the sitting-room, where
tea-things were set out on a small table between two armchairs. The
homely informality of the reception, so different from the official
stiffness of Mr. Penfield, instantly put her at her ease; and when the
teapot arrived in the custody of a small gentleman of archidiaconal
aspect and surprising crinkliness of feature, she felt as if she were
merely paying some rather unusual kind of afternoon call.

Dr. Thorndyke had what would, in his medical capacity, have been called a
fine bedside manner--pleasant, genial, sympathetic, but never losing
touch with the business on hand. Insensibly a conversation of pleasing
generality slipped into a consultation, and Margaret found herself
stating her case, apparently of her own initiative. Having described her
interview with Mr. Penfield and commented on the old lawyer's very
unhelpful attitude, she continued:

"It was Mr. Rodney who advised me to consult you. As a civil lawyer with
no experience of criminal practice, he felt hardly competent to deal with
the case. That was what he said. It sounds rather ominous--as if he
thought there might be some criminal element in the affair."

"Not necessarily," said Thorndyke. "But your husband is missing, and a
missing man is certainly more in my province than in Rodney's. What did
he suggest that you should ask me to do?"

"I should wish, of course," replied Margaret, "to get into communication
with my husband. But if that is not possible, I should at least like to
know what has become of him. Matters can't be left in their present
uncertain state. There is the future to think of."

"Precisely," agreed Thorndyke, "and as the future must be based upon the
present and the past, we had better begin by setting out what we actually
know and can prove. First, I understand that on the 23rd of June your
husband left Sennen, and was seen by several persons to leave, on a yacht
in company with Mr. Varney, and that there was no one else on board. The
yacht reached Penzance at about half-past two in the afternoon, and your
husband went ashore at once. He was seen by Mr. Varney to land on the
pier and go towards the town. Did anyone besides Mr. Varney see him go
ashore?"

"No--at least, I have not heard of anyone. Of course, he may have been
seen by some fishermen or strangers on the pier. But does it matter? Mr.
Varney saw him land, and he certainly was not on the yacht when Mr.
Rodney arrived half an hour later. There can't be any possible doubt that
he did land at Penzance."

"No," Thorndyke agreed; "but as that is the last time that he was
certainly seen alive, and as the fact that he landed may have to be
proved in a court of law, additional evidence would be worth securing."

"But that was not the last time that he was seen alive," said Margaret;
and here she gave him an account of Varney's expedition to Falmouth,
explaining why he went and giving full particulars respecting the
steamer, all of which Thorndyke noted down on the note-block which lay by
his side on the table.

"This is very important," said he, when she had finished. "But you see
that it is on a different plane of certainty. It is hearsay at the best,
and there is no real identification. What luck did Mr. Varney have at
Ipswich?"

"He went down there on the evening of the 27th, the day after his visit
to Falmouth. He went straight to the quay-side and made inquiries about
the steamer Hedwig, which he learned had left about noon, having come in
about nine o'clock on the previous night. He talked to various
quay-loafers, and from one of them ascertained that a single passenger
had landed--a big man, carrying a large bag or portmanteau in his hand
and a coat of some kind on his arm. The passenger landed alone. Nothing
was seen of any woman."

"Did Mr. Varney take the name and address of his informant at Ipswich or
the one at Falmouth?"

"I am afraid not. He said nothing about it."

"That is unfortunate," said Thorndyke, "because these witnesses may be
wanted, as they might be able to identify a photograph of your husband.
We must find out from Mr. Varney what he did in the matter."

Margaret looked at Dr. Thorndyke with a slightly puzzled expression. "You
speak of witnesses and evidence," said she, "as if you had something
definite in your mind. Some legal proceedings, I mean."

"I have," he replied. "If your husband makes no sign and if he does not
presently appear, certain legal proceedings will become inevitable." He
paused for a few moments and then continued:

"You must understand, Mrs. Purcell, that when a man of any position--and
especially a married man--disappears from 'his usual places of resort,'
as the phrase goes, he upsets all the social adjustments that connect him
with his surroundings, and, sooner or later, those adjustments have to be
made good. If he disappears completely, it becomes uncertain whether he
is alive or dead, and this uncertainty communicates itself to his
property and to his dependents and relatives. If he is alive, his
property is vested in himself; if he is dead, it is vested in his
executors or in his heirs or next of kin. Should he be named as a
beneficiary in a will, and the person who has made that will die after
his disappearance, the question immediately arises whether he was dead or
alive at the time of the testator's death--a vitally important question,
since it affects not only himself and his heirs, but also the other
persons who benefit under the will. And then there is the status of the
wife, if the missing man is married: the question whether she is a
married woman or a widow has, in justice to her, to be settled if and
when possible. So you see that the disappearance of a man like your
husband sets going a process that generates all sorts of legal problems.
You cannot simply write him off and treat him as non existent. His life
must be properly wound up so that his estate may be disposed of, and this
will involve the necessity of presuming his death; and presumption of
death may raise difficult questions of survivorship, although these may
arise at any moment."

"What is meant by a question of survivorship?" Margaret asked.

"It is a question which arises in respect of two persons, both of whom
are dead and concerning one or both of whom the exact date of death is
unknown. One of them must have died before the other, unless they both
died at the same instant. The question is, Which survived the other?
Which of them died first? It is a question on which may turn the
succession to an estate, a title, or even a kingdom."

"Well," said Margaret, "it is not likely to arise in respect of Dan."

"On the contrary," Thorndyke dissented, "it may arise to-morrow. If some
person who has left him a legacy should die to-day, that person's will
could not be administered until it had been decided whether your husband
was or was not alive at the time the testator died; that is, whether or
not he survived the testator. But, as matters stand, we can give no
answer to that question. We can prove that he was alive at half-past two
on the 2 of June. Thenceforward we have no knowledge of him."

"Excepting what Mr. Varney has told us."

"Mr. Varney's information is legally worthless unless he can produce the
witnesses, and unless they can identify a photograph or otherwise prove
that the man whom they saw was actually Mr. Purcell. You must ask Mr.
Varney about it. However, at the moment you are more concerned to find
out what has become of your husband. I suppose I may ask a few necessary
questions?"

"Oh, certainly," she replied. "Pray don't have any scruples of delicacy.
Ask anything you want to know."

"Thank you, Mrs. Purcell," said Thorndyke. "And to begin with the
inevitable question, Do you know of, or suspect, any kind of entanglement
with any woman?"

The direct, straightforward question came rather as a relief to Margaret,
and she answered without embarrassment:

"Naturally, I suspect, because I can think of no other reason for his
leaving me in this way. But to be honest, I have never had the slightest
grounds of complaint in regard to his behaviour with other women. He
married me because he fell in love with me, and he has never seemed to
change. Whatever he has been to other people, to me he has always
appeared, in his rough, taciturn way, as devoted as his nature allowed
him to be. This affair is an utter surprise to me."

Thorndyke made no comment on this, but, following the hint that Margaret
had dropped, asked:

"As to his character in general, what sort of a man is he? Is he popular,
for instance?"

"No," replied Margaret, "he is not very much liked--in fact, with the
exception of Mr. Varney he has no really intimate friends, and I have
often wondered how poor Mr. Varney put up with the way he treated him.
The truth is that Dan is rather a bully; he is strong, big, and
pugnacious, and used to having his own way and somewhat brutal, at times,
in his manner of getting it. He is a very self-contained, taciturn,
rather secretive man, and--well, perhaps he is not very scrupulous. I am
not painting a very flattering picture, I am afraid."

"It sounds like a good portrait, though," said Thorndyke. "When you say
that he is not very scrupulous, are you referring to his business
transactions?"

"Well, yes, and to his dealings with people generally."

"By the way," asked Thorndyke, "what is his occupation?"

Margaret uttered a little apologetic laugh. "It sounds absurd, but I
really don't quite know what his business is. He is so very
uncommunicative. I have always understood that he is a financier, what
ever that may be. I believe he negotiates loans and buys and sells stocks
and shares, but he is not on the Stock Exchange. He has an office in
Coleman Street, in the premises of a firm of outside brokers, and he
keeps a clerk, a man named Levy. It seems to be quite a small
establishment, though it appears to yield a fair income. That is all I
can tell you, but I dare say Mr. Levy could give you other particulars if
you wanted them."

"I will make a note of the address, at any rate," said Thorndyke; and
having done so, he asked:

"As to your husband's banking account: do you happen to know if any
considerable sum has been drawn out quite lately, or if any cheques have
been presented since he disappeared?"

"His current account is intact," she replied. "I have an account at the
same bank, and I saw the manager a couple of days ago. Of course, he was
not very expansive, but he did tell me that no unusual amounts had been
withdrawn, and that no cheque has been presented since the 21st of June,
when Dan drew a cheque for me. It is really rather odd, especially as the
balance is somewhat above the average. Don't you think so?"

"I do," he answered. "It suggests that your husband's disappearance was
unpremeditated, and that extreme precautions are being taken to conceal
his present whereabouts. But the mystery is what he is living on if he
took no considerable sum with him and has drawn no cheques since.
However, we had better finish with the general questions. You don't
appear to know much about your husband's present affairs: what do you
know of his past?"

"Not a great deal, and I can think of nothing that throws any light on
his extraordinary conduct in taking himself off as he has done. I met him
at Maidstone about six years ago. He was then employed in the office of a
large paper mill--Whichboy's mill, I think it was--as a clerk or
accountant. He had then recently come down from Cambridge, and seemed in
rather low water. After a time, he left Whichboy's and went to London,
and very shortly his circumstances began to improve in a remarkable way.
It was then that he began his present business, which I know included the
making of loans, because he lent my father money--in fact, it was
through these transactions and his visits on business to my father that
the intimacy grew which resulted finally in our marriage. He then seemed,
as he always has, to be a keen business man, very attentive to the main
chance, not at all sentimental in his dealings, and, as I have said, not
over-scrupulous as to his methods."

Thorndyke nodded gravely but made no comment. The association of loans to
the father with marriage with an evidently not infatuated daughter seemed
to throw a sufficiently suggestive light on Daniel Purcell's methods.

"And as to his personal habits and tastes?" he asked.

"He has always been reasonably temperate, though he likes good living and
has a robust appetite; and he really has no vices beyond a rather
unpleasant temper and excessive keenness on money. His principal interest
is in boating, yachting, and fishing; he does not bet or gamble, and his
relations with women have always seemed to be perfectly correct."

"You spoke of his exceptional intimacy with Mr. Varney. Is the friendship
of long standing?"

"Yes, quite. They were schoolfellows, they were at Cambridge together,
and they both came down about the same time and for a similar reason.
Both their fathers got suddenly into financial difficulties. Dan's father
was a stockbroker, and he failed suddenly, either through some unlucky
speculations or through the default of a client. Mr. Varney's father was
a clergyman, and he, too, lost all his money, and at about the same time.
I have always suspected that there was some connection between the two
failures, but I have never heard that there actually was. Dan is as close
as an oyster, and, of course, Mr. Varney has never referred to the
affair."

"Mr. Varney is not associated with your husband in business?"

"No. He is an artist, principally an etcher, and a very clever one, too.
I think he is doing quite well now, but he had a hard struggle when he
first came down from Cambridge. For a couple of years he worked for an
engraver doing ordinary copperplate work for the trade, and I understand
that he is remarkably skilful at engraving. But now he does nothing but
etchings and mezzotints."

"Then his activities are entirely concerned with art?"

"I believe so--now, at any rate. After he left the engraver he went to a
merchant in the City as a clerk. But he was only there quite a short
time, and I fancy he left on account of some sort of unpleasantness, but
I know nothing about it. After that he went abroad and travelled about
for a time, making sketches and drawings of the towns to do his etchings
from--in fact, he only came back from Belgium a couple of months ago.
But I am afraid I am wasting your time with a lot of irrelevant gossip."

"It is my fault if you are," said Thorndyke, "since I put the questions.
But the fact is that nothing is irrelevant. Your husband has vanished
into space in a perfectly unaccountable manner, and we have to find, if
we can, something in his known circumstances which may give us a clue to
the motive and the manner of his disappearance and his probable
whereabouts at present. Has he any favourite haunts abroad or at home?"

"He is very partial to the Eastern Counties, especially the Broads and
rivers of Norfolk. You remember he was on his way to Oulton Broad when he
disappeared?"

"Yes; and one must admit that the waterways of Norfolk and Suffolk, with
all their endless communications, would form an admirable hiding-place.
In a small yacht or covered boat a man might lose himself in that network
of rivers and lakes and lie hidden for months, creeping from end to end
of the county without leaving a trace. We must bear that possibility in
mind. By the way, have you brought me a copy of that very cautious letter
of Mr. Penfield's?"

"I have brought the letter itself," she replied, producing it and laying
it on the table.

"Thank you," said Thorndyke. "I will make a copy of it and let you have
the original back. And there is another question. Has the letter which
Mr. Penfield ought to have received been returned to you?"

"No," replied Margaret.

"Ha!" said Thorndyke, "that is important, because it is undoubtedly a
remarkable circumstance and rather significant. A letter in the wrong
envelope practically always implies another letter in another wrong
envelope. Now a letter was almost certainly written to Mr. Penfield and
almost certainly sent. It was presumably a business letter and of some
importance. It ought certainly to have been returned to the sender, and
under ordinary circumstances would have been. Why has it not been
returned? The person to whom it was sent was the person to whom the
mysterious communication that Mr. Penfield received was addressed. That
communication, we judge from Mr. Penfield's letter, contained some highly
confidential matter. But that implies some person who was in highly
confidential relations with your husband. The suggestion seems to be that
your husband discovered his mistake after he had posted the letter or
letters, and that he went at once to this other person and informed him
of what had happened."

"Informed her," Margaret corrected.

"I must admit," said Thorndyke, "that the circumstances give colour to
your inference, but we must remember that they would apply equally to a
man. They certainly point to an associate of some kind. The character of
that associate and the nature of the association are questions that turn
on the contents of that letter that Mr. Penfield received."

"Do you think," asked Margaret, "that Mr. Penfield would be more
confidential with you than he was with me?"

"I doubt it," was the reply. "If the contents of that letter were of a
secret nature, he will keep them to himself; and quite right, too. But I
shall give him a trial all the same, and you had better let him know that
you have consulted me."

This brought the conference to an end, and shortly afterwards Margaret
went on her way, now more than ever convinced that the inevitable woman
was at the bottom of the mystery. For some time after she had gone
Thorndyke sat with his notes before him, wrapped in profound thought and
deeply interested in the problem that he was called upon to solve. He did
not share Margaret's suspicions, though he had not strongly contested
them. To his experienced eye, the whole group of circumstances, with
certain points which he had not thought fit to enlarge on, suggested
something more sinister than a mere elopement.

There was Purcell's behaviour, for instance. It had all the appearances
of an unpremeditated flight. No preparations seemed to have been made, no
attempt to wind up his affairs. His banking account was left intact,
though no one but he could touch it during his lifetime. He had left or
sent no letter of farewell, explanation, or apology to his wife; and now
that he was gone, he was maintaining a secrecy as to his whereabouts so
profound that, apparently, he did not even dare to draw a cheque.

But even more significant was the conduct of Mr. Penfield. Taking from
its envelope the mysterious letter that had come to Sennen and exploded
the mine, Thorndyke spread it out and slowly read it though; and his
interpretation of it now was the same as on the occasion when he heard
Margaret's epitome of it at Sennen. It was a message to Purcell through
his wife, telling him that something which had been discovered was not
going to be divulged. What could that something be? The answer, in
general terms, seemed to be given by Penfield's subsequent conduct. He
had been absolutely uncommunicative to Margaret. Yet Margaret, as the
missing man's wife, was a proper person to receive any information that
could be given. Apparently, then, the information that Penfield possessed
was of a kind that could not be imparted to anyone. Even its very nature
could not be hinted at.

Now what kind of information could that be? The obvious inference was
that the letter which had come to Penfield contained incriminating
matter. That would explain everything. For if Penfield had thus stumbled
on evidence of a crime, either committed or contemplated, he would have
to choose between denouncing the criminal or keeping the matter to
himself. But he was not entitled to keep it to himself; for, other
considerations apart, this was not properly a client's secret. It had not
been communicated to him: he had discovered it by accident. He was
therefore not bound to secrecy, and he could not, consequently, claim a
lawyer's privilege. In short, if he had discovered a crime and chose to
suppress his discovery, he was, in effect, an accessory, before or after
the fact, as the case might be; and he would necessarily keep the secret
because he would not dare to divulge it.

This view was strongly supported by Purcell's conduct. The disappearance
of the latter coincided exactly with the delivery of the mysterious
letter to Penfield. The inference was that Purcell, having discovered his
fatal mistake, and assuming that Penfield would immediately denounce him
to the police, had fled instantly and was now in hiding. Purcell's and
Penfield's conduct were both in complete agreement with this theory.

But there was a further consideration. If the contents of that letter
were incriminating, they incriminated someone besides Purcell. The person
for whom the letter was intended must have been a party to any unlawful
proceedings referred to in it. He--or she--must, in fact, have been a
confederate. Now, who could that confederate be? Someone, apparently, who
was unknown to Margaret, unless it might be the somewhat shadowy Mr.
Levy. And that raised yet a further question: What was Purcell? How did
he get his living? His wife evidently did not know, which was a striking
and rather suspicious fact. He had been described as a financier. But
that meant nothing. The word "financier" covered a multitude of sins; the
question was, What sins did it cover in the present instance? And the
answer to that question seemed to involve a visit of exploration to
Coleman Street.

As Thorndyke collected his notes to form the nucleus of a dossier of the
Purcell Case, he foresaw that his investigations might well unearth some
very unlovely skeletons. But that was no fault of his, nor need the
disclosures be unnecessarily paraded. But Margaret Purcell's position
must be secured and made regular. Her missing husband must either be
found and brought back, or he must be written off and disposed of in a
proper and legal fashion.

V: In which Thorndyke makes a Few Inquiries

IF Mr. Penfield had been reluctant to arrange an interview with Margaret
Purcell, he was yet more unwilling to accept one with Dr. John Thorndyke.
It is true that, as a lawyer of the old school, he regarded Thorndyke
with a certain indulgent contempt, as a dabbler in law, an amateur, a
mere doctor masquerading as a lawyer. But coupled with this contempt was
an unacknowledged fear. For it was not unknown to him that this
medico-legal hermaphrodite had strange and disconcerting methods; that he
had a habit of driving his chariot through well-established legal
conventions, and of using his eyes and ears in a fashion not recognized
by orthodox legal precedents.

Accordingly, when he received a note from Thorndyke announcing the
intention of the writer to call on him, he would have liked to decline
the encounter. A less courageous man would have absented himself. But Mr.
Penfield was a sportsman to the backbone, and having got himself into
difficulties by that very quality, elected to "face the music" like a
man; and so it happened that when Thorndyke arrived in the clerks'
office, he was informed that Mr. Penfield was at liberty, and was duly
announced and ushered into the sanctum.

The old solicitor received him with a sort of stiff cordiality, helped
himself to a pinch of snuff, and awaited the opening of the offensive.

"You have heard from Mrs. Purcell, I presume," said Thorndyke.

"Yes. I understand that you are commissioned by her to ascertain the
whereabouts of her husband--a very desirable thing to do, and I wish you
every success."

"I am sure you do," said Thorndyke, "and it is with that conviction that
I have called on you to enable you to give effect to your good wishes."

Mr. Penfield paused, with his snuff-box open and an infinitesimal
particle between his finger and thumb, to steal a quick glance at
Thorndyke.

"In what way?" he asked.

"You received a certain communication, concerning which you wrote to Mrs.
Purcell at--"

"I beg your pardon," interrupted Penfield, "but I received no
communication. A communication was no doubt dispatched by Mr. Purcell,
but it never reached me."

"I am referring to a letter which did reach you--a letter with certain
enclosures, apparently put into the wrong envelope."

"And which," said Penfield, "is consequently no concern of mine, or, if
you will pardon my saying so, of yours."

"Of that," said Thorndyke, "you are doubtless a better judge than I am,
since you have read the letter and I have not. But I am instructed to
investigate the disappearance of Mr. Purcell, and as this letter appears
to be connected with this disappearance, it naturally becomes an object
of interest to me."

"Why do you assume that it is connected with the disappearance?" Penfield
demanded.

"Because of the striking coincidence of the time of its arrival and the
time of the disappearance," replied Thorndyke.

"That seems a very insufficient reason," said Penfield.

"Not, I think," rejoined Thorndyke, "if taken in conjunction with the
terms of your own letter to Mrs. Purcell. But do I understand you to say
that there was no connection?"

"I did not say that. What I say is that I have inadvertently seen a
letter which was not addressed to me and which I was not intended to see.
You will agree with me that it would be entirely inadmissible for me to
divulge or discuss its contents."

"I am not sure that I do agree with you, seeing that the writer of the
letter is the husband of our client and the consignee is a person unknown
to us both. But you will naturally act on your own convictions. Would it
be admissible for you to indicate the nature of the enclosures?"

"It would be entirely inadmissible," replied Mr. Penfield.

There was a short silence, during which Mr. Penfield refreshed himself
with a pinch of snuff and Thorndyke rapidly turned over the situation.
Obviously, the old solicitor did not intend to give any information
whatever, possibly for very good reasons. At any rate, his decision had
to be accepted and this Thorndyke proceeded to acknowledge.

"Well, Mr. Penfield," he said, "I mustn't urge you to act against your
professional conscience. I am sure you would help me if you could. By the
way, I assume that there would be no objection to my inspecting the
envelope in which that letter was contained?"

"The envelope!" exclaimed Penfield, considerably startled. "Why, what
information could you possibly gather from the envelope?"

"That is impossible to say until I have seen it," was the reply.

"However," said Penfield, "I am afraid that the same objection applies,
sorry as I am to refuse."

"But," persisted Thorndyke, "why should you refuse? The letter, as you
say, was not addressed to you, but the envelope was. It is your own
envelope, and is entirely at your disposal."

Mr. Penfield was cornered, and he had the wisdom to recognize the fact.
Reluctant as he was to let Thorndyke examine even the envelope in which
those incriminating blanks were enclosed, he saw that a refusal might
arouse suspicion, and suspicion was what he must avoid at all costs.
Nevertheless, he made a last effort to temporize.

"Was there any point on which I could enlighten you--in respect of the
envelope? Can I give you any information?" he asked.

"I am afraid not," replied Thorndyke. "My experience has taught me always
to examine the envelope of letters closely. By doing so one often picks up
unexpected crumbs of evidence; but, naturally, one cannot tell in advance
what there may be to observe."

"No," agreed Penfield. "Quite so. It is like cross-examination. Well, I
am afraid you won't pick up much this time, but if you really wish to
inspect the envelope, I suppose, as you say, I need not scruple to place
it in your hands."

With this he rose and walked over to the safe, opened it, opened an inner
drawer, and, keeping his back towards Thorndyke, took out the envelope,
which he carefully emptied of its contents. Thorndyke sat motionless, not
looking at the lawyer's back but listening intently. Not a sound,
however, reached his ears until the iron drawer slid back into its case,
when Penfield turned and, without a word, laid the empty envelope on the
table before him.

For a few moments Thorndyke looked at the envelope as it lay, noting
that, although empty, it retained the bulge caused by its late contents,
and that those contents must have been somewhat bulky. Then he picked it
up and inspected it methodically, committing his observations to memory,
since written notes seemed unadvisable under the circumstances. It was an
oblong, "commercial" envelope, about six inches long by three and
three-quarters wide. The address was written with a pen of medium width
and unusually black ink in a rather small, fluent, legible hand, with
elegant capitals of a distinctly uncial type. The post-mark was that of
Penzance, dated the 23rd of June, 8.30 p.m. But of more interest to
Thorndyke than the date, which he already knew, was an impression which
the postmark stamp had made by striking the corner of the enclosure and
thus defining its position in the envelope. From this he was able to
judge that the object enclosed was oblong in shape, about five inches
long or a little more, and somewhat less than three inches wide, and that
it consisted of some soft material, presumably folded paper, since the
blow of the metal stamp had left but a blunt impression of the corner. He
next examined the edge of the flap, first with the naked eye and then
with his pocket lens, and finally, turning back the flap from the place
where the envelope had been neatly cut open, he closely scrutinized its
inner surface.

"Have you examined this envelope, Mr. Penfield?" he asked.

"Not in that exhaustive and minute manner," replied the solicitor, who
had been watching the process with profound disfavour. "Why do you ask?"

"Because there appears to me a suggestion of its having been opened by
moistening the flap and then reclosed. Just look at it through the glass,
especially at the inside, where the gum seems to have spread more than
one would expect from a single closing, and where there is a slight
cockling of the paper."

He handed the envelope and the lens to Penfield, who seemed to find some
difficulty in managing the latter, and after a brief inspection returned
both the articles to Thorndyke.

"I have not your experience and skill," he said. "You may be right, but
all the probabilities are against your suggestion. If Purcell had
reopened the letter, it would surely have been to correct an error rather
than to make one. And the letter certainly belonged to the enclosures."

"On the other hand," said Thorndyke, "when an envelope has been steamed
or damped open, it will be laid down flap uppermost, with the addressed
side hidden, and a mistake might occur in that way. However, there is
probably nothing in it. That, I gather, is your opinion?"

Unfortunately it was. Very glad would Penfield have been to believe that
the envelope had been opened and the blanks put in by another hand. But
he had read Purcell's letter, and knew its connection with the
enclosures.

"May I ask if you were expecting a letter from Purcell?" Thorndyke asked.

"Yes. I had written to him, and was expecting a reply."

"And would that letter have contained enclosures of about the same size
as those which were sent?"

"I have no reason to suppose that it would have contained any
enclosures," Penfield replied. "None were asked for."

Thorndyke made a mental note of this reply and of the fact that Penfield
did not seem to perceive its bearing, and rose to depart.

"I am sorry to have had to be so reticent," said Penfield, as they shook
hands, "but I hope your visit has not been entirely unfruitful, and I
speed you on your quest with hearty good wishes."

Thorndyke replied in similarly polite terms and went on his way, leaving
Mr. Penfield in a state of profound relief at having got rid of him, not
entirely unmingled with twinges of apprehension lest some incriminating
fact should have leaked out unnoticed by him. Meanwhile Thorndyke, as
soon as he emerged into Lombard Street, halted and made a detailed
memorandum in his pocket-book of the few facts that he had gleaned.

Having thus disposed of Mr. Penfield, he turned his steps in the
direction of Coleman Street with the purpose of calling on Mr. Levy, not,
indeed, with the expectation of extracting much information from him, but
rather to ascertain, if possible, how Purcell got his living. Arrived at
the number that Margaret had given him, he read through the list of
occupants in the hall, but without finding among then the name of
Purcell. There was, however, on the second floor a firm entitled
Honeyball Brothers, who were described as "financial agents," and as this
description was the only one that seemed to meet the case, he ascended
the stairs and entered a small, well-furnished office bearing on its door
the Honeyball superscription. The only occupant was a spectacled youth,
who was busily directing envelopes.

"Is Mr. Levy in?" Thorndyke inquired.

"I'll see," was the cautious reply. "What name?"

Thorndyke gave his name, and the youth crossed to a door marked
"Private," which he opened, and having passed through closed it behind
him. His investigations in the sanctum resulted in the discovery that Mr.
Levy was there, a fact which he announced when he reappeared, holding the
door open and inviting Thorndyke to enter. The latter accordingly walked
through into the private office, when the door immediately closed behind
him, and a smartly dressed, middle-aged man rose from a writing-chair and
received him with an outstretched hand.

"You are Mr. Levy?" inquired Thorndyke.

"I am Mr. Levy," was the answer, accompanied by an almost affectionate
handshake and a smile of the most intense benevolence; "at your entire
service, Dr. Thorndyke. Won't you sit down? This is the more comfortable
chair and is nearer to my desk, and so more convenient for conversation.
Ahem. We are always delighted to meet members of your profession, Doctor.
We do business with quite a number of them, and I may say that we find
them peculiarly appreciative of the delicacy with which our transactions
are conducted. Ahem. Now, in what way can I have the pleasure of being of
service to you?"

"The fact is," replied Thorndyke, "I have just called to make one or two
inquiries."

"Quite so," interrupted Mr. Levy. "You are perfectly right. The wisdom of
our ancestors, Dr. Thorndyke, expresses itself admirably in the old adage
'Look before you leap.' Don't be diffident, sir. The more inquiries you
make the better we shall be pleased. Now, what is the first point?"

"Well," Thorndyke replied, "I suppose the first point to dispose of is
whether I have or have not come to the right office. My business is
concerned with Mr. Daniel Purcell."

"Then," said Mr. Levy, "I should say that you have come to the right
office. Mr. Purcell is not here at the moment, but that is of no
consequence. I am his authorized deputy. What is the nature of your
business, Doctor?"

"I am acting for Mrs. Purcell, who has asked me to ascertain her
husband's whereabouts, if possible."

"I see," said Levy. "Family doctor, hey? Well, I hope you'll find out
where he is, because then you can tell me. But isn't Mr. Penfield looking
into the matter?"

"Possibly. But Mr. Penfield is not very communicative, and it is not
clear that he is taking any steps to locate Purcell. May I take it that
you are willing to help us, so far as you can?"

"Certainly," replied Levy; "I'm willing enough. But if you want
information you are in the same position as myself. All I know is that I
haven't got his present address, but I have no doubt I shall hear from
him in due course. He is away on holiday, you must remember."

"You know of no reason for supposing that he has gone away for good?"

"Lord bless you, no," replied Levy. "The first I heard of anything
unusual was when old Penfield came round to ask if he had been to the
office. Of course he hadn't, but I gave Penfield his address at Oulton
and I wrote to Oulton myself. Then it turned out that he hadn't gone to
Oulton after all. I admit that it is queer he hasn't written, seeing how
methodical he usually is; but there is nothing to make a fuss about.
Purcell isn't the sort of man to go off on a jaunt that would involve his
dropping money; I can tell you that."

"And meanwhile his absence is not causing any embarrassment in a business
sense?"

Mr. Levy rose with a somewhat foxy smile. "Do I look embarrassed?" he
asked. "Try me. I should like to do a bit of business with you. No? Well,
then, I will wish you good-morning and good luck; and don't worry too
much about the lost sheep. He is very well able to take care of himself."

He shook hands once more with undiminished cordiality, and personally
escorted Thorndyke out on to the landing.

There was one other matter that had to be looked into. Mr. Varney's
rather vague report of the voyage from Falmouth to Ipswich required to be
brought into the region of ascertained fact. Accordingly, from Purcell's
office Thorndyke took his way to Lloyd's, where a brief investigation put
him in possession of the name and address of the owner of the steamship
Hedwig of Hernosand. With this in his notebook he turned homewards to the
Temple with the immediate purpose of writing to the owner and the captain
of the ship asking for a list of the passengers from Falmouth and of
those who disembarked at Ipswich, and further giving a description of
Purcell in case he should have travelled, as was highly probable, under
an assumed name.

With these particulars it would be possible at least to attempt to trace
the missing man, while if it should turn out that Varney had been
misinformed, the trouble and expense of a search in the wrong place would
be avoided.

VI: In which Mr. Varney prepares a Deception

VARNEY'S domestic arrangements were of the simplest. Unlike the
majority of those who engage in dishonest transactions, he was frugal,
thrifty, and content with little. Of what he earned, honestly or
otherwise, he saved as much as he could; and now that he was free of
the parasite who had clung to him for so long and had a future to
look forward to, he was more than ever encouraged to live providently
well within his modest means. For residence he occupied a couple of
furnished rooms in Ampthil Square, Camden Town; but he spent little
of his time in them, for he had a little studio in a quiet turning
off the High Street, which he held on lease, and which contained his
few household gods and formed his actual home. Thither he usually
repaired as soon as he had breakfasted, buying a newspaper on the way
and sitting in the Windsor armchair by the gas fire--alight or not,
according to the season--to smoke his morning pipe and glance over the
news before beginning work.

Following his usual custom, on a bright, sunny morning near the end of
October, he arrived at the studio with a copy of The Times under his arm,
and, letting himself in with his latch-key, laid the paper on the
work-bench, hung up his hat, and put a match to the gas fire. Then,
having drawn a chair up to the fire, he drew forth his pipe and pouch and
sauntered over to the bench, where he stood, filling his pipe and gazing
absently at the bench whereon the paper lay, while his thoughts travelled
along a well-worn if somewhat vague track into a pleasant and tranquil
future. Not for him alone was that future pleasant and tranquil. It held
another figure--a sweet and gracious figure that lived in all his
countless daydreams. She should be happy, too, freed, like himself, from
that bloated parasite who had fastened upon her. Indeed, she was free
now, if only she could be made to know it.

Again, for the thousandth time, he wondered, did she care for him? It was
impossible to guess. She seemed always pleased to see him; she was warmly
appreciative of his attentiveness and his efforts to help her, and her
manner towards him was cordial and friendly. There was no doubt that she
liked him, and what more could he ask until such time as the veil should
be lifted and her freedom revealed to her? For Maggie Purcell was not
only a pure-minded and innocent woman: she was the very soul of loyalty,
even to the surly brute who had intruded unbidden into her life. And for
this Varney loved her the more. But it left his question unanswered and
unanswerable. For while her husband lived, in her belief, no thought of
love for any other could be consciously admitted to that loyal heart.

He had filled his pipe, and taken a matchbox from his pocket, and was in
the act of striking a match when, in an instant, his movement was
arrested, and he stood, rigid and still, with the match poised in his
hand and his eyes fixed on the newspaper. But no longer absently, for his
wandering glance, travelling unheedingly over the printed page, had
lighted by chance upon the name Purcell, printed in small capitals. For a
few moments he stood with his eyes riveted on the familiar name; then he
picked up the paper and read eagerly.

It was an advertisement in the "Personal" column, and read thus: "PURCELL
(D.) is requested to communicate at once with Mr. J. Penfield, who has
important information to impart to him in re Catford, deceased. The
matter is urgent, as the will has been proved and must now be
administered."

Varney read the advertisement through twice, and as he read it he smiled
grimly, not, however, without a certain vague discomfort. There was
nothing in the paragraph which affected him, but yet he found it, in some
indefinable way, disquieting. And the more he reflected on the matter the
more disturbing did it appear. Confound Purcell! The fellow was dead, and
there was an end of it--at least, that was what he had intended and what
he wished. But it seemed that it was not the end of it. Ever since that
tragic voyage, when he had boldly cut the Gordian knot of his
entanglements, Purcell had continued to reappear in one way or another,
still, as ever, seeming to dominate his life. From his unknown and
unsuspected grave, fathoms deep in the ocean, mysterious and disturbing
influences seemed to issue, as though, even in death, his malice was
still active. When would it be possible to shake him off for good?

Varney laid down the paper, and, flinging himself into the chair, set
himself to consider the bearings of this new incident. How did it affect
him? At the first glance it appeared not to affect him at all. Penfield
would get no reply, and after one or two more trials he would have to
give it up. That was all. The affair was no concern of his.

But was that all? And was it no concern of his? Reflection did not by any
means confirm these assumption. Varney knew little about the law, but he
realized that a will which had been proved was a thing that had to be
dealt with in some conclusive manner. When Penfield failed to get into
touch with Purcell, what would he do? The matter, as he had said, was
urgent. Something would have to be done. Quite probably Penfield would
set some inquiries on foot. He would learn from Maggie, if he did not
already know, of Purcell's supposed visit to Falmouth and the mythical
voyage to Ipswich. Supposing he followed up those false tracks
systematically? That might lead to complications. Those inventions had
been improvised rather hastily, principally for Maggie's benefit. They
might not stand such investigation as a lawyer might bring to bear on
them. There was the ship, for instance. It would be possible to ascertain
definitely what passengers she carried from Falmouth. And when it became
certain that Purcell was not one of them, at the best the inquiry would
draw a blank, at the worst there might be some suspicion of a fabrication
of evidence on his part. In any case, the inquiry would be brought back
to Penzance.

That would not do at all. Inquiries must be kept away from Penzance. He
was the only witness of that mythical landing on the pier, and hitherto
no one had thought of questioning his testimony. He believed that his own
arrival on the pier had been unnoticed. But who could say? A vessel
entering a harbour is always an object of interest to every nautical eye
that beholds her. Who could say that some unseen watcher had not observed
the yacht's arrival and noted that she was worked single-handed, and that
one man only had gone ashore? It was quite possible, though he had seen
no such watcher, and the risk was too great to be thought of. At all
costs the inquiry must be kept away from Penzance.

How was that to be managed? The obvious way was to fabricate some sort of
reply to the advertisement purporting to come from Purcell--a telegram,
for instance, from France or Belgium, or even from some place in the
Eastern Counties. The former was hardly possible, however. He could not
afford the time or expense of a journey abroad, and, more over, his
absence from England would be known, and its coincidence with the arrival
of the telegram might easily be noticed. Coincidences of that kind were
much better avoided.

On reflection, the telegram did not commend itself. Penfield would
naturally ask himself: "Why a telegram when a letter would have been
equally safe and so much more efficient?" For both would reveal,
approximately, the whereabouts of the sender. No, a telegram would not
answer the purpose. It would not be quite safe, for telegrams, like
typewritten letters, are always open to suspicion as to their
genuineness. Such suspicions may lead to inquiries at the telegraph
office. On the other hand, a letter, if it could be properly managed,
would have quite the contrary effect. It would be accepted as convincing
evidence, not only of the existence of the writer, but of his whereabouts
at the time of writing--if only it could be properly managed. But could
it be?

He struck a match and lit his pipe--to little purpose, for it went out
and was forgotten in the course of a minute. Could he produce a letter
from Purcell--a practicable letter which would pass with out suspicion
the scrutiny, not only of Penfield himself, who was familiar with
Purcell's handwriting, but also of Maggie, to whom it would almost
certainly be shown? It was a serious question, and he gave it very
serious consideration, balancing the chances of detection against the
chances of success, and especially dwelling upon the improbability of any
question arising as to its authenticity.

Now, Varney was endowed in a remarkable degree with the dangerous gift of
imitating handwriting; indeed, it was this gift, and its untimely
exercise, that had been the cause of all his troubles. And the natural
facility in this respect had been reinforced by the steadiness of hand
and perfect control of line that had come from his years of practice as a
copperplate engraver. In that craft his work had largely consisted of
minute and accurate imitation of writing and other linear forms, and he
was now capable of reproducing his "copy" with microscopic precision and
fidelity. Reflecting on this, and, further, that he was in possession of
Purcell's own fountain pen with its distinctive ink, he decided
confidently that he could produce a letter which would not merely pass
muster but would even defy critical examination, to which it was not
likely to be subjected.

Having decided that the letter could be produced, the next question was
that of ways and means. It would have been best for it to be sent from
some place abroad, but that could not very well be managed. However, it
would answer quite well if it could be sent from one of the towns or
villages of East Anglia--in fact, that would perhaps be the best plan,
as it would tend to confirm the Falmouth and Ipswich stories and be, in
its turn, supported by them. But there was the problem of getting the
letter posted. That would involve a journey down to Suffolk or Norfolk,
and to this there were several objections. In the first place, he could
ill spare the time, for he had a good deal of work on hand: he had an
engagement with a dealer on the present evening, he had to arrange about
an exhibition on the following day, and in the evening he was to dine
with Maggie and Philip Rodney. None of these engagements, but especially
the last, was he willing to cancel; and yet, if the letter was to be
sent, there ought not to be much delay. But the most serious objection
was the one that had occurred to him in relation to the telegram. His
absence from town would probably be known and he might even be seen,
either at his East Anglian destination or on his way thither or
returning, and the coincidence of those movements with the arrival of the
letter could hardly fail to be noticed. Indeed, if he were seen in the
locality from whence the letter came, or going or returning, that would
be a perilously striking coincidence.

What, then, was the alternative? He reflected awhile, and presently he
had an idea. How would it answer if he should not post the letter at all,
but simply drop it into Penfield's letter-box? There was something to be
said for that. It would go to prove that Purcell must be lurking
somewhere in London--not an unlikely thing in itself, for London is so
large that it is hardly a locality at all, and it is admittedly one of
the safest of hiding-places. But, for that matter, why not post the
letter, say, in Limehouse or Ratcliff, and thus suggest a lurking-place
in the squalid and nautical east? That did not seem a bad idea. But still
his preferences leaned towards the Eastern Counties--somewhere in the
neighbourhood of Ipswich, which would give consistency to the account of
the voyage from Falmouth. It was something of a dilemma, and he turned
over the alternative plans for some time without coming to any
conclusion.

As he sat thus meditating, his eye roamed idly about the bare but homely
studio, and presently it encountered an object that started a new and
interesting train of thought. Pushed away in a corner was a small
lithographic press, now mostly disused, for the little "auto-lithographs"
that he used to produce had ceased to be profitable now that there was a
fair demand for his etchings and mezzotints. But the press was in going
order, and he was a moderately expert lithographer--quite expert enough
to produce a perfectly convincing post-mark on a forged letter,
especially if that post-mark were carefully indented after printing, to
disguise the process by which it had been produced.

It was a brilliant idea. In his pleased excitement he started up from his
chair and began rapidly to pace up and down the studio. A most admirable
plan! For it not only disposed of all the difficulties but actually
turned them into advantages. He would get the letter prepared; he would
keep his engagement with Maggie; then, after leaving her, he would make
his way to George Yard and there drop the letter into Penfield's
letter-box. It would be found on the following morning, and would appear
to have been posted the previous evening and delivered by the first post.
He would actually be present in Maggie's flat at the very moment when the
letter was (apparently) being posted in Suffolk. A most excellent scheme!

Chuckling with satisfaction, he set himself forth with to carry it out.
The means and appliances were in a cupboard that filled a recess--just a
plain wall cupboard, but fitted with a Chubb lock of the highest class.
Unlocking this, he cast his eye over the orderly shelves. Here, standing
upright in an empty ink-bottle, was the thick-barrelled fountain pen that
had once been Purcell's. Varney took out the pen in its container and
stood it on the table. Next, from the back of the cupboard, he reached
out an expanding letter-file, and, opening it, took from the compartment
marked "P" a small bundle of letters docketed "Purcell," which he also
laid on the table. They were all harmless unimportant letters (saved for
that very reason), and if one should have asked why Varney had kept them,
the answer, applicable to most of the other contents of the file, would
have been that they had been preserved in obedience to the forger's
instinct to keep a few originals in stock on the chance that they might
come in handy one day.

He drew a chair up to the table and began methodically to look through
the letters, underlining with a lead pencil the words that he would
probably want to copy. In the third letter that he read he had an
unexpected stroke of luck, for it contained a reference to Mr. Penfield,
to whom some enclosed document was to be sent, and it actually gave his
full name and address. This was a windfall indeed! As he encircled the
address with a pencil mark, Varney smiled complacently, and felt that
Fortune was backing him up handsomely.

Having secured the "copy" for the handwriting, the next thing was to get
the post-mark drawn and printed. The letters in the file had no
envelopes, but he had in his pocket a letter that he had received that
morning from an innkeeper at Tenterden, to whom he had written for
particulars as to accommodation. It was probably a typical country
letter, and its post-mark would serve as well as any other. He took it
from his pocket, and, laying it on a small drawing board, pinned a piece
of tracing paper over it and made a very careful tracing of the
post-mark. Then he drew away the letter, and slipped in its place a small
piece of lithographic transfer paper with a piece of black lead transfer
paper over it, and went over the tracing carefully with a hard pencil. He
now had a complete tracing of the post-mark on the lithographic paper,
including the name "Tenterden" and the date and time, which he had
included to give the dimensions and style of the lettering. But he now
partially erased them, excepting the year date, and replaced them, in the
same style and size, with the inscription "Woodbridge, Oct. 28, 4.30
P.M.," drawn firmly with a rather soft pencil.

He now fetched his lithographic ink and pens from the cupboard, and, with
the original before him, inked in the tracing, being careful to imitate
all the accidental characters of the actual post mark, such as the
unequal thickness of the lines due to the uneven pressure of the marking
stamp. When he had finished, he turned the envelope over and repeated the
procedure with the London post mark, only here he made an exact
facsimile excepting as to the date and time, which he altered to
"Oct. 29, 11.20 P.M."

The next proceeding was to transfer the inked tracings to a lithographic
stone. He used a smallish stone, placing the two post-marks a convenient
distance apart, so that they could be printed separately. When the
transfer and the subsequent "etching" processes were completed and the
stone was ready for printing, he inked up and took a trial proof of the
two post-marks on a sheet of paper. The result was perfectly convincing.
Ridiculously so. As he held the paper in his hand and looked at those
absurd post-marks, he chuckled aloud. With a little ingenuity, how easy
it was to sprinkle salt on the forensic tail of the inscrutable Penfield!
He was disposed to linger and picture to himself the probable proceedings
of that astute gentleman when he received the letter. But there was a
good deal to do yet, and he must not waste time. There was the problem of
printing the Woodbridge post-mark fairly on the stamp, and then there was
the addressing and writing of the letter.

The first problem he solved by tracing the outline of an envelope on the
sheet that he had printed, with the post-mark in the correct place for
the stamp, cutting this piece out and using it to make register marks on
the stone. Then he affixed a stamp exactly to the correct spot on the
envelope, inked up the stone, laid the envelope against the register
marks, and passed the stone under the roller. When he picked up the
envelope, the stamp bore the Woodbridge post-mark with just that slight
inaccuracy of imposition that made it perfectly convincing. The London
post-mark presented no difficulty, as it did not matter to half an inch
where it was placed. Another ink-up and another turn of the crank-handle,
and the envelope was ready for the penmanship.

Although Varney was so expert a copyist, he decided to take no
unnecessary risks. Accordingly, he made a careful tracing of Penfield's
name and address from the original letter and transferred this in black
lead to the envelope. Then with Purcell's pen, charged with its special
black ink, and with the original before him, he inked in the tracing with
a free and steady hand and quickly enough to avoid any tell-tale wavering
or tremor of the line. It was certainly a masterly performance, and when
it was done it would have puzzled a much greater expert than Penfield to
distinguish between the copy and the original.

Varney regarded it with deep satisfaction. He was about to put it aside
to dry, before he should rub out the tracing marks, when it occurred to
him that Purcell would almost certainly have marked it "confidential" or
"personal." It was, in fact, rather desirable that this missive should be
opened by Penfield himself. The fewer hands it passed through the better;
and then, of course, it was not worthwhile to let any of the clerks into
the secret of Purcell's disappearance. Accordingly, with the original
letter still before him, he wrote at the top of the envelope, in bold and
rather large characters, the word "personal." That ought to make it safe.

He put the envelope aside and began to think out the text of the letter
that he was going to write. As he did so, his eyes rested gloatingly on
the work that he had done, and done to such a perfect finish. It was
really a masterpiece of deception. Even a post-office sorter would have
been taken in by it. He took it up and again regarded it admiringly. Then
he began to consider whether "confidential" would not have been better
than "personal." It was certainly most desirable that this letter should
not be opened even by the chief clerk, for it would let the cat out of
the bag rather completely. He held the envelope irresolutely for a full
minute, turning the question over. Finally, he picked up the pen, and,
laying the envelope before him, turned the full stop into an "and" and
followed this with the word "confidential." There was not as much space
as he would have liked, and in his anxiety to preserve the character of
the handwriting while compressing the letters, the tail of the final L
strayed on to the edge of the stamp, which to his critical eye looked a
little untidy; but that was of no consequence--in fact, it was rather an
additional realistic touch.

He now set to work upon the letter itself. It was to be but a short
letter, and it took him only a few minutes to draft out the matter in
pencil. Then, spreading Purcell's letter before him, he studied it word
by word and letter by letter. When he had got the character of the
writing well into his mind, he took a sheet of notepaper, and with a
well-sharpened H pencil made a very careful copy of his draft, constantly
referring to Purcell's original and even making tracings of important
words and of the signature. Having compared the lightly pencilled copy
with Purcell's letter and made one or two corrections, he picked up the
pen and traced over the pencil writing with the sureness and steadiness
that his training as an engraver made possible.

The letter being finished with a perfect facsimile of the signature, he
made a final comparison of the handwriting with Purcell's, and, finding
it beyond criticism, read through the letter again, speculating on Mr.
Penfield's probable proceedings when he received it. The text of the
letter ran thus:

"DEAR MR. PENFIELD,

"I have just seen your advertisement in The Times, and am writing to let
you know that circumstances render it impossible for me to call on you,
and for the same reason I am unable to give you my present address. If
there is anything connected with the Catford business that you wish me to
know, perhaps you could put it briefly in another advertisement, to which
I could reply if necessary. Sorry to give you this trouble.

"Yours sincerely,

"DANIEL PURCELL."

Laying down the letter, Varney once more turned to the envelope. First,
with a piece of artist's soft rubber he removed the pencil marks of the
tracing. Then, placing the envelope on a sheet of blotting-paper, he
carefully traced over the post-marks with an agate tracing-style,
following the two concentric circles of each with their enclosed letters
and figures with minute accuracy and pressing somewhat firmly. The result
was that each of the two post-marks was visibly indented, as if made by a
sharply-struck marking stamp. It only remained to erase the pencil marks
from the letter, to place it in the envelope, and close the latter; and
when this was done, Varney rose and, having once more lit his pipe, began
to replace the materials in the cupboard, where also he bestowed the
letter for the present.

He was in the act of closing the cupboard door, when his glance fell on a
small deed-box on the top shelf. He looked at it thoughtfully for a few
moments, then lifted it down, placed it on the table, and unlocked it.
The contents were three paper packets, each sealed with his ring-seal. He
broke the seals of all three and opened the packets. Two of them
contained engraved copper plates, of a twenty-pound and a five-pound note
respectively. The third contained a sheaf of paper blanks. Varney took
out the latter and counted them, holding each one up to the light to
examine the water-mark. There were twelve of them, all five-pound notes.
He laid them down and cogitated profoundly; and unconsciously his eyes
turned to the etching press at the end of the bench. A few minutes' work,
a smear of ink, and a turn of the press, would convert those blanks into
actual notes, so good that they could be passed with perfect safety.
Twelve fives--sixty pounds. It was handsome pay for half an hour's work,
and five-pound notes were so easy to get rid of.

It was a severe temptation to a comparatively poor man whose ethical
standards were none of the highest. Prosperous as he now thought himself
with the growing demand for his etchings, sixty pounds represented the
product of nearly two months' legitimate work. It was a great temptation.
There were the blanks, all ready for the magic change. It seemed a pity
to waste them. There were only a dozen, and there would be no more. This
would really be the end of the lay. After this he could go straight and
live a perfectly reputable life.

The gambler's lure, the attraction of easily won wealth, was beginning to
take effect. He had actually picked up the five-pound plate, and was
moving towards the bench, when something in his mind brought him suddenly
to a stop. In that moment there had risen before his mental vision the
sweet and gracious figure of Margaret Purcell. Instantly his feelings
underwent a revulsion. That which, but a minute ago, had seemed natural
and reasonable now looked unspeakably sordid and base. No compulsion now
urged him on unwillingly to crime. It would be his own choice--the
choice of mere greed. Was it for this that he had set her and himself
free? Could he stand in her presence and cherish thoughts of honourable
love with this mean crime, committed of his own free-will, on his
conscience? Assuredly not. The very corpse of Purcell cried out from its
dark tomb beneath the Wolf on this voluntary resumption of the chains
which he had broken at the cost of murder.

Once more he turned towards the bench, but now with a different purpose.
Hurriedly, as if fearful of another backsliding, he caught up a large
graver and drove its point across the plate from corner to corner,
ploughing up the copper in a deep score. That finished the matter. Never
again could that plate be printed from. But he did not leave it at that.
With a shaving scraper he pared off the surface of the plate until the
engraving on it was totally obliterated. He fetched the other plate and
treated it in a similar manner. Then he flung both plates into a
porcelain dish and filled it with strong nitric acid mordant. Finally, as
the malodorous red fumes began to rise from the dish, he took up the
sheaf of blanks and held them in the flame of the gas-stove. When the
last blackened fragments had fallen to the hearth, he drew a deep breath.
Now at last he was free. Really free. Free even from the peril of his own
weakness.

His labours had consumed the best part of the morning, but, in any case,
he was in no mood for his ordinary work. Opening the window a little
wider to let the fumes escape, he took his hat from the peg and went
forth, turning his steps in the direction of Regent's Park.

VII: The Flash Note Factory

To the lover of quiet and the admirer of urban comeliness, the
ever-increasing noise and turmoil of London and its ever-decreasing
architectural interest and charm give daily an added value to the Inns of
Court, in whose peaceful precincts quiet and comeliness yet survive. And
of the Inns of Court, if we except Old Buildings, Lincoln's Inn, the
Temple with its cloisters, its fountain, and its ancient church, makes
the strongest appeal to the affections of that almost extinct creature
the Londoner; of which class the last surviving genuine specimens are to
be found in its obsolete chambers, living on amidst the amenities of a
bygone age.

But it was neither the quiet nor the architectural charm of the old
domestic buildings that had caused Mr. Superintendent Miller, of the
Criminal Investigation Department, to take the Temple on his way from
Scotland Yard to Fleet Street (though it was as short a way as any); nor
was it a desire to contemplate the houses attributed to Wren that made
him slow down when he reached King's Bench Walk and glance hesitatingly
up and down that pleasant thoroughfare--if a thoroughfare it can be
called. The fact is that Mr. Miller was engaged in certain
investigations, which had led him, as investigations sometimes do, into a
blind alley; and it was in his mind to see if the keen vision of Dr. John
Thorndyke could detect a way out. But he did not want a formal
consultation. Rather, he desired to let the matter arise, as it were, by
chance, and he did not quite see how to manage it.

Here, as he stood hesitating opposite Thorndyke's chambers, Providence
came to his aid; for at this moment a tall figure emerged from the shadow
of the covered passage from Mitre Court and came with an easy,
long-legged swing down the tree-shaded footway. Instantly the
Superintendent strode forward to intercept the newcomer, and the two met
halfway up the Walk.

"You were not coming to see me, by any chance?" Thorndyke asked, when the
preliminary greetings had been exchanged.

"No," replied Miller, "though I had half a mind to look in on you, just
to pass the time of day. I am on my way to Clifford's Inn to look into a
rather queer discovery that has been made there."

Here the Superintendent paused with an attentive eye on Thorndyke's face,
though experience should have told him that he might as well study the
expression of a wigmaker's block. As Thorndyke showed no sign of rising
to the bait, he continued:

"A remarkably queer affair. Mysterious, in fact. Our people are rather
stuck, so I am going to have a look round the chambers to see if I can
pick up any traces."

"That is always a useful thing to do," said Thorndyke. "Rooms, like
clothes, tend to take certain impressions from those who live in them.
Careful inspection, eked out by some imagination, will usually yield
something of interest."

"Precisely," agreed Miller. "I realized that long ago from watching your
own methods. You were always rather fond of poking about in empty houses
and abandoned premises. By the way," he added, forced into the open by
Thorndyke's impassiveness, "I wonder if you would care to stroll up with
me and have a look at these chambers?"

"Are the facts of the case available?" asked Thorndyke.

"Certainly," replied Miller, "to you--so far as they are known. If you
care to walk up with me, I'll tell you about the case as we go along."

Thereupon Thorndyke (to whom the insoluble mystery and especially the
untenanted chambers were as a hot scent to an eager fox-hound) turned and
retraced his steps in company with the Supertendent.

"The history of the affair," the latter began, "is this: At No. 92,
Clifford's Inn a man named Bromeswell had chambers on the second floor.
He had been there several years, and was an excellent tenant, paying his
rent and other liabilities with clock work regularity on, or immediately
after, quarter day. He had never been known to be even a week in arrear
with rent, gas, or anything else. But at Midsummer he failed to pay up in
his usual prompt manner, and, after a fortnight had passed, a polite
reminder was dropped into his letter-box. But still nothing was done
beyond dropping in another reminder. Once or twice the porter went to the
door of the chambers but he always found the 'oak' shut, and when he
hammered on it with a stick, he got no answer.

"Well, the time ran on, and the porter began to think that things looked
a bit queer, but still nothing was done. Then one day the postman brought
a batch of letters, or, rather, circulars, to the lodge addressed to
Bromeswell. He had tried to get them into Bromeswell's letter-box, but
couldn't get them in, as the box was choke-full. Now this made it pretty
clear that Bromeswell had not been in his chambers for some considerable
time, unless he was dead and his body shut up in them, so the porter
acquainted the treasurer with the state of affairs and consulted with him
as to what was to be done. There were no means of getting into the
chambers without breaking in, for the tenant had at some time fixed a new
patent lock on the outer door, and the porter had no duplicate key. But
the chambers couldn't be left indefinitely, especially at there was
possibly a dead man inside, so the treasurer decided to send a man up a
ladder to break a window and let himself in. As a matter of fact, the
porter went up himself, and as soon as he got into the chambers and had a
look round, he began to smell a rat.

"The appearance of the place, and especially the even coating of dust
that covered everything, showed that no one had been in those rooms for
two or three months at least; but what particularly attracted the
attention of the porter, who is a retired police sergeant, was a rather
queer-looking set of apparatus that suggested to him the outfit of a
maker of flash notes. On this he began to make some inquiries, and then
it transpired that nobody knew anything about Bromeswell. Mr. Duskin, the
late porter, must have known him, since he must have let him the
chambers; but Duskin left the Inn some years ago, and the present porter
has never met this tenant. It seems an incredible thing, but it appears
to be a fact that no one even knows Bromeswell by sight."

"That does really seem incredible," said Thorndyke, "in the case of a man
living in a place like Clifford's Inn."

"Ah, but he wasn't really living there. That was known, because no milk
or bread was ever left there and no laundress ever called for washing.
There are no resident chambers in No. 92. The porter had an idea that
Bromeswell was a press artist or something of that kind, and used the
premises to work in. But of course it wasn't any concern of his."

"How was the rent paid?"

"By post, in notes and cash. And the gas was paid in the same way; never
by cheque. But to go on with the history: The porter's suspicions were
aroused, and he communicated them to the treasurer, who agreed with him
that the police ought to be informed. Accordingly, they sent us a note,
and we instructed Inspector Monk, who is a first-class expert on flash
notes, to go to Clifford's Inn and investigate, but to leave things
undisturbed as far as possible. So Monk went to the chambers and had a
look at the apparatus, and what he saw made him pretty certain that the
porter was right. The apparatus was a complete paper-maker's plant in
miniature, all except the moulds. There were no moulds to be seen, and
until they were found it was impossible to say that the paper was not
being made for some lawful purpose, though the size of the pressing
plates--eighteen inches by seven--gave a pretty broad hint. However,
there was an iron safe in the room, one of Wilkins' make, and Monk
decided that the moulds were probably locked up in it. He also guessed
what the moulds were like. You may have heard of a long series of most
excellent forgeries of Bank of England notes."

"I have," said Thorndyke. "They were five-pound and twenty-pound notes,
mostly passed in France, Belgium, Switzerland and Holland."

"That's the lot," said Miller, "and first-class forgeries they were;
and for a very good reason. They were made with the genuine moulds. Some
six years ago two moulds were lost or stolen from the works at Maidstone,
where the Bank of England makes its paper. They were the moulds for
five-pound and twenty-pound notes respectively, and each mould would make
a sheet that would cut into two notes--a long narrow sheet sixteen and
three-quarter inches by five and five thirty-seconds in the case of a
five-pound note. Well, we have been on the lookout for those forgers for
years, but, naturally, they were difficult to trace, for the forgeries
were so good that no one could tell them from the real thing but the
experts at the Bank. You see, it is the paper that the forger usually
comes a cropper over. The engraving is much easier to imitate. But this
paper was not only made in the proper moulds with all the proper
water-marks, but it seemed to be made by a man who knew his job. So you
can reckon that Monk was as keen as mustard on getting those moulds.

"And get them he did. On our authority Wilkins made him a duplicate
key--as we didn't want to blow the safe open--and sure enough, as soon
as he opened the door, there were the two moulds. So that's that. There
is an end of those forgeries. But the question is, Who and where the
devil is this fellow Bromeswell? And there is another question. This
only accounts for the paper. The engraving and printing were done
somewhere else and by some other artist. We should like to find out who
he is. But, for the present, he is a bird in the bush. Bromeswell is
our immediate quarry."

"He seems to be pretty much in the bush, too," remarked Thorndyke. "Is
there no trace of him at all? What about his agreement and his
references?"

"Gone," replied Miller. "When the Inn was sold most of the old papers
were destroyed. They were of no use."

"It is astonishing," said Thorndyke, "that a man should have been in
occupation of those chambers for years and remain completely unknown. And
yet one sees how it can have happened with the change of porters. Duskin
was the only link that we have with Bromeswell, and Duskin is gone. As to
his not being known by sight, he probably came to the chambers only
occasionally to make a batch of paper, and if there were no residents in
his block, no one would be likely to notice him."

"No," Miller agreed; "Londoners are not inquisitive about their
neighbours, especially in a business quarter. This is the place, and
those are his rooms on the second floor."

As he paused by an ancient lamp-post near the postern gate that opens on
Fetter Lane, the Superintendent indicated a small, dark entry, and then
nodded at a range of dull windows at the top of the old house. Then he
crossed a tiny courtyard, plunged into the dark entry, and led the way up
the narrow stairs, groping with his hands along the unseen handrail, and
closely followed by Thorndyke.

At the first floor they emerged for a moment into modified daylight, and
then ascended another flight of dark and narrow stairs, which opened on a
grimy landing, whose only ornaments were an iron dust-bin and a
gas-meter, and which displayed a single iron-bound door, above which
appeared in faded white lettering the inscription "Mr. Bromeswell."

The Superintendent unlocked the massive outer door, which opened with a
rusty creak, revealing an inner door fitted with a knocker. This Miller
pushed open, and the two men entered the outer room of the "set" of
chambers, halting just inside the door to make a general survey of the
room, of which the most striking feature was its bareness. And this was
really a remarkable feature when the duration of the tenancy was
considered. In the course of some years of occupation the mysterious
tenant had accumulated no more furniture than a small kitchen table, a
Windsor chair, a canvas seated camp armchair, a military camp bedstead
with a sleeping-bag, and a couple of rugs and a small iron safe.

"It is obvious," said Thorndyke, "that Bromeswell never lived here.
Apparently he visited the place only at intervals, but when he came he
stayed until he had finished what he had come to do. Probably he brought
a supply of food, and never went out between his arrival and departure."

He strolled into the tiny kitchen, where a gas ring, a teapot, a cup and
saucer, one or two plates, a tin of milk-powder, one of sugar, another of
tea, and a biscuit-tin containing an unrecognizable mildewy mass, bore
out his suggestion. With a glance at the loaded letter-box, he crossed
the room, and, opening the door, entered what was intended to be the
bedroom, but had been made into a workshop. And very complete it was,
being fitted with a roomy sink and tap, a small boiler--apparently a
dentist's vulcanizer--and a mixer or beater worked by a little electric
motor, driven by a bichromate battery, there being no electric light in
the premises. By the window was a strong bench, on which was a powerful
office press, a stack of long, narrow copper plates, and a pile of pieces
of felt of a similar shape but somewhat larger. Close to the bench was a
trough made from a stout wooden box, lined with zinc and mounted on four
legs, in which was a folded newspaper containing a number of neat coils
of cow-hair cord, each coil having an eye-splice at either end, evidently
to fit on the hooks which had been fixed in the walls.

"Those cords," Miller explained, as Thorndyke took them from the paper to
examine them, "were used as drying lines to hang the damp sheets of paper
on. They are always made of cow hair, because that is the only material
that doesn't mark the paper. But I expect you know all about that. Is
there anything that catches your eye in particular? You seem interested
in those cords."

"I was looking at these two," said Thorndyke, holding out two cords which
he had uncoiled. "This one, you see, was too long; it had been cut the
wrong length, or, more probably, was the remainder of a long piece. But
instead of cutting off the excess, our friend has thriftily shortened
this rather expensive cord by working a sheep-shank on it. Now it isn't
everyone who knows how to make a sheep-shank, and the persons who do are
not usually papermakers."

"That's perfectly true, Doctor," assented Miller. "I'm one of the people
who don't know how to make that particular kind of knot. What is the
other point?"

"This other cord," replied Thorndyke, "which looks new, has an eye-splice
at one end only, but it is, as you see, about five inches longer than the
other; just about the amount that would be taken up by working the
eye-splice. That looks as if Bromeswell had worked the splices himself,
and if you consider the matter you will see that is probably the case.
The length of these cords is roughly the width of this room. They have
been cut to a particular measure, but the cord was most probably bought
in a single length, as this extra long piece suggests."

"Yes," agreed Miller. "They wouldn't have been sold with the eye-splices
worked on them, and, in fact, I don't see what he wanted with the
eye-splices at all. A simple knotted loop would have answered the purpose
quite as well."

"Exactly," said Thorndyke. "They were not necessary. They were a luxury,
a refinement; and that emphasizes the point that they suggest, which is
that Bromeswell is a man who has some technical knowledge of cordage, is
probably a sailor, or in some way connected with the sea. As you say, a
common knotted loop, such as a bowline knot, would have answered the
purpose perfectly. But that is true of most of the cases in which a
sailor uses an eye-splice. Then why does he take the trouble to work the
splice? Principally for the sake of neatness of appearance, because, to
an expert eye, a tied loop with its projecting end looks slovenly.

"Now this man will have had quite a lot of time on his hands. He will have
had to wait about for hours while the pulp was boiling and while it was
being beaten up. A sailor would very naturally spend a part of his idle
time in tidying up the cordage."

The Superintendent nodded reflectively.

"Yes," he said, "I think you are right, Doctor, and it is an important
point. This fellow was a fairly expert papermaker. He wasn't a mere
amateur, like most of the note forgers. If he was some kind of sailor
man as well, that would make him a lot easier to identify if we should
get on his track. But that is just what we can't do. There is nothing
to start from. He is a mere name, and pretty certainly a false name at
that."

As he spoke, Miller looked about him discontentedly, running his eye over
the bench and its contents. Suddenly he stepped over to the press, and,
diving into the shadowed space between it and the wall, brought up his
hand grasping a silver-mounted briar pipe.

"Now, Doctor," he said with a grin, handing it to Thorndyke when he had
inspected it, "here is something in your line. Just run your eye over
that pipe and tell me what the man is like."

Thorndyke laughed as he took the pipe in his hand. "You are thinking of
the mythical anatomist and the fossil bone," said he. "I am afraid this
relic will not tell us much. It is a good pipe; it must have cost half a
guinea, which would have meant more if its owner had been honest. The
maker's name tells us that it was bought in Cheapside, near the Bank, its
weight and the marks on the mouthpiece tell us that the owner has a
strong jaw and a good set of teeth; its good condition suggests a
careful, orderly man, and its presence here makes it likely that the
owner was Mr. Bromeswell. That isn't much, but it confirms the other
appearances."

"What other appearances?" demanded Miller.

"Those of the bed, the chair, the bench, the hooks, and the trough.
They all point to a big, heavy man. The bedstead is about six feet six
inches long, but the heel-marks are near the foot and the pillow is
right at the head. This bench and the trough have been put up for this
man's use--they were apparently knocked up by himself--and they are
both of a suitable height for you or me. A short man couldn't work at
either. The hooks are over seven feet from the floor. The canvas seat
of the chair is deeply sagged, although the woodwork looks in nearly
new condition, and the canvas of the bed is in the same condition. Add
this massive, hard-bitten pipe to those indications, and you have the
picture of a tall, burly, powerful man. We must have a look at his
pillow and rugs to see if we can pick up a stray hair or two and get an
idea of his complexion. What did he make the pulp from? I don't see any
traces of rags."

"He didn't use rags. He used Whatman's water-colour paper, which is a
pure linen paper. Apparently he tore it up into tiny fragments and boiled
it in soda lye until it was ready to go into the beater. Monk found a
supply of the paper in a cupboard and some half-cooked stuff in the
boiler." As he spoke, Miller unscrewed and raised the lid of the boiler,
which was then seen to be half filled with a clear liquid, at the bottom
of which was a mass of sodden fragments of shredded paper. From the
boiler he turned to a small cupboard and opened the door. "That seems to
be his stock of material," he said, indicating a large roll of thick
white paper. He took out a sheet and handed it to Thorndyke, who held it
up to the light and read the name "Whatman," which formed the water-mark.

"Yes," said Thorndyke, as he returned the sheet. "His method of work
seems clear enough, but that is not of much interest, as you have the
moulds. What we want is the man himself. You have no description of him,
I suppose?"

"Not if your description of him is correct," replied Miller. "The
suspected person, according to the Belgian police, is a smallish, slight,
dark man. They may be on the wrong track, or there may be a confederate.
There must have been a confederate, perhaps more than one. But Bromeswell
only made the paper. Someone else must have done the engraving and
printing. As to planting the notes, that may have been done by some other
parties, or by either or both of these two artists. I should think they
probably kept the game to themselves, judging by what we have seen here.
This seems to be a one man show, and it looks as if even the engraver
didn't know where the paper was made, or the moulds wouldn't have been
left in this way. Shall we go and look for those hairs that you spoke
of?"

They returned to the outer room, where they both subjected the little
pillow of the camp bed to a searching scrutiny. But though they
examined both sides and even took off the dusty pillow-case, not a
single hair was to be found. Then they turned their attention to the
rugs, which had been folded neatly and placed on the canvas--there
was no mattress--unfolding them carefully and going over them inch
by inch. Here, too, they seemed to have drawn a blank, for they had
almost completed their examination, when the Superintendent uttered an
exclamation, and delicately picked a small object from near the edge of
the rug.

"This seems to be a hair, Doctor," said he, holding it up between his
finger and thumb. "Looks like a moustache hair, but it's a mighty short
one."

Thorndyke produced his pocket lens and a sheet of notepaper, and holding
the latter while Miller cautiously dropped the hair on it, he inspected
the find through his lens.

"Yes," he said, "it is a moustache hair, about half an inch long,
decidedly thick, cleanly cut, and of a lightish red-brown colour. Somehow
it seems to fit the other characters. A closely-cropped, bristly, sandy
moustache appears to go appropriately with the stature and weight of the
man and that massive pipe. There is a tendency for racial characters to
go together, and the blond races run to height and weight. Well, we have
a fairly complete picture of the man, unless we have made some erroneous
inferences, and we seem to have finished our inspection. Have you been
through the stuff in the letter-box?"

"Monk went through it, but we may as well have a look at it to make sure
that he hasn't missed anything. I'll hand the things out if you will put
them on the table and check them."

As Miller took out the letters in handfuls, Thorndyke received them from
him and laid them out on the table. Then he and Miller examined the
collection systematically.

"You see, Doctor," said the latter, "they are all circulars; not a
private letter among them excepting the two notes from the treasurer
about the rent. And they are quite a miscellaneous lot. None of these
people knew anything about Bromeswell, apparently; they just copied the
address out of the directory. Here's one from a money-lender. Bromeswell
could have given him a tip or two. The earliest post-mark is the eleventh
of June, so we may take it that he wasn't here after the tenth or the
morning of the eleventh."

"There is a slight suggestion that he left at night," said Thorndyke, as
he made a note of the date. "The place where you found the pipe would be
in deep shadow by gaslight, but not by daylight. Certainly the blind was
up, but he would probably have drawn it up after he had turned the gas
out, as its being down during the day might attract attention."

"Yes," said Miller, "you are probably right about the time; and that
reminds me that Monk found a small piece of paper under the bench--I've
got it in my pocket--which seems to bear out your suggestion." He took
from his pocket a bulky letter-case, from an inner recess of which he
extracted a little scrap of Whatman paper. "Here it is," he said, handing
it to Thorndyke. "He seems to have just jotted down the times of two
trains, and, as you say, they were probably night trains."

Thorndyke looked with deep attention at the fragment, on which was
written, hastily but legibly in very black ink, "8.15 and 11.15," and
remarked:

"Quite a valuable find in its way. The writing is very characteristic,
and so is the ink. Probably it would be more so when seen through the
microscope. Magnification brings out shades of colour that are invisible
to the naked eye.

"Well, Doctor," said Miller, "if you can spare the time to have a look at
it through the microscope, I wish you would, and let us know if you
discover anything worth noting. And perhaps you wouldn't mind taking a
glance at the hair, too, to settle the colour more exactly."

He transferred the latter, which he had carefully folded in paper and put
in his pocket-book, to Thorndyke, who deposited it, with the scrap of
paper, in his letter-case, after pencilling on the wrapper a note of the
nature and source of the object.

"And that," said the Superintendent, "seems to be the lot. We haven't
done so badly, after all. If you are right--and I expect you are--we
have got quite a serviceable description of the man Bromeswell. But it is
a most mysterious affair. I can't imagine what the deuce can have
happened. It is pretty clear that he came here about the tenth of June,
and probably made a batch of paper, which we shall hear of later. But
what can have happened to the man? Something out of the common,
evidently. He would never have stayed away voluntarily with the certainty
that the premises would be entered, his precious moulds found, and the
whole thing blown upon. If he had intended to clear out he would
certainly have taken the moulds with him, or at least destroyed them if
he thought that the game was up. What do you think, Doctor?"

"It seems to me," replied Thorndyke, "that there are three possibilities.
He may be dead, and if so he probably died suddenly, before he was able
to make any arrangements; he may be in prison on some other charge; or he
may have got a scare that we know nothing of and had to keep out of
sight. You said that the Belgian police were taking some action."

"Yes, they have got an officer over here, by agreement with us, who is
making inquiries about the man who planted the notes in Belgium. But he
isn't after Bromeswell. He is looking for quite a different man, as I
told you. But he doesn't pretend that he could recognize him."

"It doesn't follow that Bromeswell knows that. If the confederate has
discovered that inquiries are being made, he may have given his friend a
hint and the pair of them may have absconded. But that is a mere
speculation. As you say, something extraordinary must have happened, and
it must have been something sudden and unforeseen. And that is all that
we can say at present."

By the time that this conclusion was reached, they had emerged from
Clifford's Inn Passage into Fleet Street; and here they parted, the
Superintendent setting a course westward and Thorndyke crossing the road
to the gateway of Inner Temple Lane.

VIII: In which Thorndyke tries over the Moves

IT was in a deeply meditative frame of mind that Thorndyke pursued his
way towards his chambers after parting with the Superintendent. For the
inspection which he had just made had developed points of interest other
than those which he had discussed with the detective officer. To his
acute mind, habituated to rapid inference, the case of the mysterious Mr.
Bromeswell had inevitably presented a parallelism with that of Daniel
Purcell. Bromeswell had disappeared without leaving a trace. If he had
absconded, he had done so without premeditation or preparation,
apparently under the compulsion of some unforeseen but imperative
necessity. But that was precisely Purcell's case; and the instant the
mere comparison was made, other points of agreement began to appear and
multiply in the most startling manner.

The physical resemblance between Purcell and the hypothetical Bromeswell
was striking but not conclusive. Both were big, heavy men; but such men
are not uncommon, and the resemblance in the matter of the moustache had
to be verified--or disproved. But the other points of agreement were
very impressive--impressive alike by their completeness and by their
number. Both men were connected with the making of paper and of the same
kind--handmade paper. The banknote moulds had been stolen or lost at
Maidstone about six years ago. But at that very time Purcell was at.
Maidstone, and was then engaged in the paper industry. Bromeswell
appeared to have a sailor's knowledge and skill in respect of cordage.
But Purcell was a yachtsman and had such knowledge and skill. Then the
dates of the two disappearances coincided very strikingly. Bromeswell
disappeared from London about the tenth of June; Purcell disappeared from
Penzance on the twenty-third of June. Even in trivial circumstances there
was curious agreement. For instance, it was a noticeable coincidence that
Bromeswell's pipe should have been bought at a shop within a minute's
walk of Purcell's office.

But there was another coincidence that Thorndyke had noted even while he
was examining the premises at Clifford's Inn. Those premises were
concerned exclusively with the making of the paper blanks on which the
notes would later be printed. Of the engraving and printing activities
there was no trace. Bromeswell was a papermaker pure and simple; but
somewhere in the background there must have been a confederate, who was
an engraver and a printer, to whom Bromeswell supplied the paper blanks
and who engraved the plates and printed the notes. But Purcell had one
intimate friend; and that friend was a skilful engraver, who was able to
print from engraved plates. Moreover, the rather vague description given
by the Belgian police of the man who uttered the forged notes, while it
obviously could not apply to Purcell, agreed very completely with
Purcell's intimate friend.

And there was yet another agreement, perhaps more striking than any. If
it were assumed that Bromeswell and Purcell were one and the same person,
the whole of the mystery connected with Mr. Penfield's letter was
resolved. Every thing became consistent and intelligible--up to a
certain point. If the mysterious "enclosures," were a batch of paper
blanks with the Bank of England water-mark on them, it was easy to
understand Mr. Penfield's reticence; for he had made himself an accessory
to a felony, to say nothing of the offence that he was committing by
having these things in his possession. It would also account completely
for Purcell's sudden flight and his silence as to his whereabouts; for he
would, naturally, assume that no lawyer would be such an imbecile as to
accept the position of an accessory to a crime that he had no connection
with. He would take it for granted that Penfield would forthwith hand the
letter and the enclosures to the police.

But there were one or two difficulties. In the first place, the theory
implied an incredible lack of caution on the part of Penfield, who was a
lawyer of experience, and would fully appreciate the risk he was running.
Then it assumed an equally amazing lack of care and caution in the case
of Purcell--a carelessness quite at variance with the scrupulous caution
and well-maintained secrecy of the establishment at Clifford's Inn. But
the most serious discrepancy was the presence of the paper blanks in a
letter. The letter into which they ought to have been put would be
addressed to the confederate, and that confederate was assumed to be
Varney. But why should they have been sent in a letter to Varney? On the
very day on which the letter was posted, Varney and Purcell had been
alone together for some hours on the yacht. The blanks could have been
handed to Varney then, and naturally would have been. The discrepancy
seemed to render the hypothesis untenable, or at any rate to rule out
Varney as the possible confederate.

But it was impossible to dismiss the hypothesis as untenable. The
agreement with the observed facts were too numerous; and as soon as the
inquiry was transferred to a new field, a fresh set of agreements came
into view. Very methodically Thorndyke considered the theory of the
identity of Purcell with Bromeswell in connection with his interviews
with Mr. Penfield and Mr. Levy.

Taking the latter first, what had it disclosed? It had shown that Purcell
was a common money lender; not an incriminating fact, for the business of
a money-lender is not in itself unlawful. But it is a vocation to which
little credit attaches, and its practice is frequently associated with
very unethical conduct. It is rather on the outside edge of lawful
industry.

But what of Levy? Apparently he was not a mere employee. He appeared to
be able to get on quite well without Purcell, and seemed to have the
status of a partner. Was it possible that he was a partner in the other
concern, too? It was not impossible. A money-lender has excellent
opportunities for getting rid of good flash notes. His customers usually
want notes in preference to cheques, and he could even get batches of
notes from the Bank and number his forgeries to correspond, thus
protecting himself in case of discovery. But even if Levy were a
confederate he would not exclude Varney, for there was no reason to
suppose that he was an engraver, whereas Varney was both an engraver and
an old and constant associate of Purcell's. In short, Levy was not very
obviously in the picture at all, and, for the time being, Thorndyke
dismissed him and passed on to the other case. Taking now the interview
with Penfield, there were the facts elicited by the examination of the
envelope. That envelope had contained a rather bulky mass, apparently of
folded paper, about five inches long or a little more, and somewhat less
than three inches wide. Thorndyke rose, and, taking from the bookshelves
a manuscript book labelled "Dimensions," found in the index the entry
"Banknotes" and turned to the page indicated. Here the dimensions of a
five-pound note were given as eight inches and three-eighths long by five
inches and five thirty-seconds wide. Folded lengthwise into three, it
would thus be five inches and five thirty-seconds, or say five and an
eighth long by two and three-quarters wide, if folded quite accurately,
or a fraction more if folded less exactly. The enclosure in Penfield's
envelope was therefore exactly the size of a small batch of notes folded
into three. It did not follow that the enclosures actually were
banknotes. They might have been papers of some other kind but of similar
size. But the observed facts were in complete agreement with the
supposition that they were banknotes, and taken in conjunction with
Penfield's extraordinary secrecy and the wording of his letter to
Margaret Purcell, they strongly supported that supposition.

Then there was the suggestion that the envelope had been steamed open and
reclosed. It was only a suggestion, not a certainty. The appearances
might be misleading. But to Thorndyke's expert eye the suggestion had
been very strong. The gum had smeared upwards on the inside, which seemed
impossible if the envelope had been closed once for all; and the paper
showed traces of cockling, as if it had been damped. Mr. Penfield had
rejected the suggestion, partly for the excellent reasons that he had
given, but also, perhaps, because Purcell's flight implied that he had
discovered the mistake, and that therefore the mistake was presumably his
own.

But there was one important point that Penfield seemed to have
overlooked. The letter that he expected to receive would (presumably)
have contained no enclosures. The letter that he did receive contained a
bulky enclosure which bulged the envelope. The two letters must therefore
have been very different in appearance. Now, ordinarily, when two letters
are put each into the envelope of the other, when once the envelopes are
closed the mistake is covered up. There is nothing in their exterior to
suggest that any mistake has occurred. But in the present case the error
was blatantly advertised by the appearance of the closed letters.
Penfield's envelope, which should have been flat, bulged with its
contents. The other envelope--if there was one, as there almost
certainly must have been--which should have bulged, was conspicuously
flat. Of course, Penfield may have been wrong in assuming that no
enclosures were to be sent to him. Both letters may have held enclosures.
But taking the evidence as it was presented, it was to the effect that
there were enclosures in only one of the letters. And if that were the
case, the mistake appeared incredible. It became impossible to understand
how Purcell could have handled the two letters and finally put them into
the post without seeing that the enclosures were in the wrong envelope.

What was the significance of the point? Well, it raised the question
whether Purcell could possibly have posted this letter himself; and this
question involved the further question whether the envelope had been
opened and reclosed. For if it had, the transposition of the contents
must have taken place after the letters left Purcell's hands. Against
this was the fact of Purcell's flight, which made it practically certain
that he had become aware of the transposition. But it was not conclusive,
and having noted the objection, Thorndyke proceeded to follow out the
alternative theory. Accepting, for the moment, the hypothesis that the
letter had been opened and the transposition made intentionally, certain
other questions arose. First, who had the opportunity? Second, what could
have been the purpose of the act? And, third, who could have had such a
purpose? Thorndyke considered these questions in the same methodical
fashion, taking them one by one and in the order stated.

Who had the opportunity? That depended, among other things, on the time
at which the letter was posted. Penfield had stated that the letter had
been posted at 8.30 p.m. If that were true, it put Varney out of the
problem, for he had left Penzance some hours before that time. But it was
not true. The time shown by the post-mark was not the time at which the
letter was posted, but that at which it was sorted at the post office. It
might have been posted at a pillar-box some hours previously. It was
therefore not impossible that it might have been posted by Varney. And
if it was physically possible, it at once became the most probable
assumption, since there was no reasonable alternative. It was
inconceivable that Purcell should have handed the letters to a stranger
to post; and if he had, it was inconceivable that that stranger should
have opened the letters and transposed their contents. There was, indeed,
the possibility that Purcell had met a confederate at Penzance and had
handed him the letters--one of which would be addressed to himself--to
post, and that this confederate might have made the transposition. But
this was pure speculation, without a particle of evidence to support it;
whereas Varney, as an intimate friend, even if not a confederate, might
conceivably have had the letters handed to him to post, though this was
profoundly improbable, seeing that Purcell was going ashore and Varney
was in charge of the yacht. In effect, there was no positive evidence
that anybody had had the opportunity to make the transposition; but if it
had not been done by Purcell, himself, then Varney appeared to be the
only possible agent.

From this vague and unsatisfactory conclusion Thorndyke proceeded to the
second question:

Assuming the transposition to have been made intentionally, what could
have been the purpose of the act? To this question, so far as the
immediate purpose was concerned, the answer was obvious enough, since
only one was possible. The blanks must have been put into Mr. Penfield's
envelope for the express purpose of notifying the solicitor that Purcell
was a banknote forger--in short, for the purpose of exposing Purcell.
This led at once to the third question: Who could have had such a
purpose? But to this also the answer was obvious. The only person who
could have had such a purpose would be a confederate, for no one else
would have been in possession of the knowledge that would make such a
purpose possible. The transposition could have been made only by someone
who knew what the contents of the envelope were.

But why should any confederate have done this? The exposure of Purcell
involved at least a risk of the exposure of his confederate; and it could
be assumed that if Purcell suspected that he had been betrayed, he would
certainly denounce his betrayer. The object, therefore, could not have
been to secure the arrest of Purcell--a conclusion that was confirmed by
the fact that Purcell had become aware of the transposition, and, if he
had not done it himself, must apparently have been informed in time to
allow of his escaping.

But what other object could there be? Was it possible that the
confederate wished to get rid of Purcell, and made this exposure with the
express purpose of compelling him to disappear? That raised the question:
When did Purcell become aware that the transposition had been made? And
the answer was somewhat perplexing. He could not have become aware of it
immediately, or he would have telegraphed to Penfield and stopped the
letter; and yet he seemed to have absconded at once, before the letter
could have been delivered to Penfield. He was due at Oulton the following
day, and he never arrived there. He was stated to have gone from Penzance
to Falmouth. That might or might not be true, but the voyage to Ipswich
was evidently a myth. The answer that he had received from the owners of
the Hedwig, enclosing a report from the captain of the ship, showed that
the only passengers who embarked at Falmouth were three distressed
Swedish sailors, who travelled with the ship to Malmo, and that no one
went ashore at Ipswich. It followed that Varney had either been
misinformed or had invented the incidents; but when it was considered
that he must, if he was telling the truth, have been misinformed in the
same manner on both separate occasions, it seemed more probable that the
story of the voyage was a fabrication. In that case the journey to
Falmouth, of which no one but Varney had heard, was probably a
fabrication, too. This left Penzance as the apparent starting-point of
the flight. Purcell had certainly landed at Penzance and had forthwith
disappeared from view. What became of him thereafter it was impossible to
guess. He seemed to have vanished into thin air.

Arrived at this point, Thorndyke's quietly reflective attitude suddenly
gave place to one of intense attention. For a new and somewhat startling
question had presented itself. With an expression of deep concentration
he set himself to consider it.

Hitherto he had accepted Purcell's landing at Penzance as an undeniable
fact, from which a secure departure could be taken. But was it an
undeniable fact? The only witness of that landing was Varney, and Varney
had shown himself a very unreliable witness. Apparently he had lied about
the Ipswich voyage, probably, too, about the visit to Falmouth. What if
the landing at Penzance were a fabrication, too? It seemed a wild
suggestion, but it was a possibility; and Thorndyke proceeded carefully
to develop the consequences that would follow if it were true.

Suppose that Purcell had never landed at Penzance at all. Then several
circumstances hither to incomprehensible became understandable. The
fables of Purcell's appearance at Falmouth and Ipswich, which had seemed
to be motiveless falsehoods, now showed a clear purpose; which was to
create a certainty that Purcell had landed from the yacht as stated and
to shift the search for the missing man from Penzance to Ipswich. Again,
if Purcell had never landed at Penzance, the letter could not have been
posted by him, and it became practically certain that it must have been
posted there by Varney and the transposition made by him. And this made
the transposition understandable by developing a very evident purpose.
When Penfield opened the letter, and when, later, he heard of Purcell's
disappearance, he would at once assume that Purcell had absconded to
avoid being arrested. The purpose of the transposition, then, was to
furnish a reasonable explanation of a disappearance that had already
occurred.

But what had become of Purcell? If he had not landed at Penzance he
certainly had not landed anywhere else, for there had not been time for
the yacht to touch at any other port. Nor could it be supposed that he
had trans-shipped on to another vessel during the voyage. There was no
reason why he should. The letter had not been posted, and until it had
been posted there was no reason for flight. The only reasonable inference
from the facts, including Varney's false statements, was that something
had happened during the voyage from Sennen; that Purcell had disappeared,
presumably overboard; and that Varney had reasons for concealing the
circumstances of his disappearance. In short, that Purcell was dead, and
that Varney was responsible for his death.

It was an appalling theory. Thorndyke hardly dared even to propound it to
himself. But there was no denying that it fitted the facts with the most
surprising completeness. Once assume it to be true, and all the
perplexing features of the case became consistent and understandable. Not
only did it explain Varney's otherwise inexplicable anxiety to prove that
Purcell had been seen alive at a date subsequent to that of the alleged
landing at Penzance; it accounted for the facts that Purcell had taken no
measures to provide himself with a stock of cash before disappearing, and
that he had made no communication of any sort to his wife since his
departure, though he could have done so with perfect safety. It was in
perfect agreement with all the known facts and in disagreement with none.
It was a complete solution of the mystery; and there was no other.

When Thorndyke reached this conclusion, he roused himself from his
reverie, and, filling his pipe, took an impartial survey of the scheme of
circumstantial evidence that he had been engaged in constructing. It was
all very complete and consistent. There were, so far, no discrepancies or
contradictions. All the evidence pointed in the one direction. The
assumed actions of Varney were in complete agreement with the
circumstances that were known and the others that were inferred, as well
as with the assumed motives. But it was largely hypothetical, and might
turn out to be entirely illusory. If only one of the assumed facts should
prove to be untrue, the whole structure of inference would come tumbling
down. He took out of his pocket-book the folded paper containing the
single moustache hair that the Superintendent had found in the Clifford's
Inn rooms. Laying it on a sheet of white paper, he once more examined it,
first through his lens, then under the microscope, noting the length,
thickness, and colour, and mentally visualizing the kind of moustache
from which it had come. Here was an indispensable link in the chain of
evidence. If Purcell had had such a moustache, that would not prove that
he and Bromeswell were one and the same person, but it would be
consistent with their identity. But if Purcell had no such moustache,
then it was probable--indeed, nearly certain--that he and Bromeswell
were different persons. And if they were, the whole hypothetical scheme
that he had been working out collapsed. Both Purcell and Varney ceased to
have any connection with the forged notes, the mysterious "enclosures"
could not be of the nature that he had assumed, and all the deductions
from those assumed facts ceased to be valid. It was necessary without
delay to test this essential link, to ascertain whether this derelict
hair could have been derived from Daniel Purcell.

Enclosed with it was the slip of paper with the notes of the trains,
which he had, for the moment, forgotten. He now examined it minutely, and
was once more struck by the intense blackness of the ink; and he recalled
that a similar intensity of blackness had been noticeable in the address
on Mr. Penfield's envelope. It had appeared almost like the black of a
carbon ink, but he had decided that it was not. So it was with the
present specimen, but now he had the means of deciding definitely.
Fetching the microscope, he laid the paper on the stage and examined it,
first by reflected, then by transmitted, light. The examination made it
clear that this was an iron-tannin ink of unusual concentration, with a
"provisional" blue pigment, probably methyl blue. There was only one
letter, P. and this he tried to compare with the P on Mr. Penfield's
envelope, so far as he could remember it; but he could not get beyond a
belief that there was a resemblance--a belief that would have to be
tested by a specimen of Purcell's handwriting.

Having finished with the paper he returned to the hair. He decided to
write to Margaret, asking for a description of her missing husband, and
had just reached out to the stationery case, when an elaborate and formal
tattoo on the small brass knocker of the inner door arrested him. Rising,
he crossed the room and threw the door open, thereby disclosing the
dorsal aspect of a small elderly gentleman. As the door opened the
visitor turned about, and Thorndyke immediately, not without surprise,
recognized him. It was Mr. Penfield.

IX: In which Mr. Penfield receives a Shock

MR. PENFIELD greeted Thorndyke with a little stiff bow, and bestowed upon
the extended hand a formal and somewhat rheumatic shake. "I must
apologize," he said, as his host ushered him into the room, "for
disturbing you by this visit, but I had a little matter to communicate to
you, and thought it better to make that communication personally rather
than by correspondence."

"You are not disturbing me at all," Thorndyke replied. "On the contrary,
I expect that your visit will save me the necessity of writing a letter."

"To me?" asked Penfield.

"No; to Mrs. Purcell. I was on the point of writing to her to ask for a
description of her husband. As I have never met him I thought it as well
that I should get from her such details of his appearance as might be
necessary for purposes of identification."

"Quite so," said Mr. Penfield. "Very desirable indeed. Well, I think I
can tell you all you want to know, unless you want very minute details.
And it happens that your inquiry comes rather opportunely in respect of
the matter that I have to communicate. Shall we dispose of your question
first?"

"If you please," replied Thorndyke. He took from a drawer a pad of ruled
paper, and, uncapping his fountain pen, looked at Mr. Penfield, whom he
had inducted into an easy chair. "May I offer you a cigar, Mr. Penfield?"
he asked.

"I thank you," was the reply, "but I am not a smoker. Perhaps--" Here
he held out his snuff-box tentatively. "No? Well, it is an obsolete vice,
but I am a survivor from an obsolete age." He refreshed himself with a
substantial pinch, and continued: "With regard to Purcell: his person is
easy to describe and should be easy to identify. He is a big lump of a
man, about six feet or a fraction over. Massive, heavy, but not fat; just
elephantine. Rather slow in his movements, but strong, active, and not at
all clumsy. As to his face, I would call it beefy--a full red face with
thick, bright-red, crinkly ears and full lips. Eyes, pale blue; hair,
yellowish or light brown, cropped short. No beard or whiskers, but a
little, bristly, pale-reddish moustache, cut short like a sandy
toothbrush. Expression, surly; manner, short, brusque, taciturn, and
rather morose. Big, thick, purple hands that look, in spite of their
size, capable, neat, and useful hands. In fact, the hands are an epitome
of Purcell: a combination of massive strength and weight with remarkable
bodily efficiency. How will that do for you?"

"Admirably," replied Thorndyke, inwardly some what surprised at the old
solicitor's powers of observation. "It is a very distinctive picture, and
quite enough for what we may call prima facie identification. I take it
that you know him pretty well?"

"I have seen a good deal of him since his marriage, when his wife
introduced him to me, and I have managed his legal business for some
years. But I know very little of his private affairs. Very few people do,
I imagine. I never met a less communicative man. And now, if we have done
with his appearance, let us come to the question of his present
whereabouts. Have you any information on the subject?"

"There is a vague report that he was seen some months ago at Ipswich. It
is quite unconfirmed, and I attach no importance to it."

"It is probably correct, though," said Penfield. "I have just had a
letter from him, and the post mark shows that it came from that very
locality."

"There is no address on the letter, then?"

"No; and I am invited to reply by advertisement. The occasion of the
letter was this: a client of mine, a Mrs. Catford, who is a relative of
Mrs. Purcell's, had recently died, leaving a will of which I am the
executor and residuary legatee. By the terms of that will Mrs. Purcell
and her husband each benefits to the extent of a thousand pounds. Now, as
Mrs. Catford's death occurred subsequently to Purcell's disappearance, it
became necessary to establish his survival of the testatrix or the
contrary--in order that the will might be administered. As his
whereabouts were unknown, the only method that I could think of was to
put an advertisement in the 'Personal' column of The Times, on the bare
chance that he might see it, asking him to communicate with me. By a
lucky chance he did see it and did communicate with me. But he gave no
address, and any further communication from me will have to be by
advertisement, as he suggests. That, however, is of no importance to me.
His letter tells me all I want to know; that he is alive at a date
subsequent to the death of the testatrix, and that the bequest in his
favour can consequently take effect. I am not concerned with his exact
whereabouts. That matter is in your province."

As he concluded, punctuating his conclusion with a pinch of snuff, the
old lawyer looked at Thorndyke with a sly and slightly ironical smile.

Thorndyke reflected rapidly on Mr. Penfield's statement. The appearance
of this letter was very remarkable, and the more so coming as it did on
top of the confirmatory evidence respecting the moustache hair. It was
now highly probable--almost certain--that Bromeswell and Purcell were
one and the same person. But if that were so, all the probabilities went
to show that Purcell must be dead. And yet here was a letter from him,
not to a stranger, but to one who knew his handwriting well. It was very
remarkable.

Again, the report of Purcell's voyage from Falmouth to Ipswich was
certainly untrue. But if it was untrue there was no reason for supposing
that Purcell had ever been at Ipswich at all. Yet here was a letter sent
by Purcell from that very locality. That was very remarkable, too.
Clearly, the matter called for further investigation, and that involved,
in the first place, an examination of this letter that had come so
mysteriously to confirm a report that was certainly untrue. He returned
Mr. Penfield's smile, and then asked:

"You accept this letter, then, as evidence of survival?"

Mr. Penfield looked astonished. "But, my dear sir, what else could I do?
I may be insufficiently critical, and I have not your great special
knowledge of this subject, but to my untrained intelligence it would
appear that the circumstance of a man's having written a letter affords
good presumptive evidence that he was alive at the date when it was
written. That is my own view, and I propose to administer the will in
accordance with it. Do I understand that you dissent from it?"

Thorndyke smiled blandly. He was beginning rather to like Mr. Penfield.

"As you state the problem," said he, "you are probably right. At any
rate, the administration of the will is your concern and not mine. As you
were good enough to remark, my concern is with the person and the
whereabouts of Mr. Purcell and not with his affairs. Were you proposing
to allow me to inspect the envelope of this letter?"

"It was for that very purpose that I came," replied Penfield, with a
smile and a twinkle of mischief in his eyes; "but I will not restrict you
to the envelope this time. You shall inspect the letter as well, if a
mere letter will not be superfluous when the envelope has given up its
secrets."

He produced a wallet from his pocket and, opening it, took out a letter,
which he gravely handed to Thorndyke. The latter took it from him, and as
he glanced at the jet-black writing of the address said, "I take it that
you are satisfied that the hand writing is Purcell's?"

"Certainly," was the reply. "But whose else should it be? The question
does not seem to arise. However, I may assure you that it is undoubtedly
Purcell's writing and also Purcell's ink, though that is less conclusive.
Still, it is a peculiar ink. I have never seen any quite like it. My
impression is that he prepares it himself."

As Penfield was speaking, Thorndyke examined the envelope narrowly.
Presently he rose, and, taking a reading-glass from the mantelshelf, went
over to the window, where, with the aid of the glass, he scrutinized the
envelope inch by inch on both sides. Then, laying down the reading-glass,
he took from his pocket a powerful doublet lens, through which he
examined certain parts of the envelope, particularly the stamp and the
London postmark. Finally, he took out the letter, opened the envelope,
and carefully examined its interior, and then inspected the letter itself
before unfolding it, holding it so that the light fell on it obliquely
and scrutinizing each of the four corners in succession. At length he
opened the letter, read it through, again examined the corners, and
compared some portions of the writing with that on the envelope.

These proceedings were closely observed by Mr. Penfield, who watched them
with an indulgent smile. He was better able than on the last occasion to
appreciate the humour of Thorndyke's methods. There was nothing about
this letter that he had need to conceal. He could afford to let the
expert find out what he could this time; and Mr. Penfield, from a large
and unfavourable experience of expert witnesses, suspected that the
discovery would probably take the form of a mare's nest.

"Well," he said, as Thorndyke returned to his chair with the letter in
his hand, "has the oracle spoken? Have we made any startling
discoveries?"

"I wouldn't use the word 'discoveries,'" replied Thorndyke, "which seems
to imply facts definitely ascertained, but there are certain appearances
which suggest a rather startling inference."

"Indeed!" said Mr. Penfield, taking snuff with great enjoyment. "I
somehow expected that they would when I decided to show you the letter.
What is the inference that is suggested?"

"The inference is," replied Thorndyke, "that this letter has never been
through the post."

Mr. Penfield paused with his hand uplifted, holding a minute pinch of
snuff, and regarded Thorndyke in silent astonishment.

"That," he said, at length, "is certainly a startling inference, and it
would be still more startling if there were any possibility that it
could be true. Unfortunately, the letter bears a postmark showing that it
was posted at Woodbridge, and another showing that it was sorted at the
London office. But no doubt you have observed and allowed for those
facts."

"The appearances," said Thorndyke, "suggest that when the post-marks were
made the envelope was empty and probably unaddressed."

"But, my dear sir," protested Penfield, "that is a manifest
impossibility. You must see that for yourself. How could such a thing
possibly have happened?"

"That is a separate question," replied Thorndyke. "I am now dealing only
with the appearances. Let me point them out to you. First, you will
notice that the words 'personal and confidential' have been written at
the top of the envelope. Apparently the word 'personal' was first written
alone and the words 'and confidential' added as an after thought. That is
suggested by the change in the writing and the increasingly condensed
form of the letters towards the end, due to the want of space. But in
spite of the squeezing up of the letters the tail of the final L has been
forced on to the stamp, and actually touches the circle of the post-mark;
and if you examine it through this lens you can see plainly that the
written line is on top of the post mark. Therefore the post-mark was
already there when that word was written."

He handed the envelope and the lens to Mr. Penfield, who, after some
ineffectual struggles, rejected the lens and had recourse to his
spectacles.

"It has somewhat the appearance that you suggest," he said at length;
"but I have not your expert eye, and therefore not your confidence. I
should suppose it to be impossible to say with certainty whether one
written mark was on top of or underneath another."

"Very well," said Thorndyke; "then we will proceed to the next point. You
will notice that both of the post-marks are deeply indented; unusually
so. As a matter of fact, post-marks are usually not visibly indented at
all, and it is a noticeable coincidence that this envelope should bear
two different post-marks, each unusually indented."

"Still," said Penfield, "that might easily have happened. The laws of
chance are not applicable to individual cases."

"Quite so," Thorndyke agreed. "But now observe another point. These
post-marks are so deeply indented that, in both cases, the impression is
clearly visible on the opposite side of the envelope, especially inside.
That is rather remarkable, seeing that, if the letter was inside, the
impression must have penetrated four thicknesses of paper."

"Still," said Penfield, "it is not impossible."

"Perhaps not," Thorndyke admitted. "But what does seem impossible is that
it should have done so without leaving any trace on the letter itself.
But that is what has happened. If you will examine the letter you will
see that there is not a vestige of an indentation on any part of it. From
which you must agree with me that the only reasonable inference is that
when the indentations were made the letter was not in the envelope."

Mr. Penfield took the letter and the envelope and compared them
carefully. There was no denying the obvious facts. There was the envelope
with the deeply indented post-marks showing plainly on the reverse sides,
and there was the letter with never a sign of any mark at all. It was
certainly very odd. Mr. Penfield was a good deal puzzled and slightly
annoyed. To his orthodox legal mind this prying into concrete facts and
physical properties was rather distasteful. He was accustomed to sworn
testimony, which might be true or might he untrue (but that was the
witnesses' lookout), but which could be accepted as admitted evidence. He
could not deny that the facts were apparently as Thorndyke had stated.
But that unwilling admission produced no conviction. He was a lawyer, not
a scientific observer.

"Yes," he agreed reluctantly, "the appearances are as you say. But they
must be in some way illusory. Perhaps some difference in the properties
of the paper may be the explanation. At any rate, I cannot accept your
inference, for the simple reason that it predicates an impossibility. It
assumes that this man, or some other, posted a blank, empty envelope, got
it back, put a letter in it, addressed it, and then delivered it by hand,
having travelled up from Woodbridge to do so. That would be an
impossibility, unless the person were a post office official; and then,
what on earth could be the object of such an insane proceeding? Have you
asked yourself that question?"

As a matter of fact, Thorndyke had, and he had deduced a completely
sufficient answer. But he did not feel called upon to explain this. It
was not his concern to convince Mr. Penfield. That gentleman's beliefs
were a matter of perfect indifference to him. He had considered it fair
to draw Mr. Penfield's attention to the observed facts and even to point
out the inferences that they suggested. But if Mr. Penfield chose to shut
his eyes to the facts, or to reject the obvious inferences, that was his
affair.

"At the moment," he replied, "I am concerned with the appearances and the
immediate inferences from them. When I am sure of my facts I shall go on
to consider their bearing--those questions of motive, for instance, to
which you have referred. That would be premature until I have verified
the facts by a more searching examination. Would it be convenient for you
to leave this letter with me for a few hours, that I might examine it
more completely?"

Mr. Penfield would have liked to refuse. But there was no pretext for
such refusal. He therefore made a virtue of necessity, and replied
graciously: "Certainly, certainly. By all means. I will just take a copy,
and then you can do as you please with the original, short of destroying
it. But don't, pray don't let it lead you astray."

"In what respect?"

"Well," said Mr. Penfield, taking a deprecating pinch of snuff, "it has
sometimes seemed to me that the specialist has a tendency--just a
tendency, mark you--to mislead himself. He looks for a certain thing,
which might be there, and--well, he finds it. I cannot but remark your
own unexpected successes in your search for the--ha--the unusual, shall
we say. On two occasions I have shown you an envelope. On both occasions
you have made most surprising discoveries, involving the strangest
aberrations of conduct on the part of Purcell and others. To-day you have
found unheard-of anomalies in the post-marks, from which you infer that
Purcell or another has exerted immense ingenuity and overcome insuperable
obstacles in order to behave like a fool. On the previous occasion you
discovered that Purcell had been at the trouble of ungumming the
envelope, which he had undoubtedly addressed with his own hand, for the
express purpose of taking out the right contents, which were already in
it, and putting in the wrong ones. Perhaps you made some other
discoveries which you did not mention," Mr. Penfield added, after a
slight pause; and as Thorndyke only bowed slightly, which was not very
explicit, he further added: "Would it be indiscreet or impertinent to
inquire whether you did, in fact, make any further discoveries? Whether,
for instance, you arrived at any opinion as to the nature of the
enclosures, which were, I think, the objects of your investigations?"

Thorndyke hesitated. For a moment he was disposed to take the old
solicitor into his confidence. But experience had taught him, as it
teaches most of us, that when the making or withholding of confidences
are alternatives, he chooses the better part who keeps his own counsel.
Nevertheless, he gave Penfield a cautionary hint.

"Those enclosures," said he, "have ceased to interest me. Any opinions
that I formed as to their nature had better be left unstated. I seek no
verification of them. Opinions held but not disclosed commit the holder
to nothing, whereas actual knowledge has its responsibilities. I do not
know what those enclosures were and I do not want to know."

For some moments after Thorndyke finished speaking there was a slightly
uncomfortable silence. Mr. Penfield's dry facetiousness evaporated rather
suddenly, and he found himself reading a somewhat alarming significance
into Thorndyke's ambiguous and even cryptic reply. "He did not know and
he did not want to know." Now, Mr. Penfield did know, and would have
given a good deal to be without that knowledge, for to possess the
knowledge was to be an accessory. Was that what Thorndyke meant? Mr.
Penfield had a dark suspicion that it was.

"Probably you are right," he said presently. "You know what opinions you
formed and I do not. But there is one point that I should like to have
made clear. We are both acting in Mrs. Purcell's interest, but her
husband is also my client. Is there any conflict in our purposes with
regard to him?"

"I think not," replied Thorndyke. "At any rate, I will say this much:
that I should under no circumstances take any action that might be
prejudicial to him without your concurrence, or at least without placing
you in possession of all the facts. But I feel confident that no such
necessity will arise. We are dealing with separate aspects of the case,
but it would be foolish for us to get at cross-purposes."

"Exactly," said Mr. Penfield. "That is my own feeling. And with regard to
this letter: if it should yield any further suggestions and you should
consider them as being of any interest to me, perhaps you would be so
good as to inform me of them."

"I will, certainly," Thorndyke replied; "and, by the way, what are you
going to do? Shall you issue any further advertisement?"

"I had not intended to," said Mr. Penfield; "but perhaps it would be well
to try to elicit a further reply. I might ask Purcell to send a receipt
for the legacy, which I shall pay into his bank. He knows the amount, so
that I need not state it."

"I think that would be advisable," said Thorndyke, "but my impression is
that there will be no reply."

"Well, we shall see," said Penfield, rising and drawing on his gloves.
"If an answer comes, you shall see it; and if there is no answer, I will
advise you to that effect. You will agree with me that we keep our own
counsel about the matters that we have discussed," and as Thorndyke
assented, he added: "of course the actual receipt of the letter is no
secret."

With this and a stiff handshake Mr. Penfield took his departure,
cogitating profoundly as he wended his way eastward, wondering how much
Thorndyke really knew about those unfortunate enclosures and how he came
by his knowledge.

Meanwhile Thorndyke, as soon as he was alone, resumed his examination of
the letter, calling in now the aid of more exact methods. Placing on the
table a microscope specially constructed for examining documents, he laid
the envelope on the stage and inspected the post-mark at the point where
the tail of the L touched it. The higher magnification at once resolved
any possible uncertainty. The written line was on top of the post mark
beyond all doubt. But it also brought another anomaly into view. It was
now evident that the indentation of the post-mark did not coincide
exactly with the whole width of the printed line. The indented line was
somewhat narrower. It consisted of a furrow, deepest in the middle, which
followed the printed line but did not completely occupy, it, and in one
or two places strayed slightly outside it. On turning the envelope over
and testing the other post-mark, the same peculiarity was observable. The
indentation was a thing separate from the printed mark, and had been
produced by a separate operation, apparently with a bluntly pointed tool,
which would account for its excessive depth.

It was an important discovery in two respects. First, it confirmed the
other evidence that the letter had never been posted; and, secondly, it
threw some light on the means by which the postmark had been produced.
What was the object of the indentation? Evidently to imitate the
impression of metal types and disguise the method that had actually been
used.

What was that method? It was not photography, for the marks were in
printers' ink. It was not copperplate, for the engraved plate throws up a
line in relief, whereas these lines were flat, like the lines of a
lithograph. In fact, lithography appeared to be the only alternative; and
with this view the appearances agreed completely, particularly the thick
black ink, quite different from the rather fluid ink used by the post
office.

From the post-marks Thorndyke now transferred his attention to the
writing. He had been struck by the exact resemblance of the name
"Penfield" on the envelope to the same name in the letter. Each was a
perfect facsimile of the other. Placing them together, he could not see a
single point of difference or variation between them. With a delicate
caliper gauge he measured the two words, taking the total length, the
height of each letter, and the distance between various points. In all
cases the measurements were practically identical. Now such perfect
repetition as this does not happen in natural writing. It is virtually
diagnostic of forgery--of a forgery by means of a careful tracing from
an original. And Thorndyke had no doubt that this was such a forgery.

Confirmation was soon forthcoming. An exploration with the microscope of
the surfaces of the envelope and the letter showed in both a number of
minute spindle-shaped fragments of rubber. Something had been rubbed out.
Then, on examining the words by transmitted light powerful enough to turn
the jet-black writing into a deep purple, there could be seen through the
ink a broken grey line, the remains of a pencil line, which the ink had
partly protected from the rubber. Similar remains of a pencil tracing
were to be seen in other parts of the letter, especially in the
signature. In short, there was no possible doubt that the whole
production, letter and post-marks alike, was a forgery.

The next question was, Who was the forger? But the answer to that seemed
to be contained in the further question, What was the purpose of the
forgery? For the evident purpose of this letter was to furnish evidence
that Purcell was still alive, and as such it had been accepted by Mr.
Penfield. That distinctly pointed to Varney, who had already made two
false, or at least incorrect, statements, apparently with the same
object. The skill with which the forgery had been executed also pointed
to him, for an engraver must needs be a skilful copyist. There was only
one doubtful point. Whoever had prepared this letter was a lithographer;
not a mere draughtsman, but a printer as well. Now was Varney a
lithographer? It was extremely probable. Many etchers and mezzotinters
work also on the stone. But until it had been ascertained that he was,
the authorship of the letter must be left in suspense. But assuming the
letter to be Varney's work, it was evident that Mr. Penfield's visit had
added materially to the body of circumstantial evidence. It had
established that Purcell had worn a moustache apparently identical in
character with that of the missing Bromeswell, which, taken in
conjunction with all the other known facts, made it nearly a certainty
that Bromeswell and Purcell were one and the same person. But that
assumption had been seen to lead to the inference that Purcell was dead,
and that Varney was responsible for, or implicated in, the circumstances
of his death.

Then there was this letter. It was a forged letter, and its purpose was
to prove that Purcell was alive. But the fact that it was necessary to
forge a letter to prove that he was alive was in itself presumptive
evidence that he was not alive. Subject to proof that Varney was a
lithographer and therefore capable of producing this forgery, the
evidence that Mr. Penfield had brought furnished striking confirmation of
the hypothesis that Thorndyke had formed as to what had become of Daniel
Purcell.

X: In which Thorndyke sees a New Light

"WE shall only be three at dinner, after all," said Margaret. "Mr. Rodney
will be detained somewhere, but he is coming in for a chat later in the
evening."

Varney received the news without emotion. He could do without Rodney. He
would not have been desolated if the other guest had been a defaulter,
too. At any rate, he hoped that he would not be needlessly punctual, and
thus shorten unduly the tte--tte with Margaret which he, Varney, had
secured by exercising the privilege of an old friend to arrive
considerably before his time.

"You have only met Dr. Thorndyke once before, I think?" said Margaret.

"Yes; at Sennen, you know, the day that queer letter came from Mr.
Penfield, and I didn't see much of him then. I remember that I was a
little mystified about him; couldn't quite make out whether he was a
lawyer, a doctor, or a man of science."

"As a matter of fact, he is all three. He is what is called a medical
jurist--a sort of lawyer who deals with legal cases that involve medical
questions. I understand that he is a great authority on medical
evidence."

"What legal cases do involve medical questions?"

"I don't know much about it," replied Margaret, "but I believe they
include questions of survivor-ship and cases of presumption of death."

"Presumption of death!" repeated Varney. "What on earth does that mean?"

"I am not very clear about it myself," she replied, "but from what I am
told I gather that it is a sort of legal proceeding that takes place when
a person disappears permanently and there is uncertainty as to whether he
or she is dead or alive. An application is made to the court for
permission to presume that the person is dead, and if the court gives the
permission the person is then legally presumed to be dead, and his will
can be administered and his affairs wound up. That is an instance of the
kind of case that Dr. Thorndyke undertakes. He must have had quite a lot
of experience of persons who have disappeared, and for that reason Mr.
Rodney advised me to consult him about Dan."

"Do you mean with a view to presuming his death?" asked Varney, inwardly
anathematizing Dan for thus making his inevitable appearance in the
conversation, but keenly interested nevertheless.

"No," replied Margaret. "I consulted him quite soon after Dan went away.
What I asked him to do was to find out, if possible, what had become of
him, and if he could discover his whereabouts to get into touch with
him."

"Well," said Varney, "he doesn't seem to have had much luck up to the
present. He hasn't been able to trace Dan, has he?"

"No," she replied--"at least, I suppose not. But we know where the lost
sheep is now. Had you heard about the letter?"

"The letter?"

"Yes. From Dan. He wrote to Mr. Penfield a few days ago."

"Did he, though?" said Varney, with well-simulated surprise. "From
somewhere abroad, I suppose?"

"No. The post-mark was Woodbridge--there was no address," and here
Margaret briefly explained the circumstances.

"It sounds rather as if he were afloat," said Varney. "That is an ideal
coast for lurking about in a smallish yacht. There is endless cover in
the rivers and the creeks off the Come, the Roach, the Crouch, and the
Blackwater. But it looks as if he had made more preparation for the
flitting than we thought at the time. He hasn't written to you?"

Margaret shook her head. The affront was too gross for comment.

"It was beastly of him," said Varney. "He might have sent you just a
line. However, Dr. Thorndyke will have something to go on now. He will
know whereabouts to look for him."

"As far as I am concerned," Margaret said coldly, "the affair is
finished. This insult was the last straw. I have no further interest in
him, and I hope I may never see him again. But," she added earnestly,
after a brief pause, "I should like to be rid of him completely. I want
my freedom."

As she spoke--with unusual emphasis and energy--she looked, for a
moment, straight into Varney's eyes. Then suddenly she flushed scarlet
and turned her head away.

Varney was literally overwhelmed. He felt the blood rush to his head and
tingle in the tips of his fingers. After one swift glance he, too, turned
away his head. He did not dare to look at her. Nor, for some seconds, did
he dare to trust his voice. At last it had come! In the twinkling of an
eye his dim hopes, more than half distrusted, had changed into realities.
For there could be no doubt. That look into his eyes, that sudden blush,
what could they be but an unpremeditated, unintended confession? She
wanted her freedom. That unguarded glance told him why; and then her
mantling cheeks, while they rebuked the glance, but served to interpret
its significance.

With an effort he regained his normal manner. His natural delicacy told
him that he must not be too discerning. He must take no cognizance of
this confidence that was never intended. She must still think that her
secret was locked up in her own breast, secure from every eye, even from
his.

And yet what a pitiful game of cross-purposes they were playing! She
wanted her freedom! And behold! she was free, and he knew it and could
not tell her. What a tangle it was! And how was it ever going to be
straightened out? In life, Purcell had stood between him and liberty; and
now the ghost--nay, less than the ghost, the mere unsubstantial name--of
Purcell stood between him and a lifelong happiness that Fortune was
actually holding out to him.

It was clear that, sooner or later, the ghost of Purcell would have to be
laid. But how? And here it began to dawn upon him that the ingenious
letter, on which he had been congratulating himself, had been a tactical
mistake. He had not known about Dr. Thorndyke, and he had never heard
before of the possibility of presuming a person's death. He had been
busying himself to produce convincing evidence that Purcell was alive,
whereas it was possible that Thorndyke had been considering the chances
of being able to presume his death. It was rather a pity, for Purcell had
got to be disposed of before he could openly declare himself to Maggie;
and this method of legal presumption of death appeared to be the very one
that suited the conditions. He wished he had known about it before.

These reflections flashed through his mind in the silence that had
followed Margaret's unguarded utterance. For the moment Varney had been
too overcome to reply. And Margaret suddenly fell silent with an air of
some confusion. Recovering himself, Varney now replied in a tone of
conventional sympathy: "Of course you do. The bargain is off on the one
side, and it is not reasonable that it should hold on the other. You
don't want to be shackled for ever to a man who has gone out of your
life. But I don't quite see what is to be done."

"Neither do I," said Margaret. "Perhaps the lawyers will be able to make
some suggestion--and I think I hear one of them arriving."

A moment or two later the door opened and the housemaid announced "Dr.
Thorndyke." Varney stood up, and as the guest was ushered in he looked
with deep curiosity, not entirely unmingled with awe, at this tall,
imposing man, who held in his mind so much recondite knowledge and
doubtless so many strange secrets.

"I think you know Mr. Varney," said Margaret, as she shook hands, "though
you hadn't much opportunity to improve his acquaintance at Sennen."

"No," Thorndyke agreed. "Mr. Penfield's bombshell rather distracted our
attention from the social aspects of that gathering. However, we are free
from his malign influence this evening."

"I am not sure that we are," said Varney. "Mrs. Purcell tells me that he
has just produced another mysterious letter."

"I shouldn't call it 'mysterious,'" said Thorndyke. "On the contrary, it
resolves the mystery. We now know, approximately, where Mr. Purcell is."

"Yes, it ought to be easy to get on his track now. That, I understand, is
what you have been trying to do. Do you propose to locate him more
exactly?"

"I see no reason for doing so," replied Thorndyke. "His letter answers
Mr. Penfield's purpose, which was to produce evidence that he is alive.
But his letter does raise certain questions that will have to be
considered. We shall hear what Mr. Rodney has to say on the subject. He
is coming to-night, isn't he?"

"He is not coming to dinner," said Margaret, "but he is going to drop in
later. There goes the gong. Shall we go into the dining-room?"

Thorndyke held the door open, and they crossed the corridor to the
pleasant little room beyond. As soon as they had taken their places at
the table, Margaret led off the conversation with a rather definite
change of subject.

"Have you brought any of your work to show us, Mr. Varney?" she asked.

"Yes," he replied; "I have brought one or two etchings that I don't think
you have seen and a couple of aquatints."

"Aquatints," said Margaret. "Isn't that a new departure?"

"No. It is only a revival. I used to do a good deal of aquatint work, but
I have not done any for quite a long time until I attacked these two. I
like a change of method now and again. But I always come back to
etchings."

"Do you work much with the dry point?" asked Thorndyke.

"Not the pure dry point," was the reply. "Of course, I use it to do
finishing work on my etchings, but that is a different thing. I have done
very few dry points proper. I like the bitten line."

"I suppose," said Thorndyke, "an etcher rather looks down on
lithography?"

"I don't think so," replied Varney. "I don't certainly. It is a fine
process and an autograph process, like etching and mezzotint. The
finished print is the artist's own work, every bit of it, as much as an
oil painting."

"Doesn't the printer take some of the credit?" Thorndyke asked.

"I am assuming that the artist does his own printing. If he doesn't, I
should not call him a lithographer. He is only a lithographic
draughtsman. When I used to work at lithography I always did my own
printing. It is more than half the fun. I have the little press still."

"Then perhaps you will revive that process, too, one day?"

"I don't think so," Varney replied. "The flat surface of a lithograph is
rather unsatisfying after the rich raised lines of an etching. I shall
never go back to lithography, except, perhaps, for some odd jobs;" and
here a spirit of mischievous defiance impelled him to add: "I did a
little lithograph only the other day, but I didn't keep it. It was a
crude little thing."

Thorndyke noted the statement with a certain grim appreciation. In spite
of himself, he could not but like Varney; and this playful, sporting
attitude in respect of a capital crime appealed to him as a new
experience. It established him and Varney as opposing players in a sort
of grim and tragic game, and it confirmed him in certain opinions that he
had formed as to the antecedents and motives of the crime. For as to the
reality of the crime he now had no doubt. The statement that Varney had
just made in all the insolence of his fancied security had set the
keystone on the edifice that Thorndyke had built up. Circumstantial
evidence has a cumulative quality. It advances by a sort of geometrical
progression, in which each new fact multiplies the weight of all the
others. The theory that Varney had made away with Purcell involved the
assumption that Varney was a lithographer who was able to print. It was
now established that Varney was a lithographer and that he owned a press.
Thus the train of circumstantial evidence was complete.

It was a most singular situation. In the long pauses which tend to occur
when good appetites coincide with a good dinner, the two men, confronting
one another across the table, sat, each busy with his thoughts behind the
closed shutters of his mind, each covertly observant of the other, and
each the object of the other's meditations. To Varney had come once more
that queer feeling of power that he had experienced at Sennen when Mr.
Penfield's letter had arrived; the sense of an almost godlike superiority
and omniscience. Here were these simple mortals, full of wonder,
perplexity, and speculation as to the vanished Purcell. And they were all
wrong. But he knew everything. And he was the motive power behind all
their ineffectual movements. It was he who, by the pressure of a finger,
had set this puppet-show in motion, and he had but to tweak a string in
his quiet studio and they were all set dancing again. Every one of them
was obedient to his touch: Maggie, Penfield, Rodney, even this
strong-faced, inscrutable man whose eye he had just met--all of them
were the puppets whose movements, joint or separate, were directed by his
guiding hand.

Thorndyke's reflections were more complex. From time to time he glanced
at Varney--he was too good an observer to need to stare--profoundly
interested in his appearance. No man could look less like a murderer than
this typical artist with his refined face, dreamy yet vivacious, and his
suave, gentle manners. Yet that, apparently, was what he was. Moreover,
he was a forger of bank notes--perhaps of other things, too, as
suggested by the very expert production of this letter--and had almost
certainly uttered the forged notes. That was, so to speak, the debit side
of his moral account, and there was no denying that it was a pretty heavy
one.

On the other hand, he was evidently making a serious effort to earn an
honest living. His steady industry was clear proof of that. It was
totally unlike a genuine criminal to work hard and with enthusiasm for a
modest income. Yet that was what he was evidently, doing. It was a very
singular contradiction. His present mode of life, which was evidently
adapted to his temperament, seemed totally irreconcilable with his lurid
past. There seemed to be two Varneys: the criminal Varney, practising
felonies and not stopping short of murder, and the industrious, artistic
Varney, absorbed in his art and content with the modest returns that it
yielded.

Which of them was the real Varney? As he debated this question, Thorndyke
turned to the consideration of the other partner in the criminal firm.
And this seemed to throw an appreciable light on the question. Purcell
had clearly been the senior partner. The initiative must have been his.
The starting-point of the banknote adventure must have been the theft of
the note-moulds at Maidstone. That had been Purcell's exploit, probably a
lucky chance of which he had taken instant advantage. But the moulds were
of no use to him without an engraver, so he had enlisted Varney's help.
Now, to what extent had that help been willingly given?

It was, of course, impossible to say. But it was possible to form a
reasonable opinion by considering the characters of the two men. On the
one hand, Varney, a gentle, amiable, probably pliable man. On the other,
Purcell, a strong, masterful bully, brutal, selfish, unscrupulous, ready
to trample ruthlessly on any rights or interests that conflicted with his
own desires. That was, in effect, the picture of him that his wife had
painted--the wife whom he had married, apparently against her
inclination, by putting pressure on her father, who was his debtor.
Purcell was a money-lender, a usurer; and even at that a hard case, as
Mr. Levy's observations seemed to hint. Now, a usurer has certain
affinities with a blackmailer. Their methods are somewhat similar. Both
tend to fasten on their victim and bleed him continuously. Both act by
getting a hold on the victim and putting on the screw when necessary,
and both are characterized by a remorseless egoism.

Now, Purcell was clearly of the stuff of which blackmailers are made. Was
it possible that there was an element of blackmail in his relations with
Varney? The appearances strongly suggested it. Here were two men jointly
engaged in habitual crime. Suddenly one of them is eliminated by the act
of the other, and forthwith the survivor rids himself of the means of
repeating the crime and settles down to a life of lawful industry. That
was what had happened. The instant Varney had got rid of Purcell he had
proceeded to get rid of the paper blanks by sending them to Mr. Penfield
instead of printing them and turning them into money; and by thus
denouncing the firm had made it impossible, in any case, to continue the
frauds. Then he had settled down to regular work in his studio. That
seemed to be the course of events.

It was extremely suggestive. Purcell's disappearance coincided with the
end of the criminal adventure and the beginning of a reputable mode of
life. That seemed to supply the motive for the murder--if it had been a
murder. It suggested that no escape from the life of crime had been
possible so long as Purcell was alive, that Purcell had obtained some
kind of hold on Varney which enabled him to compel the latter to continue
in the criminal partnership; and that Varney had taken the only means
that were possible to rid himself of his parasite. That was what it
looked like.

Of course, this was mere guesswork. No proof was possible. But it agreed
with all the facts, and it made Varney's apparent dual personality
understandable. The real and essential Varney appeared to be the artist,
not the criminal. He appeared to be a normal man, who had committed a
murder under exceptional circumstances. With the bank-note business
Thorndyke was not concerned, and he had no knowledge of its
circumstances. But the murder was his concern, and he set himself to
consider it.

The hypothesis was that Purcell had been, in effect, a blackmailer, and
that Varney had been his victim. Now, it must be admitted that Thorndyke
held somewhat unconventional views on the subject of blackmail. He
considered that a blackmailer acts entirely at his own risk, and that the
victim (since the law can afford him but a very imperfect protection) is
entitled to take any available measures for his own defence, including
the elimination of the blackmailer. But if the blackmailer acts at his
own risk, so does the victim who elects to make away with him. Morally,
the killing of a blackmailer may be justifiable homicide, but it has no
such legal status. In law self-defence means defence against bodily
injury; it does not include defence against moral injury. Whoever elects
to rid himself of a blackmailer by killing him accepts the risk of a
conviction on a charge of murder. But that appeared to be Varney's
position. He had accepted the risk. It was for him to avoid the
consequences if he could. As to Thorndyke himself, though he might, like
the Clerk of Arraigns at the Old Bailey, wish the offender "a good
deliverance," his part was to lay bare the hidden facts. He and Varney
were players on opposite sides. He would play impersonally, without
malice and with a certain good will to his opponent. But he must play his
own hand and leave his opponent to do the same.

These reflections passed swiftly through his mind in the intervals of a
very desultory conversation. As he reached his conclusion, he once more
looked up at Varney. And then he received something like a shock. At the
moment no one was speaking, and Varney was sitting with his eyes somewhat
furtively fixed on Margaret's downcast face. Now, to an experienced
observer there is something perfectly unmistakable in the expression with
which a man looks at a woman with whom he is deeply in love. And such was
the expression that Thorndyke surprised on Varney's face. It was one of
concentrated passion, of adoration.

Thorndyke was completely taken aback. This was an entirely new situation,
calling for a considerable revision of his conclusions and also of his
sympathies. An eliminated blackmailer is one thing; Uriah's wife is
another and a very different one. Thorndyke was rather puzzled, for
though the previous hypothesis hung fairly together, it was now weakened
by the possibility that the murder had been committed merely to remove a
superfluous husband. Not that it made any practical difference. He was
concerned with the fact of Purcell's murder. The motives were no affair
of his.

His reflections were interrupted by a question from Margaret.

"You haven't been down to Cornwall, I suppose, since you came to see us
at Sennen in the summer?"

"No, I have not; but Professor D'Arcy has, and he is starting for another
trip at the end of next month."

"Is he still in search of worms? It was worms that you were going to look
for, wasn't it?"

"Yes, marine worms. But he is not fanatical on the subject. All marine
animals are fish that come to his net."

"You are using the word 'net' in a metaphorical sense, I presume," said
Varney. "Or does he actually use a net?"

"Sometimes," replied Thorndyke. "A good many specimens can be picked up
by searching the shore at low tide, but the most productive work is done
with the dredge. Many species are found only below low-water mark."

"Is there anything particularly interesting about marine worms?" Margaret
asked. "There always seems something rather disgusting about a worm, but
I suppose that is only vulgar prejudice."

"It is principally unacquaintance with worms," replied Thorndyke. "They
are a highly interesting group of animals, both in regard to structure
and habits. You ought to read Darwin's fascinating book on earthworms and
learn what an important part they play in the fashioning of the earth's
surface. But the marine worms are not only interesting, some of them are
extraordinarily beautiful creatures."

"That was what Philip Rodney used to say," said Margaret, "but we didn't
believe him, and he never showed us any specimens."

"I don't know that he ever got any," said Varney. "He made great
preparations in the way of bottles and jars, and then he spent most of
his time sailing his yacht or line-fishing from a lugger. The only
tangible result of his preparations was that remarkable jury button that
he fixed on Dan's oil-skin coat. You remember that button, Mrs. Purcell?"

"I remember something about a button, but I have forgotten the details.
What was it?"

"Why, Dan lost the top button from his oiler and never got it replaced.
One day he lent the coat to Philip to go home in the wet, and as Phil was
going out line-fishing the next day and his own oilers were on the yacht,
he thought he would take Dan's. So he proceeded to fix on a temporary
button, and a most remarkable job he made of it. It seems that he hadn't
got either a button or a needle and thread, so he extemporized. He took
the cork out of one of his little collecting bottles--it was a flat
cork, waterproofed with paraffin wax and it had a round label inscribed
'Marine Worms.' Well, as he hadn't a needle or thread he bored two holes
through the cork with the little marlinspike in his pocket-knife, passed
through them the remains of a fiddle-string that he had in his pocket,
made two holes in the oilskin, threaded the catgut through them, and tied
a reef-knot on the inside."

"And did it answer?" asked Margaret. "It sounds rather clumsy."

"It answered perfectly. So well that it never got changed. It was on the
coat when Dan went up the ladder at Penzance, and it is probably on it
still. Dan seemed quite satisfied with it."

There was a brief silence, during which Thorndyke looked down
thoughtfully at his plate. Presently he asked: "Was the label over the
wax or under it?"

Varney looked at him in surprise, as also did Margaret. What on earth
could it matter whether the label were over or under the wax?

"The label was under the wax," the former replied. "I remember Philip
mentioning the fact that the label was waterproofed as well as the cork.
He made quite a point of it, though I didn't see why. Do you?"

"If he regarded the label as a decorative adjunct," replied Thorndyke,
"he would naturally make a point of the impossibility of its getting
washed off, which was the object of the waxing."

"I suppose he would," Varney agreed in an absent tone, and still looking
curiously at Thorndyke. He had a feeling that the latter's mildly
facetious reply was not quite "in key" with the very definite question.
Why had that question been asked? Had Thorndyke anything in his mind?
Probably not. What could he have? At any rate, it was of no consequence
to him, Varney.

In which he was, perhaps, mistaken. Thorndyke had been deeply interested
in the history of the button. Here was one of those queer, incalculable
trivialities which so often crop up in the course of a criminal trial. By
this time, no doubt, that quaint button was detached and drifting about
in the sea, or lying unnoticed on some lonely beach among the high-water
jetsam. The mere cork would be hardly recognizable, but if the label had
been protected by the wax it would be identifiable with absolute
certainty. And if ever it should be identified, its testimony would go to
prove the improbability that Daniel Purcell ever went ashore at Penzance.

XI: In which Varney has an Inspiration

THE adjournment to the drawing-room was the signal for Varney to fetch
his portfolio and exhibit his little collection, which he did with a
frank interest and pleasure in his works that was yet entirely free from
any appearance of vanity. Thorndyke examined the proofs with a curiosity
that was not wholly artistic. Varney interested him profoundly. There was
about him a certain reminiscence of Benvenuto Cellini: a combination of
the thoroughgoing rascal with the sincere and enthusiastic artist. But
Thorndyke could not make up his mind how close the parallel was. From
Cellini's grossness Varney appeared to be free; but how about the other
vices? Had Varney been forced into wrongdoing by the pressure of
circumstances on a weak will? Or was he a criminal by choice and
temperament? That was what Thorndyke could not decide.

An artist's work may show only one side of his character, but it shows
that truthfully and unmistakably. A glance through Varney's works made it
clear that he was an artist of no mean talent. There was not only skill,
which Thorndyke had looked for, but a vein of poetry, which he noted with
appreciation and almost with regret.

"You don't seem to value your aquatints," he said, "but I find them very
charming. This sea cape with the fleet of luggers half hidden in the
mist, and the lighthouse peeping over the top of the fogbank, is really
wonderful. You couldn't have done that with the point."

"No," Varney agreed; "every process has its powers and its limitations."

"The lighthouse, I suppose, is no lighthouse in particular?"

"Well, no; but I had the Wolf in my mind when I planned this plate. As a
matter of fact, I saw a scene very like this when I was sailing round
with Purcell to Penzance the day he vanished. The lighthouse looked
awfully ghostly with its head out of the fog and its body invisible."

"Wasn't that the time you had to climb up the mast?" asked Margaret.

"Yes; when the jib halyard parted and the jib went overboard. It was
rather a thrilling experience, for the yacht was out of control for the
moment and the Wolf rock was close under our lee. Dan angled for the sail
while I went aloft."

Thorndyke looked thoughtfully at the little picture, and Varney watched
him with outward unconcern but with secret amusement and a sort of elfish
mischief.

And again he was conscious of a sense of power, of omniscience. Here was
this learned, acute lawyer and scientist looking in all innocence at the
very scene on which he, Varney, had looked as he was washing the stain of
Purcell's blood from the sail. Little did he dream of the event which
this aquatint commemorated! For all his learning and his acuteness, he,
Varney, held him in the hollow of his hand.

To Thorndyke the state of mind revealed by this picture was as surprising
as it was illuminating. This was, in effect, a souvenir of that
mysterious and tragic voyage. Whatever had happened on that voyage was
clearly the occasion of no remorse. There was no shrinking from the
memory of that day, but rather evidence that it was recalled with a
certain satisfaction. In that there seemed a most singular callousness.
But what did that callous indifference, or even satisfaction, suggest? A
man who had made away with a friend with the express purpose of getting
possession of that friend's wife would surely look back on the
transaction with some discomfort; indeed, would avoid looking back on it
at all. Whereas one who had secured his liberty by eliminating his
oppressor could hardly be expected to feel either remorse or regrets. It
looked as if the blackmail theory were the true one, after all.

"That will be Mr. Rodney," Margaret said, looking expectantly at the
door.

"I didn't hear the bell," said Varney. Neither had Thorndyke heard it;
but he had not been listening, whereas Margaret apparently had, which
perhaps accounted for the slightly preoccupied yet attentive air that he
had noticed once or twice when he had looked at her.

A few moments later John Rodney entered the room unannounced, and
Margaret went forward quickly to welcome him. And for the second time
that evening Thorndyke found himself looking, all unsuspected, into the
secret chamber of a human heart.

As Margaret had advanced towards the door, he and Varney stood up. They
were thus both behind her when Rodney entered the room. But on the wall
by the door was a small mirror, and in this Thorndyke had caught an
instantaneous glimpse of her face as she met Rodney. That glimpse had
told him what, perhaps, she had hardly guessed herself; but the face
which appeared for a moment in the mirror and was gone was a face
transfigured. Not, indeed, with the expression of passionate adoration
that he had seen on Varney's face. That meant passion consciously
recognized and accepted. What Thorndyke saw on Margaret's face was a
softening, a tender, joyful welcome such as a mother might bestow on a
beloved child. It spoke of affection rather than passion. But it was
unmistakable. Margaret Purcell loved John Rodney. Nor, so far as
Thorndyke could judge, was the affection only on one side. Rodney, facing
the room, naturally made no demonstration; but still, his greeting had in
it something beyond mere cordiality.

It was an extraordinarily complex situation, and there was in it a bitter
irony such as De Maupassant would have loved. Thorndyke glanced at
Varney, from whom Margaret's face had been hidden, with a new interest.
Here was a man who had made away with an unwanted husband, perhaps with
the sole purpose of securing the reversion of the wife; and behold! he
had only created a vacancy for another man.

"This is a great pleasure, Thorndyke," said Rodney, shaking hands
heartily. "Quite an interesting experience, too, to see you in evening
clothes, looking almost human. I am sorry I couldn't get here to dinner.
I should like to have seen you taking food like an ordinary mortal."

"You shall see him take some coffee presently," said Margaret. "But
doesn't Dr. Thorndyke usually look human?"

"Well," replied Rodney, "I won't say that there isn't a certain specious
resemblance to a human being. But it is illusory. He is really a sort of
legal abstraction like John Doe or Richard Roe. Apart from the practice
of the law there is no such person."

"That sounds to me like a libel," said Margaret.

"Yes," agreed Varney. "You've done it now, Rodney. It must be
actionable to brand a man as a mere hallucination. There will be wigs
on the green--barrister's wigs--when Dr. Thorndyke begins to deal out
writs."

"Then I shall plead justification," said Rodney, "and I shall cite the
present instance. For what do these pretences of customary raiment and
food consumption amount to? They are mere camouflage, designed to cover a
legal inquiry into the disappearances from his usual places of resort of
one Daniel Purcell."

"Now you are only making it worse," said Margaret, "for you are
implicating me. You are implying that my little dinner party is nothing
more than a camouflaged legal inquisition."

"And you are implicating me, too," interposed Varney, "as an accessory
before, during, and after the fact. You had better be careful, Rodney. It
will be a joint action, and Dr. Thorndyke will produce scientific
witnesses who will prove anything he tells them to."

"I call this intimidation," said Rodney. "The circumstances seem to call
for the aid of tobacco--I see that permission has been given to smoke."

"And perhaps a cup of coffee might help," said Margaret, as the maid
entered with the tray.

"Yes, that will clear my brain for the consideration of my defence. But
still, I must maintain that this is essentially a legal inquisition. We
have assembled primarily to consider the position which is created by
this letter that Penfield has received."

"Nothing of the kind," said Margaret. "I asked you primarily that I might
enjoy the pleasure of your society, and, secondly, that you might enjoy
the pleasure of one another's."

"And yours."

"Thank you. But as to the letter, I don't see that there is anything to
discuss. We now know where Dan is, but that doesn't seem to alter the
situation."

"I don't agree with you in either respect," said Rodney. "There seems to
me a good deal to discuss; and our knowledge as to Dan's whereabouts
alters the situation to this extent: that we can get into touch with him
if we want to--or at least Dr. Thorndyke can, I presume."

"I am not so sure of that," said Thorndyke. "But we could consider the
possibility if the necessity should arise. Had you anything in your mind
that would suggest such a necessity?"

"What I have in my mind," replied Rodney, "is this. Purcell has left his
wife for reasons known only to himself. He has never sent a word of
excuse, apology, or regret. Until this letter arrived it was possible to
suppose that he might be dead, or have lost his memory, or in some other
way be incapable of communicating with his friends. Now we know that he
is alive, that he has all his faculties--except the faculty of behaving
like a decent and responsible man--and that he has gone away and is
staying away of his own free will and choice. If there was ever any
question as to his coming back, there is none now; and if there could
ever have been any excuse or extenuation of his conduct, there is now
none. We see that although he has never sent a message of any kind to his
wife, yet, when the question of a sum of money arises, he writes to his
solicitor with the greatest promptitude. That letter is a gross and
callous insult to his wife."

Thorndyke nodded. "That seems to be a fair statement of the position,"
said he. "And I gather that you consider it possible to take some
action?"

"My position is this," said Rodney. "Purcell has deserted his wife. He
has shaken off all his responsibilities as a husband. But he has left her
with all the responsibilities and disabilities of a wife. He has taken to
himself the privileges of a bachelor, but she remains a married woman.
That is an in tolerable position. My contention is that, since he has
gone for good, the tow-rope ought to be cut. He should be set adrift
finally and completely and she should be liberated."

"I agree with you entirely and emphatically," said Thorndyke. "A woman
whose husband has left her should, if she wishes it, revert to the status
of a spinster."

"And she does wish it," interposed Margaret.

"Naturally," said Thorndyke. "The difficulty is in respect of ways and
means. Have you considered the question of procedure, Rodney?"

"It seems to me," was the reply, "that the ways and means are provided by
the letter itself. I suggest that the terms of that letter and the
circumstances in which it was written afford evidence of desertion, or at
least good grounds of action."

"You may be right," said Thorndyke, "but I doubt if it would be accepted
as evidence of an intention not to return. It seems to me that a court
would require something more definite. I suppose an action for
restitution, as a preliminary, would not be practicable?"

Rodney shook his head emphatically, and Margaret pronounced a most
decided refusal.

"I don't want restitution," she exclaimed, "and I would not agree to it.
I would not receive him back on any terms."

"He wouldn't be likely to come back," said Thorndyke, "and if he did not,
his failure to comply with the order of the court would furnish definite
grounds for further action."

"But he might come back, at least temporarily," objected Margaret, "if
only by way of retaliation."

"Yes," agreed Rodney, "it is perfectly possible; in fact, it is rather
the sort of thing that Purcell would do--come back, make himself
unpleasant, and then go off again. No; I am afraid that cat won't jump."

"Then," said Thorndyke, "we are in difficulties. We want the marriage
dissolved, but we haven't as much evidence as the court would require."

"Probably more evidence could be obtained," suggested Rodney, "and of a
different kind. Didn't Penfield say something about an associate or
companion? Well, that is where our knowledge of Purcell's whereabouts
should help us. If it were possible to locate him exactly and keep him
under observation, evidence of the existence of that companion might be
forthcoming, and then the case would be all plain sailing."

Thorndyke had been expecting this suggestion and considering how he
should deal with it. He could not undertake to search the Eastern
Counties for a man who was not there, nor could he give his reasons for
not undertaking that search. Until his case against Varney was complete
he would make no confidences to anybody. And as he reflected he watched
Varney (who had been a keenly interested listener to the discussion),
wondering what he was thinking about it all, and noting idly how neatly
and quickly he rolled his cigarettes and how little he was inconvenienced
by his contracted finger, the third finger of his left hand.

"I think, Rodney," he said, "that you overestimate the ease with which we
could locate Purcell. The Eastern Counties offer a large area in which to
search for a man--who may not be there, after all. The post-mark on the
letter tells us nothing of his permanent abiding-place, if he has one.
Varney suggests that he may be afloat, and if he is, he will be very
mobile and difficult to trace. And it would be possible for him to change
his appearance--by growing a beard, for instance, to make a circulated
description useless."

Rodney listened to these objections with hardly veiled impatience. He had
supposed that Thorndyke's special practice involved the capacity to trace
missing persons, yet as soon as a case calling for this special knowledge
arose, he raised difficulties. That was always the way with these
confounded experts. Now, to him--though, to be sure, it was out of his
line--the thing presented no difficulties at all. To no man does a
difficult thing look so easy as to one who is totally unable to do it.

Meanwhile Thorndyke continued to observe Varney, who was evidently
reflecting profoundly on the impasse that had arisen. He, of course,
could see the futility of Rodney's scheme. He, moreover, since he was in
love with Margaret, would be at least as keen on the dissolution of this
marriage as Rodney. Thorndyke, watching his eager face, began to hope
that he might make some useful suggestion. Nor was he disappointed.
Suddenly Varney looked up, and, addressing himself to Rodney, said:

"I've got an idea. You may think it bosh, but it is really worth
considering. It is this. There is no doubt that Dan has cleared out for
good, and it is rather probable that he has made some domestic
arrangements of a temporary kind. You know what I mean. And he might be
willing to have the chance of making them permanent, because he is not
free in that respect any more than his wife is. Now what I propose is
that we put in an advertisement asking him to write to his wife, or to
Penfield, stating what his intentions are. It is quite possible that he
might, in his own interests, send a letter that would enable you to get a
divorce without any other evidence. It is really worth trying."

Rodney laughed scornfully. "You've missed your vocation, Varney," said
he. "You oughtn't to be tinkering about with etchings. You ought to be in
the Law. But I'm afraid the mackerel wouldn't rise to your sprat."

Thorndyke could have laughed aloud. But he did not. On the contrary, he
made a show of giving earnest consideration to Varney's suggestion, and
finally said:

"I am not sure that I agree with you, Rodney. It doesn't seem such a bad
plan."

In this he spoke quite sincerely. But then he knew, which Rodney did not,
that if the advertisement were issued there would certainly be a reply
from Purcell; and, moreover, that the reply would be of precisely the
kind that would be most suitable for their purpose.

"Well," said Rodney, "it seems to me rather a wild-cat scheme. You are
proposing to ask Purcell to give himself away completely. If you knew him
as well as I do you would know that no man could be less likely to
comply. Purcell is one of the most secretive men I have ever known, and
you can see for yourself that he has been pretty secret over this
business."

"Still," Thorndyke persisted, "it is possible, as Varney suggests, that
it might suit him to have the tow-rope cut, as you express it. What do
you think, Mrs. Purcell?"

"I am afraid I agree with Mr. Rodney. Dan is as secret as an oyster, and
he hasn't shown himself at all well disposed. He wouldn't make a
statement for my benefit. As to the question of another woman, I have no
doubt that there is one, but my feeling is that Dan would prefer to have
a pretext for not marrying her."

"That is exactly my view," said Rodney. "Purcell is the sort of man who
will get as much as he can and give as little in exchange."

"I don't deny that," said Varney, "but I still think that it would be
worth trying. If nothing came of it we should be no worse off."

"Exactly," agreed Thorndyke. "It is quite a simple proceeding. It commits
us to nothing and it is very little trouble, and if by any chance it
succeeded, see how it would simplify matters. In place of a crowd of
witnesses collected at immense trouble and cost you would have a letter
which could be put in evidence, and which would settle the whole case in
a few minutes."

Rodney shrugged his shoulders and secretly marvelled how Thorndyke had
got his great reputation.

"There is no answering a determined optimist," said he. "Of course,
Purcell may rise to your bait. He may even volunteer to go into the
witness-box and make a full confession and offer to pay our costs. But I
don't think he will."

"Neither do I," said Thorndyke. "But it is bad practice to reject a plan
because you think it probably will not succeed when it is possible and
easy to give it a trial. Have you any objection to our carrying out Mr.
Varney's suggestion?"

"I have no objection to your carrying it out," replied Rodney, "and I
don't suppose Mrs. Purcell has, but I don't feel inclined to act on it my
self."

Thorndyke looked interrogatively at Margaret. "What do you say, Mrs.
Purcell?" he asked.

"I am entirely in your hands," she replied. "It is very good of you to
take so much trouble, but I fear you will have your trouble for nothing."

"We shan't lose much on the transaction even then," Thorndyke rejoined,
"so we will leave it that I insert the advertisement in the most alluring
terms that I can devise. If anything comes of it you will hear before I
shall."

This brought the discussion to an end. If Rodney had any further ideas on
the subject he reserved them for the benefit of Margaret or Mr. Penfield,
having reached the conclusion that Thorndyke was a pure specialist--and
probably overrated at that--whose opinions and judgment on general law
were not worth having. The conversation thus drifted into other channels,
but with no great vivacity, for each of the four persons was occupied
inwardly with the subject that had been outwardly dismissed.

Presently Varney, who had been showing signs of restlessness, began to
collect his etchings in preparation for departure. Thereupon Thorndyke
also rose to make his farewell.

"I have had a most enjoyable evening, Mrs. Purcell," he said, as he shook
his hostess's hand. And he spoke quite sincerely. He had had an extremely
enjoyable evening, and he hoped that the entertainment was even now not
quite at an end. "May we hope that our plottings and schemings will not
be entirely unfruitful?"

"You can hope as much as you like," said Rodney, "if hopefulness is your
speciality, but if anything comes of this plan of Varney's, I shall be
the most surprised man in London."

"And I hope you will give the author of the plan all the credit he
deserves," said Thorndyke.

"He has got that now," Rodney replied with a grin.

"I doubt if he has," retorted Thorndyke. "But we shall see. Are we
walking the same way, Varney?"

"I think so," replied Varney, who had already decided, for his own
special reasons, that they were; in which he was in complete, though
unconscious, agreement with Thorndyke.

"Rodney seems a bit cocksure," the former remarked, as they made their
way towards the Brompton Road, "but it is no use taking things for
granted. I think it quite possible that Purcell may be willing to cut his
cable. At any rate, it is reasonable to give him the chance."

"Undoubtedly," agreed Thorndyke. "There is no greater folly than to take
failure for granted and reject an opportunity. Now, if this plan of yours
should by any chance succeed, Mrs. Purcell's emancipation is as good as
accomplished."

"Is it really?" Varney exclaimed eagerly.

"Certainly," replied Thorndyke. "That is, if Purcell should send a letter
the contents of which should disclose a state of affairs which would
entitle his wife to a divorce. But that is too much to hope for unless
Purcell also would like to have the marriage dissolved."

"I think it quite possible that he would, you know," said Varney. "He
must have had strong reasons for going off in this way, and we know what
those strong reasons usually amount to. But would a simple letter,
without any witnesses, be sufficient to satisfy the court?"

"Undoubtedly," replied Thorndyke. "A properly attested letter is good
evidence enough. It is just a question of what it contains. Let us
suppose that we have a suitable letter. Then our procedure is perfectly
simple. We produce it in court, and it is read and put in evidence. We
say to the judge: 'Here is a letter from the respondent to the
petitioner, or her solicitor, as the case may be. It is in answer to an
advertisement, also read and put in evidence; the handwriting has been
examined by the petitioner, by her solicitor, and by the respondent's
banker, and each of them swears that the writing and the signature are
those of the respondent. In that letter the respondent clearly and
definitely states that, he has left his wife for good; that under no
circumstances will he ever return to her; that he refuses hereafter to
contribute to her support; and that he has transferred his affections to
another woman, who is now living with him as his wife.' On that evidence
I think we should have no difficulty in obtaining a decree."

Varney listened eagerly. He would have liked to make a few notes, but
that would hardly do, though Thorndyke seemed to be a singularly
simple-minded and confiding man. And he was amazingly easy to pump.

"I don't suppose Purcell would give himself away to that extent," he
remarked, "unless he was really keen on a divorce."

"It is extremely unlikely in any case," Thorndyke agreed. "But we have to
bear in mind that if he writes at all it will be with the object of
stating his intentions as to the future and making his position clear. I
shall draft the advertisement in such a way as to elicit this
information, if possible. If he is not prepared to furnish the
information he will not reply. If he replies it will be because, for his
own purposes, he is willing to furnish the information."

"Yes, that is true. So that he may really give more information than one
might expect. I wonder if he will write. What do you think?"

"It is mere speculation," replied Thorndyke. "But if I hadn't some hopes
of his writing I shouldn't be at the trouble of putting in the
advertisement. But perhaps Rodney is right: I may be unreasonably
optimistic."

At Piccadilly Circus they parted and went their respective ways, each
greatly pleased with the other and both highly amused. As soon as
Thorndyke was out of sight, Varney whipped out his notebook, and by the
light of a street lamp made a careful note of the necessary points of the
required letter. That letter also occupied Thorndyke's mind, and he only
hoped that the corresponding agent of Daniel Purcell, deceased, would not
allow his enthusiasm to carry him to the extent of producing a letter the
contents of which would stamp the case as one of rank collusion. For in
this letter Thorndyke saw a way, and the only way, out for Margaret
Purcell. He knew, or at least was fully convinced, that her husband was
dead. But he had no evidence that he could take into court, nor did he
expect that he ever would have. It would be years before it would be
possible to apply to presume Purcell's death, and throughout those years
Margaret's life would be spoiled. This letter was a fiction. The erring
husband was a fiction. But it would be better that Margaret should be
liberated by a fiction than that she should drag out a ruined life
shackled to a husband who was himself a fiction.

XII: In which Varney once more Pulls the Strings

FOR the second time, in connection with the death of Daniel Purcell, Mr.
Varney found it necessary to give an attentive eye to the movements of
the postman. He had ascertained from the post office the times at which
letters were delivered in the neighbourhood of Margaret's flat; and now,
in the gloom of a December evening, he lurked in the vicinity until he
saw the postman approaching down the street and delivering letters at the
other flats on his way. Then he entered the now familiar portals, and
made his way quietly up the stairs until he reached Margaret's outer
door. Here he paused for a few moments, standing quite still and
listening intently. If he had been discovered he would have simply come
to pay a call. But he was not, and the silence from within suggested that
there was nobody in the hall. With a furtive look round, he drew a letter
from his pocket and silently slipped it into the letter-box, catching the
flap on his finger as it fell to prevent it from making any sound. Then
he turned and softly stole down the stairs; and as he reached the ground
floor the postman walked into the entry.

It was not without reluctance that he came away. For she was behind that
door, almost certainly--she, his darling, for whose freedom from the
imaginary shackles that she wore he was carrying out this particular
deception. But his own guilty conscience made it seem to him that he had
better not be present when the fabricated letter arrived. So he tore
himself from the beloved precincts and went his way, thinking his
thoughts and dreaming his dreams.

Varney's surmise was correct. Margaret was within. But it was perhaps as
well that he had refrained from paying a call, for she was not alone, and
his visit would not have been entirely welcome. About half an hour before
his arrival Jack Rodney had ascended those stairs, and had been admitted
in time to join Margaret at a somewhat belated tea.

"My excuse for coming to see you," said Rodney, "is in my pocket--the
front page of The Times."

"I don't know what you mean by an excuse," Margaret replied. "You know
perfectly well that I am always delighted to see you. But perhaps you
mean an excuse to yourself for wasting your time in gossiping with me."

"Indeed, I don't," said he. "I count no time so profitably employed as
that which I spend here."

"I don't quite see what profit you get," she rejoined, "unless it is the
moral benefit of doing a kindness to a lonely woman."

"I should like to take that view if I honestly could. But the fact is
that I come here for the very great pleasure of seeing you and talking to
you, and the profit that I get is that very great pleasure. I only wish
the proprieties allowed me to come oftener."

"So do I," she said frankly. "But you know that, too. And now tell me
what there is in the front page of The Times that gave you this sorely
needed excuse."

Rodney laughed in a boisterous, schoolboy fashion as he drew from his
pocket a folded leaf of the newspaper. "It's the great advertisement,"
said he. "The Thorndyke-Varney or Varney-Thorndyke advertisement. It came
out yesterday morning. Compose yourself to listen, and I'll read it out
to you."

He opened the paper out, refolded it into a convenient size, and with a
portentous preliminary "Ahem!" read aloud in a solemn sing-song:

"'PURCELL, D., is earnestly requested to communicate to M. or her
solicitor his intentions with regard to the future. If his present
arrangements are permanent, she would be grateful if he would notify her
to that effect, in order that she may make the necessary modifications in
her own.'"

As he finished, he looked up at her and laughed contemptuously.

"Well, Maggie," said he, "what do you think of it?"

She laughed merrily, and looked at him with hardly disguised fondness and
admiration. "What a schoolboy you are, John!" she exclaimed. "How annoyed
Dr. Thorndyke would be if he could hear you! But it is rather funny. I
can imagine Dan's face when he reads it--if he ever does read it."

"So can I," chuckled Rodney. "I can see him pulling down his lower lip
and saying, 'Gur!' in that pleasant way that he has. But isn't it a
perfectly preposterous exhibition? Just imagine a man of Thorndyke's
position doing a thing like this! Why, it is beneath the dignity of a
country attorney's office-boy. I can't conceive how he got his
reputation. He seems to be an absolute greenhorn."

"Probably he is quite good at his own speciality," suggested Margaret.

"But this is his own speciality. The truth is that the ordinary lawyer's
prejudice against experts is to a great extent justified. They are really
humbugs and pretenders. You saw what his attitude was when I suggested
that he should get Dan under observation. Of course, it was the obvious
thing to do, and one would suppose that it would be quite in his line.
Yet as soon as I made the suggestion he raised all sorts of difficulties;
whereas a common private inquiry agent would have made no difficulty
about it at all."

"Do you think not?" Margaret asked, a little eagerly. "Perhaps it might
be worth while to employ one. It would be such a blessed thing to get rid
of Dan for good."

"It would, indeed," Rodney agreed heartily. "But perhaps we had better
see if, Thorndyke gets a bite. If he fails we can try the other plan."

Margaret was slightly disappointed. She wanted to see some progress made,
and was a little impatient of the law's delays. But the truth is that
Rodney had been speaking rather at random. When he came to consider what
information he had to give to a private detective, the affair did not
look quite such plain sailing.

"Perhaps," said Margaret, "Dr. Thorndyke was right in giving Mr. Varney's
plan a trial. We are no worse off if it fails; and if it were by any
chance to succeed, oh, what a relief it would be! Not that there is the
slightest chance that it will."

"Not a dog's chance," agreed Rodney, "and Thorndyke was an ass to have
anything to do with the advertisement. He should have let Varney put it
in. No one expects an artist to show any particular legal acumen."

"Poor Mr. Varney!" murmured Margaret with a faint smile; and at this
moment the housemaid entered the room with a couple of letters on a
salver. Margaret took the letters, and, having thanked the maid, laid
them on the table by her side.

"Won't you read your letters?" said Rodney. "You are not going to make a
stranger of me, I hope."

"Thank you," she replied. "If you will excuse me I will just see whom
they are from."

She took up the top letter, opened it, glanced through it, and laid it
down. Then she picked up the second letter, and as her glance fell on the
address she uttered a little cry of amazement.

"What is it?" asked Rodney.

She held the envelope out for him to see. "It's from Dan!" she exclaimed;
and forthwith she tore it open and eagerly took out the letter.

As she read it, Rodney watched her with mingled amusement, vexation, and
astonishment. The utterly inconceivable thing had happened. Thorndyke had
taken odds of a million to one against and it had come off. That was just
a piece of pure luck. It reflected no particular credit on Thorndyke's
judgment; but still, Rodney rather wished he had been less dogmatic.

When she had quickly read through the letter, Margaret handed it to him
without comment. He took it from her and rapidly ran through the
contents.

"DEAR MAGGIE (it ran),

"I have just seen your quaint advertisement, and send you a few lines, as
requested. I don't know what you mean by 'modifying your arrangements,'
but I can guess. However, that is no concern of mine, and whatever your
plans may be, I don't want to stand in your way. So I will give you a
plain statement, and you can do what you like.

"My present arrangements are quite permanent. You have seen the last of
yours truly. I have no intention of ever coming back--and I don't
suppose you particularly want me. It may interest you to know that I have
made fresh domestic arrangements--necessarily a little unorthodox, but
also quite permanent.

"With regard to financial questions, I am afraid I can't contribute to
your 'arrangements,' what ever they may be. You have enough to live on,
and I have new responsibilities; but if you can get anything out of Levy
you are welcome to it. You will be the first person who ever has. You can
also try Penfield, and I wish you the best of luck. And that is all I
have got to say on the subject.

"With best wishes,

"Yours sincerely,

"DANIEL PURCELL."

Rodney returned the letter with an expression of disgust. "It is a
brutal, hoggish letter," said he, "typical of the writer. Where does he
write from?"

"The post-mark is Wivenhoe. It was posted last night at seven-thirty."

"That looks as if Varney were right and he were afloat; but it is a queer
time of year for yachting on the East Coast. Well, I suppose you are not
much afflicted by the tone of that letter?"

"Not at all. The more brutal the better. I shall have no qualms now. But
the question is, will the letter do? What do you think?"

"It ought to do well enough--if it isn't a little too good to be true."

"I don't quite understand. You don't doubt the truth of what he says, do
you?"

"Not at all. What I mean is this: Divorce judges are pretty wary
customers. They have to be. The law doesn't allow married people, who are
tired of one another and would like to try a fresh throw of the dice, to
make nice little mutual arrangements to get their marriage dissolved.
That is called collusion. And then there is a mischievous devil called
the King's Proctor, whose function is to 'prevent us, O Lord, in all our
doings' and to trip up poor wretches who have got a decree and think they
have escaped, and to send them back to cat-and-dog matrimony until death
do them part. Now, the only pitfall about this letter of Dan's is that it
is so very complete. He makes things so remarkably easy for us. He leaves
us nothing to prove. He admits everything in advance, and covers the
whole of our case in our favour. That letter might have been dictated by
a lawyer in our interest."

Margaret looked deeply disappointed. "You don't mean to say that we
shan't be able to act on it!" she exclaimed in dismay.

"I don't say that," he replied, "and I certainly think it will be worth
trying. But I do wish that we could produce evidence that he is living
with some woman, as he appears to state. That would be so much more
convincing. However, I will get an opinion from a counsel who has had
extensive experience of divorce practice--a man like Barnby, for
instance. I could show him a copy of the letter and hear what he thinks."

"Why not Dr. Thorndyke?" said Margaret. "He was really right, after all,
and we shall have to show him the letter."

"Yes, and he must see the original. But as to taking his opinion--well,
we shall have to do that as a matter of courtesy, but I don't set much
value on his judgment. You see, he chose to go double Nap on this letter,
and he happened to win. Events prove that he was right to take the
chance, but it was primitive strategy. It doesn't impress me."

Margaret made no immediate rejoinder. She was not a lawyer, and to her
the fact that the plan had succeeded was evidence that it was a good
plan. Accordingly, her waning faith in Thorndyke was strongly revived.

"I can't help hoping," she said presently, "that this letter will secure
a decision in our favour. It really ought to. You see, there is no
question of arrangement or collusion on my side. Our relations were
perfectly normal and pleasant up to the moment of Dan's disappearance.
There were no quarrels, no differences, nothing to hint at any desire for
a change in our relations; and I have waited six months for him to come
back, and have taken no action until he made it clear that he had gone
for good. Don't you think that I have a fair chance of getting my
freedom?"

"Perhaps you are right, Maggie," he replied. "I may be looking out for
snags that aren't there. Of course, you could call me and Philip and
Varney to prove that all was normal up to the last, and Penfield and
Thorndyke to give evidence of your efforts to trace Dan. Yes, perhaps it
is a better case than I thought. But all the same, I will show the letter
to Barnby when Thorndyke has seen it and get his opinion without
prejudice."

He paused and reflected profoundly for a while. Suddenly he looked up at
Margaret, and in his eyes there was a new light.

"Supposing, Maggie," he said in a low, earnest voice, "you were to get
this marriage dissolved. Then you would be free--free to marry. You know
that years ago, when you were free, I loved you. You know that, because I
told you; and I thought, and I still think, that you cared for me then.
The fates were against us at that time, but in the years that have passed
there has been no change in me. You are the only woman I have ever
wanted, Of course, I have kept my feelings to myself. That had to be. But
if we can win back your freedom, I shall ask you to be my wife, unless
you forbid me. What shall you say to me, Maggie?"

Margaret sat with downcast eyes as Rodney was speaking. For a few moments
she had appeared pale and agitated, but she was now quite composed, and
nothing but a heightened colour hinted at any confusion. At the final
question she raised her head and looked Rodney frankly in the face.

"At present, John," she said quietly, "I am the wife of Daniel Purcell,
and as such have no right to contemplate any other marriage. But I will
be honest with you. There is no reason why I should not be. You are quite
right, John. I loved you in those days that you speak of, and if I never
told you, you know why. You know how I came to marry Dan. It seemed to me
then that I had no choice. Perhaps I was wrong, but I did what I thought
was my duty to my father.

"In the years that have passed since then--the long, grey years--I have
kept my covenant with Dan loyally in every respect. If I have ever looked
back with regret, it has been in secret. But through those years you have
been a faithful friend to me, and of all my friends the best beloved. And
so you are now. That is all I can say, John."

"It is enough, Maggie," he said, "and I thank you from my heart for
saying so much. Whatever your answer might have been, I would have done
everything in my power to set you free. But now I shall venture to have a
hope that I hold a stake in your freedom."

She made no answer to this, and for some time both sat silently engrossed
with their own thoughts, and each thinking much the same thoughts as the
other. The silence was at length broken by Rodney.

"It was an awful blow to me when I came home from my travels and found
you married. Of course, I guessed what had happened, though I never
actually knew. I assumed that Dan had put the screw on your father in
some way."

"Yes. He had lent my father money, and the bills could not be met."

"What a Juggernaut the fellow is!" exclaimed Rodney. "An absolutely
ruthless egoist. By the way, was he in the habit of lending money? I
notice that he refers in this letter to a person named Levy. Who is Levy?
And what does Dan do for a livelihood? He is out of the paper trade,
isn't he?"

"I think so. The truth is, I have never known what his occupation is. I
have suspected that he is principally a money-lender. As to Mr. Levy, I
have always thought he was a clerk or manager, but it rather looks as if
he were a partner."

"We must find out," said Rodney. "And there is another thing that we must
look into--that mysterious letter that Penfield received from Dan. Did
you ever learn what was in it?"

"Never. Mr. Penfield refused to divulge the slightest hint of its
contents. But I feel convinced that it was in some way connected with
Dan's disappearance. You remember it arrived on the very day that Dan
went away. I think Dr. Thorndyke called on Mr. Penfield to see if he
could glean any information, but I assume that he didn't succeed."

"We can take that for granted," said Rodney. "I don't think Thorndyke
would get much out of a wary old bird like Penfield. But we must find out
what was in that letter. Penfield will have to produce it if we put him
in the witness-box, though he will be a mighty slippery witness. However,
I will see Thorndyke and ask him about it when I have consulted Barnby.
Perhaps I had better take charge of the letter."

Margaret handed him the letter, which he put securely in his wallet, and
the plan of action being now settled, he stayed only for a little further
gossip, and then took his leave.

On the following afternoon he called by appointment on Thorndyke, who,
having admitted him, closed the "oak" and connected the bell with the
laboratory upstairs, where his assistant, Polton, was at work.

"So," he said, "our fish has risen to the tin minnow, as I gather from
your note."

"Yes. You have had better luck than I expected."

"Or than I deserved, you might have added if you had been less polite.
Well, I don't know that I should agree. I consider it bad practice to
treat an improbability as an impossibility. But what does he say?"

"All that we could wish--and perhaps a little more. That is the only
difficulty. He makes things a little too easy for us--at least, that is
my feeling. But you had better see the letter."

He took it from his wallet and passed it to Thorndyke, who glanced at the
post-mark, and when he had taken out the letter looked quickly into the
interior of the envelope.

"Wivenhoe," he remarked. "Some distance from Woodbridge, but in the same
district."

He read carefully through the text, noting at the same time the
peculiarities that he had observed in the former letter. In this case,
too, the postmarks had been made when the envelope was empty--a curious
oversight on the part of Varney in view of the care and ingenuity
otherwise displayed. Indeed, as he read through the letter, Thorndyke's
opinion of that cunning artificer rose considerably. It was a most
skilful and tactful production. It did certainly make things almost
suspiciously easy, but then that was its function. The whole case for the
petition rested on it. But the brutal attitude of the imaginary truant
was admirably rendered, and, so far as he could judge, the personality of
the missing man convincingly represented.

"It is not a courteous epistle," he remarked tentatively.

"No," agreed Rodney, "but it is exactly the sort of letter that one would
expect from Purcell. It gives you his character in a nutshell."

This was highly satisfactory and very creditable to Varney.

"You mentioned in your note that you were going to take Barnby's opinion
on it. Have you seen him?"

"Yes, and he thinks the same as I do: that it would be a little risky to
base a petition on this letter alone. The judge might smell a rat. He
considers that if we could produce evidence that Purcell is actually
living with another woman, this letter would be good evidence of
desertion. He suggested putting a private inquiry agent on Purcell's
tracks. What do you say to that?"

"In the abstract it is an excellent suggestion. But how are you going to
carry it out? You speak of putting the agent on Purcell's tracks. But
there are no tracks. There is no place in which he is known to have been
staying; there is no person known to us who has seen him since he landed
at Penzance. You would start your sleuth without a scent to wander about
Essex and Suffolk looking for a man whom he had never seen and would
probably not recognize if he met him, and who is possibly not in either
of those counties at all. It really is not a practicable scheme."

Rodney emitted a discontented grunt. "Doesn't sound very encouraging
certainly," he admitted. "But how do the police manage in a case of the
kind?"

"By having, not one agent but a thousand, and all in communication
through a central office. And even the police fail if they haven't enough
data. But with regard to Barnby, of course his opinion has great weight.
He knows the difficulties of these cases, and his outlook will probably
be the judge's outlook. But did you make clear to him the peculiarities
of this case?--the character of the petitioner, her excellent relations
with her husband, the sudden, unforeseen manner of the disappearance, and
the total absence of any grounds for a suspicion of collusion? Did you
present these points to him?"

"No, I didn't. We merely discussed the letter."

"Well, see him again and put the whole case to him. My feeling is that a
petition would probably succeed."

"I hope you are right," said Rodney, more encouraged than he would have
liked to admit. "I'll see Barnby again. Oh, and there is another point.
That letter that Purcell sent to Penfield by mistake in June. It probably
throws some light on the disappearance, and might be important as
evidence on our side. I suppose Penfield did not tell you what was in it
or show it to you?"

"No, he would say nothing about it; but he allowed me, at my request, to
examine the envelope."

Rodney grinned. "He might also have shown you the postman who delivered
the letter. But if he won't tell us anything, we might put him in the
witness-box and make him disgorge his secret."

"Yes, and you may have to if the court demands to have the letter
produced. But I strongly advise you to avoid doing so if you can. I have
the impression that the production of that letter would be very much the
reverse of helpful--might, in fact, be fatal to the success of the case
and would in addition be very disagreeable to Mrs. Purcell."

Rodney looked at him in astonishment. "Then you know what was in the
letter?" said he.

"No, but I have formed certain opinions which I have no doubt are
correct, but which I do not feel at liberty to communicate. I advise you
to leave Mr. Penfield alone. Remember that he is a lawyer, that he is
Mrs. Purcell's friend, that he does know what is in the letter, and that
he thinks it best to keep his knowledge to himself. But he will have to
be approached on the question as to whether he is willing to act for Mrs.
Purcell against her husband. If you undertake that office you can raise
the question of the letter with him, but I would urge you most strongly
not to force his hand."

Rodney listened to this advice with a slightly puzzled expression. Like
Mr. Penfield, he viewed Thorndyke with mixed feelings, now thinking of
him as an amateur, a doctor who dabbled ineffectively in law, and now
considering the possibility that he might command some means of acquiring
knowledge that were not available to the orthodox legal practitioner.
Here was a case in point. He had examined the envelope of that mysterious
letter "at his own request" and evidently for a specific purpose, and
from that inspection he had in some unaccountable way formed a very
definite opinion as to what the envelope had contained. That was very
curious. Of course, he might be wrong; but he seemed to be pretty
confident. Then there was the present transaction. Rodney himself had
rejected Varney's suggestion with scorn. But Thorndyke had adopted it
quite hopefully, and the plan had succeeded in the face of all
probabilities. Could it be that Thorndyke had some odd means of gauging
those probabilities? It looked rather like it.

"You are only guessing at the nature of that letter," he said
tentatively, "and you may have got it wrong."

"That is quite possible," Thorndyke agreed. "But Penfield isn't guessing.
Put the case to him, hear what he says, and follow his advice. And if you
see Barnby again it would be better to say nothing about that letter.
Penfield will advise you to keep it out of the case if you can, and that
is my advice, too."

When Rodney took his departure, which he did a few minutes later, he
carried with him a growing suspicion that he had under-estimated
Thorndyke; that the latter, perhaps, played a deeper game than at first
sight appeared; and that he played with pieces unknown to traditional
legal practice.

For some time after his visitor had left Thorndyke remained wrapped in
profound thought. In his heart he was sensible of a deep distaste for
this case that he was promoting. If it were to succeed, it could only be
by misleading the court. It is true that the parties were acting in good
faith, that the falsities which they would present were falsities that
they believed to be true. But the whole case was based on a fiction, and
Thorndyke detested fictions. Nor was he satisfied with his own position
in an ethical sense. He knew that the case was fictitious, that the
respondent was a dead man, and that the documents to be produced in
evidence were forgeries. He was, in fact, an accessory to those
forgeries. He did not like it at all. And he was not so optimistic as to
the success of the petition as he had led Rodney to believe, though he
was not very uneasy on that score. What troubled him was that this was,
in effect, a bogus case, and that he was lending it his support.

But what was the alternative? His thoughts turned to Margaret,
sweet-faced, sweet-natured, gracious-mannered, the perfect type of an
English gentlewoman; and he thought of the fine, handsome, high-minded
gentleman who had just gone away. These two loved one another--loved as
only persons of character can love. Their marriage, if it could be
achieved, would secure to them a lifelong happiness, in so far as such
happiness is attainable by mortals. But between them and their happiness
stood the fiction of Daniel Purcell. In order that they might marry,
Purcell must either be proved to be dead or assumed to be alive.

Could he be proved to be dead? If he could, that were the better way,
because it would demonstrate the truth. But was it possible? In a
scientific sense it probably was. Science can accept a conclusion with
reservations. But the law has to say "yes" or "no" without any
reservations at all. This was not a case of death merely presumed. It was
a death alleged to have occurred at a specific time and place and in a
specific manner; and inseparably bound up with it was a charge of murder.
If Purcell was dead, Varney had murdered him, and the murder was the
issue that would be tried. But no jury would entertain for a moment the
guilt of the accused on such evidence as Thorndyke could offer. And an
acquittal would amount to a legal decision that Purcell was not dead. On
that decision Margaret's marriage to Rodney would be impossible.

Thus Thorndyke's reflections led him back, as they always did, to the
conclusion that Purcell's death was incapable of legal proof, and must
ever remain so, unless by some miracle new and conclusive evidence should
come to light. But to wait for a miracle to happen was an unsatisfactory
policy. If Purcell could not be proved to be dead, and if such failure of
proof must wreck the happiness of two estimable persons, then it would
appear that it might be allowable to accept what was the actual legal
position and assume that he was alive.

So, once again, Thorndyke decided that he had no choice but to continue
to share with Varney the secret of Purcell's death and to hold his peace.

And if this must be, the petition must take its course, aided and
abetted, if necessary, by him. After all, nobody would be injured and
nothing done which was contrary either to public policy or private
morals. There were only two alternatives, as matters stood. The fiction
of Purcell as a living man would either keep Margaret and Rodney apart,
as it was doing now, or it would be employed (with other fictions) to
enable them to be united. And it was better that they should be united.

XIII: In which the Medico-Legal Worm Arrives

ROMANCE lurks in unsuspected places. As we go our daily round, we are apt
to look distastefully upon the scenes made dull by familiarity, and to
seek distraction by letting our thoughts ramble far away into time and
space, to ages and regions in which life seems more full of colour. In
fancy, perchance, we thread the ghostly aisles of some tropical forest,
or linger on the white beach of some lonely coral island, where the
coconut palms, shivering in the sea breeze, patter a refrain to the song
of the surf; or we wander by moonlight through the narrow streets of some
Southern city and hear the thrum of the guitar serenading to the shrouded
balcony; and behold! all Romance is at our very doors.

It was on a bright afternoon early in March that Thorndyke sat, with
Philip Rodney by his side, on one of the lower benches of the lecture
theatre of the Royal College of Surgeons. Not a likely place, this, to
encounter Romance. Yet there it was--and Tragedy, too--lying unnoticed
at present on the green baize cover of the lecturer's table, its very
existence unsuspected.

Meanwhile Thorndyke and Philip conversed in quiet undertones, for it
still wanted some minutes to the hour at which the lecture would
commence.

"I suppose," said Philip, "you have had no report from that private
detective fellow--I forget his name?"

"Bagwell. No, excepting the usual weekly note stating that he is still
unable to pick up any trace of Purcell."

"Ah," commented Philip, "that doesn't sound encouraging. Must be costing
a lot of money, too. I fancy my brother and Maggie Purcell are both
beginning to wish they had taken your advice and relied on the letter by
itself. But Jack was overborne by Barnby's insistence on corroborative
evidence, and Maggie let him decide. And now they are sorry they listened
to Barnby. They hadn't bargained for all this delay."

"Barnby was quite right as to the value of the additional evidence," said
Thorndyke. "What he didn't grasp was the very great difficulty of getting
it. But I think I hear the big-wigs approaching."

As he spoke, the usher threw open the lecturer's door. The audience stood
up, the president entered, preceded by the mace-bearer and followed by
the officers and the lecturer, and took his seat; the audience sat down,
and the lecture began without further formalities.

The theatre was nearly full. It usually was when Professor D'Arcy
lectured; for that genial savant had the magnetic gift of infusing his
own enthusiasm into the lecture and so into his audience, even when, as
on this occasion, his subject lay on the outside edge of medical science.
To-day he was lecturing on the epidermic appendages of the marine worms,
and from the opening sentence he held his audience as by a spell,
standing before the great blackboard with a bunch of coloured chalks in
either hand, talking with easy eloquence--mostly over his shoulder--while
he covered the black surface with those delightful drawings that
added so much to the charm of his lectures. Philip watched his flying
fingers with fascination, and struggled frantically to copy the diagrams
into a large notebook with the aid of a handful of coloured pencils;
while Thorndyke, not much addicted to note-taking, listened and watched
with concentrated attention, mentally docketing and pigeon-holing any new
or significant facts in what was to him a fairly familiar subject.

The latter part of the lecture dealt with those beautiful sea worms that
build themselves tubes to live in--worms like the Serpula, that make
their shelly or stony tubes by secretion from their own bodies, or, like
the Sabella or Terebella, build them up with sand-grains, little stones
or fragments of shell. Each, in turn, appeared in lively portraiture on
the blackboard, and the trays on the table were full of specimens which
were exhibited by the lecturer, and which the audience were invited to
inspect more closely after the lecture.

Accordingly, when the last words of the peroration had been pronounced,
the occupants of the benches trooped down into the arena to look at the
exhibits and seek further details from the genial Professor. Thorndyke
and Philip held back for a while on the outskirts of the crowd; but the
Professor had seen them on their bench, and now approached, greeting them
with a hearty hand shake and a facetious question.

"What are you doing here, Thorndyke? Is it possible that there are
medico-legal possibilities even in a marine worm?"

"Oh, come, D'Arcy!" protested Thorndyke, "don't make me such a hidebound
specialist. May I have no rational interests in life? Must I live for
ever in the witness-box like a marine worm in its tube?"

"I suspect you don't get very far out of your tube," said the Professor,
with a chuckle and a sly glance at Philip.

"I got far enough out last summer," retorted Thorndyke, "to come and aid
and abet you in your worm-hunting. Have you forgotten Cornwall?"

"No, to be sure," was the reply. "But that was only a momentary lapse,
and I expect you had ulterior motives. However, the association of
Cornwall, worm-hunting, and medical jurisprudence reminds me that I have
something in your line. A friend of mine, who was wintering in Cornwall,
picked it up on the beach at Morte Hoe and sent it to me. Now, where is
it? It is on this table somewhere. It is a ridiculous thing--a small,
flat cork, evidently from a zoologist's collecting-bottle, for it has a
label stuck on it with the inscription 'Marine Worms.' It seems that our
zoologist was a sort of Robinson Crusoe, for he had bored a couple of
holes through it and evidently used it as a button. But the most
ludicrous thing about it is that a Terebella has built its tube on it, as
if the worm had been prowling about, looking for lodgings, and had read
the label and forthwith had engaged the apartments. Ah! here it is."

He pounced on a little cardboard box, and, opening it, took out the cork
button and laid it in Thorndyke's palm.

As the Professor was describing the object, Philip looked at him with a
distinctly startled expression, and uttered a smothered exclamation. He
was about to speak, but suddenly checked himself and looked at Thorndyke,
who flashed at him a quick glance of understanding.

"Isn't that a quaint coincidence?" chuckled the Professor--"I mean that
the worm should have taken up its abode and actually built his tube on
the label?"

"Very quaint," replied Thorndyke, still looking with deep interest at the
object that lay in his hand.

"You realize," Philip said in a low voice, as the Professor turned away
to answer a question, "that this button came from Purcell's oilskin
coat?"

"Yes, I remember the incident. I realized what it was as soon as D'Arcy
described the button."

He glanced curiously at Philip, wondering whether he, too, realized
exactly what this queer piece of jetsam was. For to Thorndyke its message
had been conveyed even before the Professor had finished speaking. In
that moment it had been borne to him that the unlooked-for miracle had
happened, and that Margaret Purcell's petition need never be filed.

"Well, Thorndyke," said the Professor, "my friend's treasure trove seems
to interest you. I thought it would as an instance of the possibilities
of coincidence. Quite a useful lesson to a lawyer, by the way."

"Exactly," said Thorndyke. "In fact, I was going to ask you to allow me
to borrow it to examine at my leisure."

The Professor was delighted. "There, now," he chuckled, with a
mischievous twinkle at Philip, "what did I tell you? He hasn't come here
for the comparative anatomy at all. He has just come to grub for legal
data. And now, you see, the medico-legal worm has arrived, and is
instantly collared by the medical jurist. Take him, by all means,
Thorndyke. You needn't borrow him. I present him as a gift to your black
museum. You needn't return him."

Thorndyke thanked the Professor, and, having packed the specimen with
infinite tenderness in its cotton wool, bestowed the box in his waistcoat
pocket. A few minutes later he and Philip took their leave of the
Professor and departed, making their way through Lincoln's Inn to
Chancery Lane.

"That button gave me quite a shock for a moment," said Philip, "appearing
out of the sea on the Cornish coast; for, of course, it was on Purcell's
coat when he went ashore--at least, I suppose it was. I understood
Varney to say so."

"He did," said Thorndyke. "He mentioned the incident at dinner one
evening, and he then said definitely that the cork button was on the coat
when Purcell went up the ladder."

"Yes, and it seemed rather mysterious at first, as Purcell went right
away from Cornwall. But there is probably quite a simple explanation.
Purcell went to the East Coast by sea, and it is most likely that, when
he got on board the steamer, he obtained a proper button from the
steward, cut off the jury button, and chucked it overboard. But it is a
queer chance that it should have come back to us in this way."

Thorndyke nodded. "A very queer chance," he agreed.

As he spoke, he looked at Philip with a some what puzzled expression. He
was, in fact, rather surprised. Philip Rodney was a doctor, a man of
science, and an unquestionably intelligent person. He knew all the
circumstances that were known, and he had seen and examined the button;
and yet he had failed to observe the one vitally important fact that
stared him in the face.

"What made you want to borrow the button?" Philip asked presently. "Was
it that you wanted to keep it as a relic of the Purcell case?"

"I want to examine the worm-tube," replied Thorndyke. "It is a rather
unusual one; very uniform in composition. Mostly, Terebella tubes are
very miscellaneous as to their materials--sand, shell, little pebbles,
and so forth. The material of this one seems to be all alike."

"Probably the stuff that the worm was able to pick up in the
neighbourhood of Morte Hoe."

"That is possible," said Thorndyke; and the conversation dropped for a
moment, each man occupying himself with reflections on the other.

To Philip it seemed rather surprising that a man like Thorndyke, full of
important business, should find time, or even inclination, to occupy
himself with trivialities like this. For, after all, what did it matter
whether this worm-tube was composed of miscellaneous gatherings or of a
number of similar particles? No scientific interest attached to the
question. It seemed rather a silly quest. And yet Thorndyke had thought
it worth while to borrow the specimen for this very purpose.

Thorndyke, for his part, was more than ever astonished at the mental
obtuseness of this usually acute and intelligent man. Not only had he
failed in the first place to observe a most striking and significant
fact: he could not see that fact even when his nose was rubbed hard on
it.

As they passed through Old Buildings and approached the main gateway,
Philip slowed down.

"I am going into my brother's chambers here to have tea with him. Do you
care to join us? He will be glad to see you."

Thorndyke, however, was in no mood for tea and gossip. He had got a
first-class clue--a piece of really conclusive evidence. How conclusive
it was and how far its conclusiveness went he could not tell at present;
and he was eager to get to work on the assay of this specimen in an
evidential sense--to see exactly what was the amount and kind of
evidence that the sea had cast up on the shore of Morte Hoe. He therefore
excused himself, and having bidden Philip adieu, he strode out into
Chancery Lane and bore south towards the Temple.

On entering his chambers, he discovered his assistant, Polton, in the act
of transferring boiling water from a copper kettle to a small silver
teapot; whereby he was able to infer that his approach had been observed
by the said Polton from his lookout in the laboratory above. The two men,
master and man, exchanged friendly greetings, and Thorndyke then
observed:

"I have got a job to do later on, Polton, when I have finished up the
evening's work. I shall want to grind some small sections of a mineral
that I wish to identify. Would you put out one or two small hones and the
other things that I shall need?"

"Yes, sir," replied Polton. "I will put the mineral section outfit on a
tray and bring it down after tea. But can't I grind the sections? It
seems a pity for you to be wasting your time on a mechanical job like
that."

"Thank you, Polton," replied Thorndyke. "Of course you could cut the
sections as well as, or better than, I can. But it is possible that I may
have to produce the sections in evidence, and in that case it will be
better if I can say that I cut them myself and that they were never out
of my own hands. The courts don't know you as I do, you see, Polton."

Polton acknowledged the compliment with a gratified smile, and departed
to the laboratory. As soon as he was gone, Thorndyke brought forth the
little cardboard box, and, having taken out the button, carried it over
to the window, where, with the aid of his pocket lens, he made a long and
careful examination of the worm-tube, the result of which was to confirm
his original observation. The mineral particles of which the tube was
built up were of various shapes and sizes, from mere sand-grains up to
quite respectable little pebbles. But, so far as he could see, they were
all of a similar material. What that material was an expert mineralogist
would have been able, no doubt, to say offhand, and an expert opinion
would probably have to be obtained. But in the meantime his own knowledge
was enough to enable him to form a fairly reliable opinion when he had
made the necessary investigations.

As he drank his tea, he reflected on this extraordinary windfall.
Circumstances had conspired in the most singular manner against Varney.
How much they had conspired remained to be seen. That depended on how
much the worm-tube had to tell. But even if no further light were thrown
on the matter by the nature of the mineral, there was evidence enough
that Purcell had never landed at Penzance. The Terebella had already
given that much testimony. And the cross-examination was yet to come.

Having finished tea, he fell to work on the reports and written opinions
which had to be completed and sent off by the last post; and it was
characteristic of the man that, though the button and its as yet
half-read message lurked in the sub-conscious part of his mind as the
engrossing object of interest, he was yet able to concentrate the whole
of his conscious attention on the matters with which he was outwardly
occupied. Twice during the evening Polton stole silently into the room,
once to deposit on a side-table the little tray containing the mineral
section appliances, and the second time to place on a small table near
the fire a large tray bearing the kind of frugal, informal supper that
Thorndyke usually consumed when alone and at work.

"If you wait a few moments, Polton, I shall have these letters ready for
the post. Then we shall both be free. I don't want to see anybody
to-night unless it is something urgent."

"Very well, sir," replied Polton. "I will switch the bell on to the
laboratory, and I'll see that you are not disturbed unnecessarily."

With this he took up the letters which Thorndyke had sealed and stamped
and reluctantly withdrew, not without a last wistful glance at the
apparatus on the tray.

As the door closed behind him, Thorndyke rose, and, bringing forth the
button from the drawer in which he had bestowed it, began operations at
once. First, with a pair of fine forceps he carefully picked off the
worm-tube half a dozen of the largest fragments and laid them on a glass
slide. This he placed on the stage of the microscope, and, having fitted
on a two inch objective, made a preliminary inspection under various
conditions of light, both transmitted and reflected. When he had got
clearly into his mind the general character of the unknown rock, he
fetched from a store cabinet in the office a number of shallow drawers
filled with labelled specimens of rocks and minerals, and he also placed
on the table in readiness for reference one or two standard works on
geology and petrology. But before examining either the books or the
specimens in the drawers, he opened out a geological chart of the British
Isles and closely scrutinized the comparatively small area with which the
button was concerned--the Land's End and the north and south coast of
Cornwall. A very brief scrutiny of the map showed him that the inquiry
could now be narrowed down to a quite small group of rocks, the majority
of which he could exclude at once by his own knowledge of the more
familiar types; which was highly satisfactory. But there was evidently
something more than this. Anyone who should have been observing him as
he pored over the chart would have seen, by a suddenly increased
attention, with a certain repressed eagerness, that some really
illuminating fact had come into view; and his next proceedings would make
clear to such an observer that the problem had already changed from one
of search to a definite and particular identification.

From the chart he turned to the drawers of specimens, running his eye
quickly over their contents, as if looking for some specific object; and
this object he presently found in a little cardboard tray--a single
fragment of a grey, compact rock, which he pounced upon at once, and,
picking it out of its tray, laid it on the slide with the fragment from
the worm-tube. Careful comparison gave the impression that they were
identical in character, but the great difference in the size of the
fragments compared was a source of possible error. Accordingly, he
wrapped the specimen lightly in paper, and with a hammer from the tool
drawer struck it a sharp blow, which broke it into a number of smaller
fragments, some of them quite minute. Picking out one or two of the
smallest from the paper and carefully noting the "conchoidal" character
of the fracture, he placed them on a separate slide, which he at once
labelled "stock specimen," labelling the other slide "worm-tube." Having
taken this precaution against possible confusion, he laid the two slides
on the stage of the microscope and once more made a minute comparison.
And again the conclusion emerged that the fragments from the worm-tube
were identical in all their characters with the fragment of the stock
specimen.

It now remained to test this conclusion by more exact methods. Two more
labelled slides having been prepared, Thorndyke laid them, label
downwards, on the table and dropped on each a large drop of melted Canada
balsam. In one drop, while it was still soft, he immersed two or three
fragments from the worm-tube; in the other a like number of fragments of
the stock specimen. Then he heated both slides over a spirit-lamp to
liquefy the balsam and completely immerse the fragments, and laid them
aside to cool while he prepared the appliances for grinding the sections.

This process was, as Polton had hinted, a rather tedious one. It
consisted in rubbing the two slides backwards and forwards upon a wetted
Turkey stone until the fragments of rock were ground to a flat surface.
The flattened surfaces had then to be polished upon a smoother stone, and
when this had been done the slides were once more heated over a
spirit-lamp, the balsam liquefied, and each of the fragments neatly
turned over with a needle on to its flat side. When the balsam was cool
and set hard, the grinding process was repeated until each of the
fragments was worn down to a thin plate or film with parallel sides. Then
the slides were again heated, a fresh drop of balsam applied, and a
cover-glass laid on top. The specimens were now finished and ready for
examination.

On this, the final stage of the investigation, he bestowed the utmost
care and attention. The two specimens were examined exhaustively and
compared again and again by every possible method, including the use of
the polariscope and the spectroscope, and the results of each observation
were at once written down. Finally, Thorndyke turned to the books of
reference, and, selecting a highly technical work on petrology, checked
his written notes by the very detailed descriptions that it furnished of
rocks of volcanic origin. And once again the results were entirely
confirmatory of the opinion that he had at first formed. No doubt
whatever was left in his mind as to the nature of the particles of rock
of which the worm had built its tube. But if his opinion was correct, he
held evidence producible in a court of law that Daniel Purcell had never
landed at Penzance; that, in fact, his dead body was even now lying at
the bottom of the sea.

As he consumed his frugal supper, Thorndyke turned over the situation in
his mind. He had no doubts at all. But it would be necessary to get his
identification of the rock confirmed by a recognized authority who could
be called as a witness, and whose statement would be accepted by the
court as establishing the facts. There was no difficulty about that. He
had a friend who was connected with the Geological Museum, and who was
recognized throughout the world as a first-class authority on everything
relating to the physical and chemical properties of rocks and minerals.
He would take the specimens tomorrow to this expert, and ask him to
examine them; and when the authoritative opinion had been pronounced, he
would consider what procedure he should adopt. Already there was growing
up in his mind a doubt as to the expediency of taking action on purely
scientific evidence, and in answer to that doubt a new scheme began to
suggest itself.

But for the moment he put it aside. The important thing was to get the
expert identification of the rock, and so put his evidence on the basis
of established fact. The conversion of scientific into legal evidence was
a separate matter that could be dealt with later. And having reached this
conclusion, he took a sheet of notepaper from the rack and wrote a short
letter to his friend at the Museum, making an appointment for the
following afternoon. A few minutes later he dropped it into the box of
the Fleet Street post office, and for the time being dismissed the case
from his mind.

XIV: In which Mr. Varney is Disillusioned

THORNDYKE'S visit to the Geological Museum was not a protracted affair,
for his friend, Mr. Burston, made short work of the investigation.

"You say you have examined the specimens yourself," said he. "Well, I
expect you know what they are; just come to me for an official
confirmation, h'm? However, don't tell me what your conclusion was. I may
as well start with an open mind. Write it down on this slip of paper and
lay it on the table face downwards. And now let us have the specimens."

Thorndyke produced from his pocket a cigar-case, from which he extracted
a pill-box and the labelled microscope-slide.

"There are two little water-worn fragments in the pill-box," he
explained, "and three similar ones which I have ground into sections. I
am sorry the specimens are so small, but they are the largest I had."

Mr. Burston took the pill-box, and, tipping the two tiny pebbles into the
palm of his hand, inspected them through a Coddington lens.

"Yes," said he; "I don't think it will be very difficult to decide what
this is. I think I could tell you offhand. But I won't. I'll put it
through the regular tests and make quite sure of it; and meanwhile you
had better have a browse round the Museum."

He bustled off to some inner sanctum of the curator's domain, and
Thorndyke adopted his advice by straying out into the galleries. But he
had little opportunity to study the contents of the cases, for in a few
minutes Mr. Burston returned with a slip of paper in his hand.

"Now," he said facetiously, as they re-entered the room, "you see there's
no deception."

He laid his slip of paper on the table beside Thorndyke's, and invited
the latter to "turn up the cards." Thorndyke accordingly turned over the
two slips of paper. Each bore the single word "phonolite."

"I knew you had spotted it," said Burston. "However, you have now got
corroborative evidence, and I suppose you are happy. I only hope I
haven't helped to send some poor devil to chokee or worse. Good-bye. Glad
you brought the things to me."

He restored the pill-box and slide, and having shaken hands heartily
returned to his lair, while Thorndyke went forth into Jermyn Street and
took his way thoughtfully eastward.

In a scientific sense the Purcell case was now complete. But the more he
thought about it the more did he feel the necessity for bringing the
scheme of evidence into closer conformity with traditional legal
practice. Even to a judge a purely theoretical train of evidence might
seem inconclusive; to a jury, who had been well pounded by a persuasive
counsel, it would probably appear quite unconvincing. It would be
necessary to obtain corroboration along different lines and in a new
direction; and the direction in which it would be well to explore in the
first place was the ancient precinct of Lincoln's Inn, where, at 62, Old
Buildings, Mr. John Rodney had his professional chambers.

Now, at the very moment when Thorndyke was proceeding with swift strides
from the neighbourhood of Jermyn Street towards Lincoln's Inn on business
of the most critical importance to Mr. Varney, it was decreed by the
irony of Fate that the latter gentleman should be engaged in bringing his
affairs to a crisis of another kind. For some time past he had been
watching with growing impatience the dilatory proceedings of the lawyers
in regard to Margaret's petition. Especially had he chafed at the farce
of the private detective, searching, as he knew, for a man whose body was
lying on the bed of the sea hundreds of miles away from the area of the
search. He was deeply disappointed, too. For when his advertisement
scheme had been adopted by Thorndyke, he had supposed that all was plain
sailing; he had but to send the necessary letter, and the dissolution of
the marriage could be proceeded with at once. That was how it had
appeared to him. And as soon as the marriage was dissolved he would make
his declaration, and in due course his heart's desire would be
accomplished.

Very differently had things turned out. Months had passed, and not a
sign of progress had been made. The ridiculous search for the missing
man--ridiculous to him only, however--dragged on interminably, and
made him gnash his teeth in secret. His omniscience was now a sheer
aggravation; for it condemned him to look on at the futile activities
that Barnby had suggested and Rodney initiated, recognizing all their
futility, but unable to utter a protest. To a man of his temperament it
was maddening.

But there was another source of trouble. His confidence in Margaret's
feelings towards him had been somewhat shaken of late. It had seemed to
him there had been a change in her bearing towards him--a slight change,
subtle and indefinable, but a change. She seemed as friendly, as cordial
as ever; she welcomed his visits and appeared always glad to see him, and
yet there was a something guarded, so he felt, as if she were consciously
restraining any further increase of intimacy.

The thought of it troubled him profoundly. Of course, it might be nothing
more than a little extra carefulness, due to her equivocal position. She
had need to keep clear of anything in the slightest degree compromising;
that he realized clearly. But still, the feeling lurked in his mind that
she had changed, at least in manner, and sometimes he was aware of a
horrible suspicion that he might have been over-confident. More than once
he had been on the point of saying something indiscreet, and as time went
on he felt ever growing a yearning to have his doubts set at rest.

On this present occasion he was taking tea with Margaret by invitation,
with the ostensible object of showing her a set of etchings of some of
the picturesque corners of Maidstone. He always enjoyed showing her his
works, because he could see that she enjoyed looking at them; and these
etchings of her native town would, he knew, have a double appeal.

"What a lovely old place it is!" she exclaimed, as she sipped her tea
with her eyes fixed on the etchings that Varney had placed before her on
a music-stand. "Why is it, Mr. Varney, that an etching or a drawing of
any kind is so much more like the place than a photograph? It can't be a
question of accuracy, for the photograph is at least as accurate as a
drawing, and contains a great deal more detail."

"Yes," agreed Varney, "and that is probably the explanation. An artist
puts down what he sees and what anyone else would see and recognize. A
photograph puts down what is there, regardless of how the scene would
look to a spectator. Consequently, it is full of irrelevant detail, which
gets in the way of the real effect as the eye would see it; and it may
show appearances that the eye never sees at all, as in the case of
Muybridge's instantaneous photographs of galloping horses. A photograph
of a Dutch clock might catch the pendulum in the middle of its swing, and
then the clock would appear to have stopped. But an artist would always
draw it at the end of its swing, where it pauses for an instant, and that
is where the eye sees it when the clock is going."

"Yes, of course," said Margaret; "and now I understand why your etchings
of the old streets and lanes show just the streets and lanes that I
remember, whereas the photographs that I have all look more or less
strange and unfamiliar. I suppose they are full of details that I never
noticed; but your etchings pick out and emphasize the things that I used
to look at with pleasure and which live in my memory. It is a long time
since I have been to Maidstone. I should like to see it again; indeed, I
am not sure that, if I were free to choose, I shouldn't like to live
there again. It is a dear old town."

"Yes; isn't it? But you say 'if you were free to choose.' Aren't you free
to choose where you will live?"

"In a sense I am, I suppose," she replied; "but I don't feel that I can
make any definite arrangements for the future until--well, until I know
what my own future is to be."

"But surely you know that now. You have got that letter of Dan's. That
practically releases you. The rest is only a matter of time and legal
formalities. If Jack Rodney had only got Penfield or some other solicitor
to get the case started as soon as you had that letter, you would have
had your decree by now and have been your own mistress. At least, that is
my feeling on the subject. Of course, I am not a lawyer, and I may be
wrong."

"I don't think you are," said Margaret. "I have thought the same all
along, and I fancy Mr. Rodney is beginning to regret that he did not
follow Dr. Thorndyke's advice and rely on the letter only. But he felt
that he could hardly go against Mr. Barnby, who has had so much
experience in this kind of practice. And Mr. Barnby was very positive
that the letter was not enough."

"Yes, Barnby has crabbed the whole business; and now after all these
months you are just where you were, excepting that you have dropped a lot
of money on this ridiculous private detective. Can't you get Rodney to
send the fellow packing and get the case started in earnest?"

"I am inclined to think that he is seriously considering that line of
action, and I hope he is. Of course, I have not tried to influence him in
the matter. It is silly for a lay person to embarrass a lawyer by urging
him to do this or that against his judgment. But I must say that I have
grown rather despondent as the time has dragged on and nothing has been
done, and I shall be very relieved when a definite move is made. I have
an impression that it will be quite soon."

"That is good hearing," exclaimed Varney, "because when a move is made it
can't fail to be successful. How can it? On that letter Dan could offer
no defence, and it is pretty obvious that he has no intention of offering
any. And if there is no defence the case must go in your favour."

"Unless the judge suspects collusion, as Mr. Barnby seems to think he
may."

"But," protested Varney, "judges don't give their decisions on what they
suspect, do they? I thought they decided on the evidence. Surely
collusion would have to be proved like anything else; and it couldn't be,
because there has been no collusion. And I don't see why anyone should
suspect that there has been."

"I agree with you entirely, Mr. Varney," said Margaret, "and I do hope
you are right. You are making me feel quite encouraged."

"I am glad of that," said he, "and I am encouraging myself at the same
time. This delay has been frightfully disappointing. I had hoped that by
this time the affair would have been over and you would have been free.
However, we may hope that it won't be so very long now."

"It will take some months, in any case," said Margaret.

"Yes, of course," he admitted; "but that is a mere matter of waiting. We
can wait patiently when we see the end definitely in view. And what a
relief it will be when it is over! Just think of it! When the words are
spoken and the shackles are struck off! Won't that be a joyful day?"

As Varney was speaking, Margaret watched him furtively and a little
uneasily. For there had come into his face an expression that she had
seen more than once of late--an expression that filled her gentle soul
with forebodings of trouble for this impulsive, warm-hearted friend. And
now the note of danger was heightened by something significant in the
words that he had used--something that expressed more than mere friendly
solicitude.

"It will certainly be a relief when the whole business is over," she said
quietly; "and it is most kind and sympathetic of you to take such a warm
interest in my future."

"It isn't kind at all," he replied, "nor particularly sympathetic. I feel
that I am an interested party. In a sense, your future is my future."

He paused for a few moments, and she looked at him in something like
dismay. Vainly she cast about for some means of changing the current of
the conversation, of escaping to some less perilous topic. Before she had
time to recover from her confusion, he looked up at her and burst out
passionately:

"Maggie, I want to ask you a question. I know I oughtn't to ask it, but
you must try to forgive me. I can't bear the suspense any longer. I think
about it day and night, and it is eating my heart out. What I want to ask
you is this: When it is all over--when that blessed day comes and you
are free, will you--can I hope that you may be willing to listen to me
if I ask you to let me be your devoted servant, your humble worshipper,
and to try to make up to you by love and faithful service all that has
been missing from your life in the past? For years--for many years,
Maggie--I have been your friend--a friend far more loving and devoted
than you have ever guessed, for in those days I hardly dared to dream
even of intimate friendship. But now the barrier between us is no longer
immovable. Soon it will be cast down for ever. And then--can it be,
Maggie, that my dream will come true? That you will grant me a lifelong
joy by letting me be the guardian of your happiness and peace?"

For a moment there had risen to Margaret's face a flush of resentment,
but it faded almost instantly and was gone, extinguished by a deep sense
of the tragedy of this unfortunate but real and great passion. She had
always liked Varney, and she had recognized and valued his quiet,
unobtrusive friendship and the chivalrous deference with which he had
been used to treat her. And now she was going to make him miserable, to
destroy his cherished hopes of a future made happy in the realization of
his great love for her. The sadness of it left no room for resentment,
and her eyes filled as she answered unsteadily:

"You know, Mr. Varney, that, as a married woman, I have no right to
speak or think of the making of a new marriage. But I feel that your
question must be answered; and I wish, dear Mr. Varney, I wish from my
heart that it could be answered differently. I have always valued your
friendship--with very good reason; and I value your love, and am proud
to have been thought worthy of it. But I cannot accept it. I can never
accept it. It is dreadful to me, dear friend, to make you unhappy--you
whom I like and admire so much. But it must be so. I have nothing but
friendship to offer you, and I shall never have."

"Why do you say you will never have, Maggie?" he urged. "May it not be
that you will change? That the other will come if I wait long enough? And
I will wait patiently--wait until I am an old man if need be, so that
only the door is not shut. I will never weary you with importunities, but
just wait your pleasure. Will you not let me wait and hope, Maggie?"

She shook her head sadly. "No, Mr. Varney," she answered. "Believe me, it
can never be. There is nothing to wait for. There will be no change. The
future is certain so far as that. I am so sorry, dear generous friend. It
grieves me to the heart to make you unhappy. But what I have said is
final. I can never say anything different."

Varney looked at her in incredulous despair. He could not believe in this
sudden collapse of all his hopes; for his doubts of her had been but
vague misgivings, born of impatience and unrest. But suddenly a new
thought flashed into his mind.

"How do you know that?" he asked. "Why are you so certain? Is there
anything now that you know of that--that must keep us apart for ever?
You know what I mean, Maggie. Is there anything?"

She was silent for a few moments. Naturally, she was reluctant to
disclose to another the secret that she had held so long locked in her
own heart, and that even now she dared but to whisper to herself. But she
felt that to this man, whose love she must reject and whose happiness she
must shatter, she owed a sacred duty. He must not be allowed to wreck his
life if a knowledge of the truth would save him.

"I will tell you, Mr. Varney," she said. "You know how I came to marry
Dan?"

"I think so," he replied. "He never told me, but I guessed."

"Well, if I had not married Dan I should have married John Rodney. There
was no engagement and nothing was said; but we were deeply attached to
one another, and we both understood. Then circumstances compelled me to
marry Dan. Mr. Rodney knew what those circumstances were. He cherished no
resentment against me. He did not even blame me. He has remained my
friend ever since, and he has formed no other attachment. I know that he
has never forgotten what might have been, and neither have I. Need I say
any more?"

Varney shook his head. "No," he replied gruffly. "I understand."

For some moments there was a deep silence in the room. Margaret glanced
timidly at her companion, shocked at the sudden change in his appearance.
In a moment all the enthusiasm, the eager vivacity, had died out of his
face, leaving it aged, drawn, and haggard. He had understood, and his
heart was filled with black despair. At a word all his glorious
dream-castles had come crashing down, leaving the world that had been so
sunny a waste of dust and ashes. So he sat for a while silent,
motionless, stunned by the suddenness of the calamity. At length he rose
and began, in a dull, automatic way, to collect his etchings and bestow
them in his portfolio. When he had secured them and tied the ribbons of
the portfolio, he turned to Margaret and, standing before her, looked
earnestly in her face.

"Good-bye, Maggie," he said in a strange, muffled voice; "I expect I
shan't see you again for some time."

She stood up, and with a little smothered sob held out her hand. He took
it in both of his and, stooping, kissed it reverently. "Good-bye again,"
he said, still holding her hand. "Don't be unhappy about me. It couldn't
be helped. I shall often think of you and of how sweet you have been to
me to-day; and I shall hope to hear soon that you have got your freedom.
And I do hope to God that Rodney will make you happy. I think he will. He
is a good fellow, an honest man, and a gentleman. He is worthy of you,
and I wish you both long years of happiness."

He kissed her hand once more, and then, releasing it, made his way
gropingly out into the hail and to the door. She followed him with the
tears streaming down her face, and watched him, as she had watched him
once before, descending the stairs. At the landing he turned and waved
his hand, and even as she returned his greeting he was gone. She went
back to the drawing-room still weeping silently, very sad at heart at
this half-foreseen tragedy. For the time being, she could see, Varney was
a broken man. He had come full of hope and he had gone away in despair;
and something seemed to hint--it may have been the valedictory tone of
his last words--that she had looked on him for the last time, that the
final wave of his hand was a last farewell.

Meanwhile Varney, possessed by a wild unrest, hurried through the
streets, yearning, like a wounded animal, for the solitude of his lair.
He wanted to shut himself in his studio and be alone with his misery.
Presently he hailed a taxicab, and from its window gazed out impatiently
to measure its progress. Soon it drew up at the familiar entry, and when
he had paid the driver he darted in and shut the door; but hardly had he
attained the sanctuary that he had longed for than the same unrest began
to engender a longing to escape. Up and down the studio he paced, letting
the unbidden thoughts surge chaotically through his mind, mingling the
troubled past with the future of his dreams--the sunny future that might
have been--and this with the empty reality that lay before him.

On the wall he had pinned an early proof of the aquatint that Thorndyke
had liked and that he himself rather liked. He had done it partly from
bravado and partly as a memorial of the event that had set both him and
Maggie free. Presently he halted before it and let it set the tune to his
meditations. There was the lighthouse looking over the fog-bank just as
it had looked on him when he was washing the bloodstain from the deck. By
that time Purcell was overboard, at the bottom of the sea. His oppressor
was gone. His life was now his own, and her life was her own.

He looked at the memorial picture, and in a moment it seemed to him to
have become futile. The murder itself was futile, so far as he was
concerned, though it had set Maggie free. To what purpose had he killed
Purcell? It had been to ensure a future for himself; and behold! there
was to be no future for him after all. Thus in the bitterness of his
disappointment he saw everything out of proportion and in false
perspective. He forgot that it was not to win Margaret but to escape from
the clutches of his parasite that he had pulled the trigger on that sunny
day in June. He forgot that he had achieved the very object that was in
his mind when he fired the shot: freedom to live a reputable life safe
from the menace of the law. His passion for Margaret had become so
absorbing that it had obscured all the other purposes of his life; and
now that it was gone, it seemed to him that nothing was left.

As he stood thus gloomily reflecting with his eyes fixed on the little
picture, he began to be aware of a new impulse. The lighthouse, the
black-sailed luggers, the open sea, seemed to take on an unwonted
friendliness. They were the setting of something besides tragedy.
There, in Cornwall, he had been happy in a way despite the abiding
menace of Purcell's domination. There, at Sennen, he had lived under
the same roof with her, had sat at her table, had been her guest and
her accepted friend. It had not really been a happy period, but memory,
like the sundial, numbers only the sunny hours, and Varney looked back
on it with wistful eyes. At least his dream had not been shattered
then. So, as he looked at the picture, he felt stirring within him
a desire to go back and look upon those scenes again. Falmouth and
Penzance and Sennen--especially Sennen--seemed to draw him. He wanted
to look out across the sea to the Longships, and in the gathering gloom
of the horizon to see the diamond and the ruby sparkle as they did
that evening when he and the distant lighthouse seemed to hold secret
converse.

It was, perhaps, a strange impulse. Whence it came he neither knew nor
asked. It may have been the effect of memory and association. It may have
been mere unrest. Or it may have been that a dead hand beckoned to him to
come. Who shall say? He only knew that he was sensible of the impulse,
and that it grew from moment to moment.

To a man in his condition, to feel an impulse is to act on it. No sooner
was he conscious of the urge to go back and look upon the well-remembered
scenes than he began to make his simple preparations for the journey.
Like most experienced travellers he travelled light. Most of his kit,
including his little case of sketching materials, was in the studio. The
rest could be picked up at his lodgings en route for Paddington. Within
ten minutes of his having formed the resolve to go, he stood on the
threshold, locking the studio door from without with the extra key that
he used when he was absent for more than a day. At the outer gate he
paused to pocket the key, and stood for a few moments with his
portmanteau in his hand, looking back at the studio with a curiously
reflective air. Then, at last, he turned and went on his way. But if he
could have looked, as the clairvoyant claims to look, through the bricks
and mortar of London, he might at this very time have seen Dr. John
Thorndyke striding up Chancery Lane from Fleet Street; might have
followed him to the great gateway of Lincoln's Inn (on the masonry
whereof tradition has it that Ben Jonson worked as a bricklayer), and
seen him pass through into the little square beyond, and finally plunge
into the dark and narrow entry of one of the ancient red brick houses
that have looked down upon the square for some three or four centuries--an
entry on the jamb of which was painted the name of Mr. John Rodney.

But Varney was not a clairvoyant, and neither was Thorndyke. And so it
befell that each of them went his way unconscious of the movements of the
other.

XV: In which Thorndyke opens the Attack

As Thorndyke turned the corner at the head of the stairs, he encountered
Philip Rodney with a kettle in his hand, which he had apparently been
filling at some hidden source of water.

"This is a bit of luck," said Philip, holding out his disengaged hand--"for
me, at least; not, perhaps, for you. I have only just arrived, and
Jack hasn't come over from the courts yet. I hope this isn't a business
call."

"In a sense it is," replied Thorndyke, "as I am seeking information. But
I think you can probably tell me all I want to know."

"That's all right," said Philip. "I'll just plant 'Polly' on the
gas-stove, and while she is boiling we can smoke a preparatory pipe and
you can get on with the examination-in-chief. Go in and take the
presidential chair."

Thorndyke entered the pleasant, homely room, half office, half
sitting-room, and seating himself in the big armchair began to fill his
pipe. In a few moments Philip entered, and sat down on a chair which
commanded a view of the tiny kitchen and of "Polly," seated on a
gas-ring.

"Now," said he, "fire away. What do you want to know?"

"I want," replied Thorndyke, "to ask you one or two questions about your
yacht."

"The deuce you do!" exclaimed Philip. "Are you thinking of going in for a
yacht yourself?"

"Not at present," was the reply. "My questions have reference to that
last trip that Purcell made in her, and the first one is: When you took
over the yacht after that trip, did you find her in every respect as she
was before? Was there anything missing that you could not account for, or
any change in her condition, or anything about her that was not quite as
you expected it to be?"

Philip looked at his visitor with undissembled surprise. "Now I wonder
what makes you ask that. Have you any reason to expect that I should have
found any change in her condition?"

"If you don't mind," said Thorndyke, "we will leave that question
unanswered for the moment. I would rather not say, just now, what my
object is in seeking this information. We can go into that later.
Meanwhile, do you mind just answering my questions as if you were in the
witness-box?"

A shade of annoyance crossed Philip's face. He could not imagine what
possible concern Thorndyke could have with his yacht, and he was inclined
to resent the rather cryptic attitude of his questioner. Nevertheless, he
answered readily:

"Of course I don't mind. But, in fact, there is nothing to tell. I don't
remember noticing any thing unusual about the yacht, and there was
nothing missing, so far as I know."

"No rope or cordage of any kind, for instance?"

"No--at least, nothing to speak of. A new ball of spun-yarn had been
broached. I noticed that, and I meant to ask Varney what he used it for.
But there wasn't a great deal of it gone, and I know of nothing else. Oh,
wait! If I am in the witness-box I must tell the whole truth, be it never
so trivial. There was a mark or stain or dirty smear of some kind on the
jib. Is that any good to you?"

"Are you sure it wasn't there before that day?"

"Quite. I sailed the yacht myself the day before, and I will swear that
the jib was spotlessly clean then. So the mark must have been made by
Purcell or Varney, because I noticed it the very next day."

"What was the mark like?"

"It was just a faint wavy line, as if some dirty water had been spilt on
the sail and allowed to dry partly before it was washed off."

"Did you form any opinion as to how the mark might have been caused?"

Philip struggled, not quite successfully, to suppress a smile. To him
there seemed something extremely ludicrous in this solemn interrogation
concerning these meaningless trifles. But he answered as gravely as he
could:

"I could only make a vague guess. I assumed that it was caused in some
way by the accident that occurred. You may remember that the jib-halyard
broke, and the sail went overboard and got caught under the yacht's
forefoot. That is when it must have happened. Perhaps the sail may have
picked some dirt off the keel. Usually a dirty mark on the jib means mud
on the fluke of the anchor, but it wasn't that. The anchor hadn't been
down since it was scrubbed. The yacht rode at moorings in Sennen Cove.
However, there was the mark; how it came there you are as well able to
judge as I am."

"And that is all you know; this mark on the sail and the spun-yarn? There
is no other cordage missing?"

"No, not so far as I know."

"And there is nothing else missing? No iron fittings or heavy objects of
any kind?"

"Good Lord, no! How should there be? You don't suspect Purcell of having
hooked off with one of the anchors in his pocket, do you?"

Thorndyke smiled indulgently, but persisted in his questions.

"Do you mean that you know there was nothing missing, or only that you
are not aware of any thing being missing?"

The persistence of the questions impressed Philip with a sudden suspicion
that Thorndyke had something definite in his mind, that he had some
reason for believing that something had been removed from the yacht. He
ventured to suggest this to Thorndyke, who answered frankly enough:

"You are so far right, Philip, that I am not asking these questions at
random. I would rather not say more than that just now."

"Very well," said Philip; "I won't press you for an explanation. But I
may say that we dismantled the yacht in rather a hurry, and hadn't time
to check the inventory, so I can't really say whether there was anything
missing or not. But you have come at a most opportune time, for it
happens that we had arranged to go over to the place where she is laid
up, at Battersea, to morrow afternoon for the very purpose of checking
the inventory and generally overhauling the boat and the gear. If you
care to come over with us, or meet us there, we can settle your questions
quite definitely. How will that suit you?"

"It will suit me perfectly," replied Thorndyke. "If you will give me the
address and fix a time, I will meet you there."

"It is a disused wharf with some empty work shops," said Philip. "I will
write down the directions, and if you will be at the gate at three
o'clock to-morrow, we can go through the gear and fittings together."

Thorndyke made a note of the whereabouts of the wharf, and having thus
despatched the business on which he had come, he took an early
opportunity to depart, not having any great desire to meet John Rodney
and be subjected to the inevitable cross-examination. He could see that
Philip was, naturally enough, extremely curious as to the object of his
inquiries, and he preferred to leave the two brothers to discuss the
matter. On the morrow his actions would be guided by the results, if any,
of the survey of the yacht.

Three o'clock on the following afternoon found him waiting at a large
wooden gate in a narrow thoroughfare close to the river. On the pavement
by his side stood the green canvas-covered "research case," which was his
constant companion whenever he went abroad on professional business. It
contained a very complete outfit of such reagents and apparatus as he
might require in a preliminary investigation; but on the present occasion
its usual contents had been reinforced by two large bottles, to obtain
which Polton had that morning made a special visit to a wholesale
chemist's in the Borough. A church clock somewhere across the river
struck the hour, and almost at the same moment John and Philip Rodney
emerged from a tributary alley and advanced towards the gate.

"You are here first, then," said Philip, "but we are not late. I heard a
clock strike a moment ago."

He produced a key from his pocket, with which he unlocked a wicket in the
gate, and, having pushed it open, invited Thorndyke to enter. The latter
passed through, and the two brothers followed, locking the wicket after
them, and conducted Thorndyke across a large yard to a desolate looking
wharf, beyond which was a stretch of unreclaimed shore. Here, drawn up
well above high-water mark, a small, sharp-sterned yacht stood on chocks
under a tarpaulin cover.

"This is the yacht," said Philip, "but there is nothing on board of her.
All the stores and gear and loose fittings are in the workshop behind us.
Which will you see first?"

"Let us look at the gear," replied Thorn-dyke; and they accordingly
turned towards a large disused workshop at the rear of the wharf.

"Phil was telling me about your visit last night," said Rodney, with an
inquisitive eye on the research case, "and we are both fairly flummoxed.
He gathered that these inquiries of yours are in some way connected with
Purcell."

"Yes, that is so. I want to ascertain whether, when you resumed
possession of the yacht after Purcell left her, you found her in the same
condition as before, and whether her stores, gear, and fittings were
intact."

"Did you suppose that Purcell might have taken some of them away with
him?"

"I thought it not impossible," Thorndyke replied.

"Now, I wonder why on earth you should think that," said Rodney, "and
what concern it should be of yours if he had."

Thorndyke smiled evasively. "Everything is my concern," he replied. "I am
an Autolycus of the Law, a collector of miscellaneous trifles of evidence
and unclassifiable scraps of information."

"Well," said Rodney, with a somewhat sour smile, "I have no experience of
legal curiosity shops and oddment repositories. But I don't know what you
mean by 'evidence.' Evidence of what?"

"Of whatever it may chance to prove," Thorndyke replied blandly.

"What did you suppose Purcell might have taken with him?" Rodney asked,
with a trace of irritability in his tone.

"I had thought it possible that there might be some cordage missing and
perhaps some iron fittings or other heavy objects. But, of course, that
is mere surmise. My object is, as I have said, to ascertain whether the
yacht was in all respects in the same condition when Purcell left her as
when he came on board."

Rodney gave a grunt of impatience; but at this moment Philip, who had
been wrestling with a slightly rusty lock, threw open the door of the
workshop, and they all entered. Thorndyke looked curiously about the
long, narrow interior with its prosaic contents, so little suggestive of
the tragedy which his thoughts associated with them. Over head the
yacht's spars rested on the tie-beams, from which hung bunches of blocks;
on the floor reposed a long row of neatly painted half-hundred weights, a
pile of chain cable, two anchors, a stove, and other oddments such as
water-breakers, buckets, mops, etc.; and on the long benches at the side
folded sails, locker cushions, sidelight lanterns, the binnacle, the
cabin lamp, and other more delicate fittings. After a long look round, in
the course of which his eye travelled along the row of ballast-weights,
Thorndyke deposited his case on a bench and asked:

"Have you still got the broken jib-halyard that Philip was telling me
about last night?"

"Yes," answered Rodney; "it is here under the bench."

He drew out a coil of rope, and, flinging it on the floor, began to
uncoil it, when it separated into two lengths.

"Which are the broken ends?" asked Thorndyke.

"It broke near the middle," replied Rodney, "where it chafed on the cleat
when the sail was hoisted. This is the one end, you see, frayed out, like
a brush in breaking, and the other--" He picked up the second half, and
passing it rapidly through his hands held up the end. He did not finish
the sentence, but stood, with a frown of surprise, staring at the rope in
his hand.

"This is queer," he said, after a pause. "The broken end has been cut
off. Did you cut it off, Phil?"

"No," replied Philip; "it is just as I took it from the locker, where, I
suppose, you or Varney stowed it."

"I wonder," said Thorndyke, "how much has been cut off. Do you know what
the original length of the rope was?"

"Yes," replied Rodney; "forty-two feet. It is down in the inventory, but
I remember working it out. Let us see how much there is here."

He laid the two lengths of rope along the floor, and with Thorndyke's
spring tape care fully measured them. The combined length was exactly
thirty-one feet.

"So," said Thorndyke, "there are eleven feet missing without allowing for
the lengthening of the rope by stretching."

The two brothers glanced at one another, and both looked at Thorndyke
with very evident surprise.

"Well," said Philip, "you seem to be right about the cordage. But what
made you go for the jib-halyard in particular?"

"Because if any cordage had been cut off it would naturally be taken from
a broken rope in preference to a whole one."

"Yes, of course. But I can't understand how you came to suspect that any
rope was missing at all."

"We will talk about that presently," said Thorndyke. "The next question
is as to the iron fittings, chain, and so forth."

"I don't think any of those can be missing," said Rodney. "You can't very
well cut a length of chain off with your pocket-knife."

"No," agreed Thorndyke, "but I thought you might have some odd piece of
chain among the ballast."

"We have no chain except the cable. Our only ballast is in the form of
half-hundredweights. They are handier to stow than odd stuff."

"How many half-hundredweights have you?"

"Twenty-four," replied Rodney.

"There are only twenty-three in that row," said Thorndyke. "I counted
them as we came in and noted the odd number."

The two brothers simultaneously checked Thorndyke's statement and
confirmed it. Then they glanced about the floor of the workshop, under
the benches, and by the walls; but the missing weight was nowhere to be
seen, nor was there any place in which an object of this size could have
got hidden.

"It is very extraordinary," said Philip. "There is certainly one weight
missing. And no one has handled them but Jack and I. We hired a barrow
and brought up all the gear ourselves."

"There is just the chance," said Thorndyke, "that one of them may have
been overlooked and left in the yacht's hold."

"It is very unlikely," replied Philip, "seeing that we took out the
floor-boards, so that you can see the whole of the bilges from end to
end. But I will run down and make sure."

He ran out, literally, and crossing the wharf disappeared over the edge.
In a couple of minutes he was back, breathing fast, and evidently not a
little excited.

"It isn't there," he said. "Of course it couldn't be. But the question
is, what has become of it? It is a most mysterious affair."

"It is," agreed Rodney. "And what is still more mysterious is that
Thorndyke seemed to suspect that it was missing even before he came here.
Now didn't you, Thorndyke?"

"I suspected that some heavy object was missing, as I mentioned," was the
reply, "and a ballast-weight was a likely object. By the way, can you fix
a date on which you know that all the ballast-weights were in place?"

"Yes, I think I can," replied Philip. "A few days before Purcell went to
Penzance we beached the yacht to give her a scrape. Of course we had to
take out the ballast, and when we launched her again I helped to put it
back. I am certain that all the weights were there then, because I
counted them after they were stowed in their places."

"Then," said Thorndyke, "it is virtually certain that they were all on
board when Purcell and Varney started from Sennen."

"I should say it is absolutely certain," said Philip.

Thorndyke nodded gravely and appeared to reflect a while. But his
reflections were broken in upon by John Rodney.

"Look here, Thorndyke, we have answered your questions and given you
facilities for verifying certain opinions that you held, and now it is
time that you were a little less reserved with us. You evidently
connected the disappearance of this rope and this weight in some way with
Purcell. Now, we are all interested in Purcell. You have got something up
your sleeve, and we should like to know what that something is. It is
perfectly obvious that you don't imagine that Purcell, when he went up
the pier ladder at Penzance, had a couple of fathoms of rope and a
half-hundred weight concealed about his person."

"As a matter of fact," said Thorndyke, "I don't imagine that Purcell ever
went up the ladder at Penzance at all."

"But Varney saw him go up," protested Philip.

"Varney says he saw him go up," Thorndyke corrected. "I do not accept Mr.
Varney's statement."

"Then what on earth do you suggest?" demanded Philip. "And why should
Varney say what isn't true?"

"Let us sit down on this bench," said Thorndyke, "and thrash the matter
out. I will put my case to you, and you can give me your criticisms on
it. I will begin by stating that some months ago I came to the conclusion
that Purcell was dead."

Both the brothers started and gazed at Thorndyke in utter astonishment.
Then Rodney said:

"You say 'some months ago.' You must mean within the last three months."

"No," replied Thorndyke. "I decided that he died on the 2nd of last June,
before the yacht reached Penzance."

An exclamation burst simultaneously from both of his hearers, and Rodney
protested impatiently:

"But this is sheer nonsense, if you will pardon me for saying so. Have
you forgotten that two persons have received letters from him less than
four months ago?"

"I suggest that we waive those letters and consider the other evidence."

"But we can't waive them!" exclaimed Rodney. "They are material evidence
of the most conclusive kind."

"I may say that I have ascertained that both those letters were
forgeries. The evidence can be produced, if necessary, as both the
letters are in existence, but I don't propose to produce it now. I ask
you to accept my statement for the time being and to leave the letters
out of the discussion."

"It is leaving out a good deal," said Rodney. "I find it very difficult
to believe that they were forgeries or to imagine who on earth could have
forged them. However, we won't contest the matter now. When did you come
to this extra ordinary conclusion?"

"A little over four months ago," replied Thorndyke.

"And you never said anything to any of us on the subject," said Rodney,
"and, what is more astonishing, you actually put in an advertisement,
addressed to a man whom you believed to be dead."

"And got an answer from him," added Philip, with a derisive smile.

"Exactly," said Thorndyke. "It was an experiment, and it was justified by
the result. But let us get back to the matter that we have been
investigating. I came to the conclusion, as I have said, that Purcell met
his death during that voyage from Sennen to Penzance, and that Varney,
for some reason, had thought it necessary to conceal the occurrence; but
I decided that the evidence in my possession would not be convincing in a
court of law."

"I have no doubt that you were perfectly right in that," Rodney remarked
dryly.

"I further considered it very unlikely that any fresh evidence would ever
be forthcoming, and that, since the death could not be proved, it was,
for many reasons, undesirable that the question should ever be raised.
Accordingly, I never communicated my belief to anybody."

"Then," said Rodney, "are we to understand that some new evidence has
come to light, after all?"

"Yes. It came to light the other day at the College of Surgeons. I dare
say Philip told you about it."

"He told me that, by an extraordinary coincidence, that quaint button of
Purcell's had turned up, and that some sort of sea-worm had built a tube
on it. But if that is what you mean, I don't see the bearing of it as
evidence."

"Neither do I," said Philip.

"You remember that Varney distinctly stated that when Purcell went up the
ladder at Penzance he was wearing his oilskin coat, and that the button
was then on it?"

"Yes. But I don't see anything in that. Purcell went ashore, it is true,
and he went away from Cornwall. But he seems to have gone by sea, and, as
I suggested the other day, he probably got a fresh button when he went on
board the steamer and chucked this cork one overboard."

"I remember your making that suggestion," said Thorndyke, "and very much
astonished I was to hear you make it. I may say that I have ascertained
that Purcell was never on board that steamer."

"Well, he might have thrown it into the sea somewhere else. There is no
particular mystery about its having got into the sea. But what was there
about my suggestion that astonished you so much?"

"It was," replied Thorndyke, "that you completely overlooked a most
impressive fact which was staring you in the face and shouting aloud for
recognition."

"Indeed!" said Philip. "What fact was it that I overlooked?"

"Just consider," replied Thorndyke, "what it was that Professor D'Arcy
showed us. It was a cork button with a Terebella tube on it. Now an
ordinary cork, if immersed long enough, will soak up water until it is
waterlogged and then sink to the bottom. But this one was impregnated
with paraffin wax. It could not get waterlogged and it could not sink. It
would float for ever."

"Well?" queried Philip.

"But it had sunk. It had been lying at the bottom of the sea for
months--long enough for a Terebella to build a tube on it. Then at last
it had broken loose, risen to the surface and drifted ashore."

"You are taking the worm-tube as evidence," said John Rodney, "that the
button had sunk to bottom. Is it impossible--I am no naturalist--but is
it impossible that the worm could have built its tube while the button
was floating about in the sea?"

"It is quite impossible," replied Thorndyke, "in the case of this
particular worm, since the tube is built up of particles of rock gathered
by the worm from the sea bottom. You will bear me out in that, Philip?"

"Oh, certainly," replied Philip. "There is no doubt that the button has
been at the bottom for a good many months. The question is how the deuce
it can have got there, and what was holding it down."

"You are not overlooking the fact that it is a button," said Thorndyke--"I
mean that it was attached to a garment?"

Both men looked at Thorndyke a little uncomfortably. Then Rodney replied:

"Your suggestion obviously is that the button was attached to a garment
and that the garment contained a body. I am disposed to concede the
garment, since I can think of no other means by which the button could
have been held down, but I see no reason for assuming the body. I admit
that I do not quite understand how Purcell's oilskin coat could have got
to the bottom of the sea, but still less can I imagine how Purcell's body
could have got to the bottom of the sea. What do you say, Phil?"

"I agree with you," answered Philip. "Something must have held the button
down, and I can think of nothing but the coat to which it was attached.
But as to the body, it seems a gratuitous assumption, to say nothing of
the various reasons for believing that Purcell is still alive. There is
nothing wildly improbable in the supposition that the coat might have
blown overboard and been sunk by something heavy in the pocket. As a
matter of fact, it would have sunk by itself as soon as it got thoroughly
soaked. You must admit, Thorndyke, that that is so."

But Thorndyke shook his head. "We are not dealing with general
probabilities," said he. "We are dealing with a specific case. An empty
oilskin coat, even if sunk by some object in the pocket, would have been
comparatively light, and, like all moderately light bodies, would have
drifted about the sea bottom, impelled by currents and tide-streams. But
that is not the condition in the present case. There is evidence that
this button was moored immovably to some very heavy object."

"What evidence is there of that?" demanded Rodney.

"There is the conclusive fact that it has been all these months lying
continuously in one place."

"Indeed!" said Rodney, with hardly concealed scepticism. "That seems a
bold thing to say. But if you know that it has been lying all the time in
one place, perhaps you can point out the spot where it has been lying."

"As a matter of fact I can," said Thorndyke. "That button, Rodney, has
been lying all these months on the sea bottom at the base of the Wolf
Rock."

The two brothers started very perceptibly. They stared at Thorndyke, then
looked at one another, and then Rodney challenged the statement.

"You make this assertion very confidently," he said. "Can you produce any
evidence to support it?"

"I can produce perfectly convincing and conclusive evidence," replied
Thorndyke. "A very singular conjunction of circumstances enables us to
fix with absolute certainty the place where that button has been lying.
Do you happen to be acquainted with the peculiar resonant volcanic rock
known as phonolite or clink-stone?"

Rodney shook his head a little impatiently. "No," he answered; "I have
never heard of it before."

"It is not a very rare rock," said Thorndyke, "but in the neighbourhood
of the British Isles it occurs in only two places. One is inland in the
North, and may be disregarded. The other is the Wolf Rock."

Neither of his hearers made any comment on this statement, though it was
evident that both were deeply impressed, and he continued:

"This Wolf Rock is a very remarkable structure. It is what is called a
'volcanic neck'--that is, it is a mass of altered lava that once filled
the funnel of a volcano. The volcano has disappeared, but this cast of
the funnel remains standing up from the bottom of the sea like a great
column. It is a single mass of phonolite, and thus entirely different in
composition from the sea bed around or anywhere near these islands. But,
of course, immediately at its base the sea bottom must be covered with
decomposed fragments which have fallen from its sides, and it is with
these fragments that our Terebella has built its tube. You remember,
Philip, my pointing out to you, as we walked home from the College, that
the worm-tube appeared to be built of fragments that were all alike. Now,
that was a very striking and significant fact. It furnished prima facie
evidence that the button had been moored in one place, and that it had
therefore been attached to some very heavy object. That night I made an
exhaustive examination of the material of the tube, and then the further
fact emerged that the material was phonolite. This, as I have said, fixed
the locality with exactness and certainty. And I may add that, in view of
the importance of the matter in an evidential sense, I submitted the
fragments yesterday to one of the greatest living authorities on
petrology, who recognized them at once as phonolite."

For some time after Thorndyke had finished speaking the two brothers sat
wrapped in silent reflection. Both were deeply impressed, but each in a
markedly different way. To John Rodney, the lawyer, accustomed to sworn
testimony and documentary evidence, this scientific demonstration
appeared amazingly ingenious but some what fantastic and unconvincing. In
the case of Philip, the doctor, it was quite otherwise. Accustomed to
acting on inferences from facts of his own observing, he gave full weight
to each item of evidence, and his thoughts were already stretching out to
the as yet unstated corollaries.

John Rodney was the first to speak. "What inference," he asked, "do you
wish us to draw from this very ingenious theory of yours?"

"It is rather more than a theory," said Thorndyke, "but we will let that
pass. The inference I leave to you; but perhaps it would help you if I
were to recapitulate the facts."

"Perhaps it would," said Rodney.

"Then," said Thorndyke, "I will take them in their order. This is the case
of a man who was seen to start on a voyage for a given destination in
company with one other man. His start out to sea was witnessed by a
number of persons. From that moment he was never seen again by any person
excepting his one companion. He is said to have reached his destination,
but his arrival there rests upon the unsupported verbal testimony of one
person, the said companion. Thereafter he vanished utterly, and since
then has made no sign of being alive; he has drawn no cheques, though he
has a considerable balance at his bank; he has communicated with no one,
and he has never been seen by anybody who could recognize him."

"Is that quite correct?" interposed Philip. "He is said to have been seen
at Falmouth and Ipswich, and then there are those letters."

"His alleged appearance, embarking at Falmouth and disembarking at
Ipswich," replied Thorndyke, "rest, like his arrival at Penzance, upon
the unsupported testimony of one person, his sole companion on the
voyage. That statement I can prove to be untrue. He was never seen either
at Falmouth or at Ipswich. As to the letters. I can prove them both to be
forgeries and for the present I ask you to admit them as such pending the
production of proof. But if we exclude the alleged appearances and the
letters, what I have said is correct: from the time when this man put out
to sea from Sennen he has never been seen by anyone but Varney, and there
has never been any corroboration of Varney's statement that he landed at
Penzance.

"Some eight months later a portion of this man's clothing is found. It
bears evidence of having been lying at the bottom of the sea for many
months, so that it must have sunk to its resting-place within a very
short time of the man's disappearance. The place where it has been lying
is one over, or near, which the man must have sailed in the yacht. It has
been moored to the bottom by some very heavy object, and a very heavy
object has disappeared from the yacht. That heavy object had apparently
not disappeared when the yacht started, and it is not known to have been
on the yacht afterwards. The evidence goes to show that the disappearance
of that object coincided in time with the disappearance of the man, and a
quantity of cordage disappeared certainly on that day.

"Those are the facts at present in our possession with regard to the
disappearance of Daniel Purcell, to which we may add that the
disappearance was totally unexpected, that it has never been explained or
accounted for excepting in a letter which is a manifest forgery, and that
even in the latter, apart from the fictitious nature of the letter, the
explanation is utterly inconsistent with all that is known of the missing
man in respect of his character, his habits, his intentions, and his
circumstances."

XVI: In which John Rodney is Convinced

ONCE more, as Thorndyke concluded, there was a long, uncomfortable
silence, during which the two brothers cogitated profoundly and with a
very disturbed expression. At length John Rodney spoke.

"There is no denying, Thorndyke, that the body of circumstantial evidence
that you have produced and expounded so skilfully and lucidly is extra
ordinarily complete. Of course, it is subject to your being able to prove
that Varney's reports as to Purcell's appearance at Falmouth and Ipswich
were false reports, and that the letters which purported to be written
and sent by Purcell were in fact not written or sent by him. If you can
prove those assertions, there will undoubtedly be a very formidable case
against Varney, because those reports and those letters would then be
evidence that someone was endeavouring to prove, falsely, that Purcell
is alive. But this would amount to presumptive evidence that he is
not alive, and that someone has reasons for concealing the fact of
his death. But we must look to you to prove what you have asserted.
You could hardly suggest that we should charge a highly respectable
gentleman of our acquaintance with having murdered his friend and made
away with the body--for that is obviously your meaning--on a mass
of circumstantial evidence, which is, you must admit, rather highly
theoretical."

"I agree with you completely," replied Thorndyke. "The evidence
respecting the reports and the letters is obviously essential. But
in the meantime it is of the first importance that we carry this
investigation to an absolute finish. It is not merely a question of
justice or our duty on grounds of public policy to uncover a crime and
secure the punishment of the criminal. There are individual rights and
interests to be guarded--those, I mean, of the missing man's wife.
If her husband is dead, common justice to her demands that his death
should be proved and placed on public record."

"Yes, indeed," Rodney agreed heartily. "If Purcell is dead, then she is a
widow, and the petition becomes unnecessary. By the way, I understand
now why you were always so set against the private detective, but what I
don't understand is why you put in that advertisement."

"It is quite simple," was the reply. "I wanted another forged letter,
written in terms dictated by myself--and I got it."

"Ha!" exclaimed Rodney. And now, for the first time, he began to
understand how Thorndyke had got his great reputation.

"You spoke just now," Rodney continued, "of carrying this investigation
to a finish. Haven't you done so? Is there anything more to investigate?"

"We have not yet completed our examination of the yacht," replied
Thorndyke. "The facts that we have elicited enable us to make certain
inferences concerning the circumstances of Purcell's death--assuming his
death to have occurred. We infer, for instance, that he did not fall
overboard, nor was he pushed overboard. He met his death on the yacht,
and it was his dead body which was cast into the sea with the sinker
attached to it. That we may fairly infer. But we have, at present, no
evidence as to the way in which he came by his death. Possibly a further
examination of the yacht may show some traces from which we may form an
opinion. By the way, I have been looking at that revolver that is hanging
from the beam. Was that on board at the time?"

"Yes," answered Rodney. "It was hanging on the cabin bulkhead. Be
careful," he added, as Thorndyke lifted it from its hook. "I don't think
it has been unloaded."

Thorndyke opened the breech of the revolver, and, turning out the
cartridges into his hand, peered down the barrel and into each chamber
separately. Then he looked at the cartridges in his hand.

"This seems a little odd," he remarked. "The barrel is quite clean and so
is one chamber, but the other five chambers are extremely foul. And I
notice that the cartridges are not all alike. There are five Eleys and
one Curtis and Harvey. That is quite a suggestive coincidence."

Philip looked with a distinctly startled expression at the little heap of
cartridges in Thorndyke's hand, and, picking out the odd one, examined it
with knitted brows.

"When did you fire the revolver last, Jack?" he asked, looking up at his
brother.

"On the day when we potted at those champagne bottles," was the reply.

Philip raised his eyebrows. "Then," said he, "this is a very remarkable
affair. I distinctly remember on that occasion, when we had sunk all the
bottles, reloading the revolver with Eleys, and that there were then
three cartridges left over in the bag. When I had loaded I opened the new
box of Curtis and Harvey's, tipped them into the bag, and threw the box
overboard."

"Did you clean the revolver?" asked Thorndyke.

"No, I didn't. I meant to clean it later, but forgot to."

"But," said Thorndyke, "it has undoubtedly been cleaned, and very
thoroughly as to the barrel and one chamber. Shall we check the
cartridges in the bag? There ought to be forty-nine Curtis and Harveys
and three Eleys if what you have told us is correct."

Philip searched among the raffle on the bench, and presently unearthed a
small linen bag. Untying the string, he shot out on the bench a heap of
cartridges, which he counted one by one. There were fifty-two in all, and
three of them were Eleys.

"Then," said Thorndyke, "it comes to this: since you used that revolver
it has been used by someone else. That someone fired only a single shot,
after which he carefully cleaned the barrel and the empty chamber and
reloaded. Incidentally, he seems to have known where the cartridge-bag
was kept, but he did not know about the change in the make of cartridges
or that the revolver had not been cleaned. You notice, Rodney," he added,
"that the circumstantial evidence accumulates."

"I do, indeed," Rodney replied gloomily. "Is there anything else that you
wish to examine?"

"Yes; there is the sail. Philip mentioned a stain on the jib. Shall we
see if we can make any thing of that?"

"I don't think you will make much of it," said Philip. "It is very faint.
However, you shall see it and judge for yourself."

He picked out one of the bundles of white duck, and while he was
unfolding it Thorndyke dragged an empty bench into the middle of
the floor under the skylight. Over this the sail was spread so
that the mysterious mark was in the middle of the bench. It was
very inconspicuous--just a faint grey-green, wavy line, like the
representation of an island on a map. The three men looked at it
curiously for a few moments, then Thorndyke asked:

"Would you mind if I made a further stain on the sail? I should like to
apply some reagents."

"Of course you must do what is necessary," said Rodney. "The evidence is
more important than the sail."

On this Thorndyke opened his research case and brought forth the two
bottles that Polton had procured from the Borough, of which one was
labelled "Tinct. Guaiaci Dil." and the other "Ozon." As they emerged from
the case, Philip commented, "I shouldn't have thought that the guaiacum
test would be of any use after all these months, especially as the sail
seems to have been scrubbed."

"It will act, I think, if the pigment or its derivatives is there," said
Thorndyke; and as he spoke he poured a quantity of the tincture on the
middle of the stained area. The pool of liquid rapidly spread
considerably beyond the limits of the stain, growing paler as it
extended. Then Thorndyke cautiously dropped small quantities of the
ozonic ether at various points around the stained area, and watched
closely as the two liquids mingled in the fabric of the sail. Gradually
the ether spread towards the stain, and, first at one point and then at
another, approached and finally crossed the wavy grey line; and at each
point the same change occurred: first the faint grey line turned into a
strong blue line, and then the colour extended to the enclosed space
until the entire area of the stain stood out a conspicuous blue patch.
Philip and Thorndyke looked at one another significantly, and the latter
said: "You understand the meaning of this reaction, Rodney; this is a
bloodstain, and a very carefully washed bloodstain."

"So I supposed," Rodney replied; and for a while no one spoke.

There was something very dramatic and solemn, they all felt, in the
sudden appearance of this staring blue patch on the sail with the
sinister message that it brought. But what followed was more dramatic
still. As they stood silently regarding the blue stain, the mingled
liquids continued to spread; and suddenly, at the extreme edge of the wet
area, they became aware of a new spot of blue. At first a mere speck, it
grew slowly, as the liquid spread over the canvas, into a small oval, and
then a second spot appeared by its side. At this point Thorndyke poured
out a fresh charge of the tincture, and when it had soaked into the cloth
cautiously applied a sprinkling of ether. Instantly the blue spots began
to elongate; fresh spots and patches appeared, and as they ran together
there sprang out of the blank surface the clear impression of a hand--a
left hand, complete in all its details excepting the third finger, which
was represented by a round spot at some two-thirds of its length.

The dreadful significance of this apparition, and the uncanny and
mysterious manner of its emergence from the white surface, produced a
most profound impression on all the observers, but especially on Rodney,
who stared at it with an expression of the utmost horror, but spoke not a
word. His brother was hardly less appalled, and when he at length spoke
it was in a hushed voice that was little above a whisper.

"It is horrible," he murmured. "It seems almost supernatural, that
accusing hand springing into existence out of the blank surface after all
this time. I wonder," he added, after a pause, "why the third finger made
no mark, seeing that the others are so distinct."

"I think," said Thorndyke, "that the impression is there. That small
round spot looks like the mark of a finger-tip, and its position rather
suggests a finger with a stiff joint."

As he made this statement, both brothers simultaneously uttered a
smothered exclamation.

"It is Varney's hand!" gasped Philip. "You recognize it, Jack, don't you?
That is just where the tip of his stiff finger would come. Have you ever
noticed Varney's left hand, Thorndyke?"

"You mean the ankylosed third finger? Yes; and I agree with you that this
is undoubtedly the print of Varney's hand."

"Then," said Rodney, "the case is complete. There is no need for any
further investigation. On the evidence that is before us, to say nothing
of the additional evidence that you can produce, there cannot be the
shadow of a doubt that Purcell was murdered by Varney and his body sunk
in the sea. You agree with me, I am sure, Thorndyke?"

"Certainly," was the reply. "I consider the evidence so far conclusive
that I have not the slightest doubt on the subject."

"Very well," said Rodney. "Then the next question is, what is to be done?
Shall I lay a sworn information or will you? Or had we better go to the
police together and make a joint statement?"

"Whatever we do," replied Thorndyke, "don't let us be premature. The
evidence, as you say, is perfectly convincing. It leaves us with no doubt
as to what happened on that day last June. It would probably be, in an
intellectual sense, quite convincing to a judge. It might even be to a
jury. But would it be sufficient to secure a conviction? I think it
extremely doubtful."

"Do you really?" exclaimed Philip. "I should have thought it impossible
that anyone who had heard the evidence could fail to come to the
inevitable conclusion."

"You are probably right," said Thorndyke. "But a jury who are trying an
accused person on a capital charge have got to arrive at something more
than a belief that the accused is guilty. They have got to be convinced
that there is, humanly speaking, no possible doubt as to the prisoner's
guilt. No jury would give an adverse verdict on a balance of
probabilities, nor would any judge encourage them to do so."

"But surely," said Philip, "this is something more than a mere balance of
probabilities. The evidence all points in the same direction, and there
is nothing to suggest a contrary conclusion."

Thorndyke smiled dryly. "You might think differently after you have heard
a capable counsel for the defence. But the position is this: we are
dealing with a charge of murder. Now, in order to prove that a particular
person is guilty of murder it is necessary first to establish the corpus
delicti, as the phrase goes--that is, to prove that a murder has been
committed by someone. But the proof that a person has been murdered
involves the antecedent proof that he is dead. If there is any doubt that
the alleged deceased is dead, no murder charge can be sustained. But
proof of death usually involves the production of the body or of some
identifiable part of it, or at least the evidence of some person who has
seen it and can swear to its identity. There are exceptional cases, of
course, and this might be accepted as one. But you can take it that the
inability of the prosecution to produce the body or any part of it, or
any witness who can testify to having seen it, or any direct evidence
that the person alleged to have been murdered is actually dead, would
make it extremely difficult to secure the conviction of the accused."

"Yes, I see that," said Philip. "But, after all, that is not our concern.
If we give the authorities all the information that we possess, we shall
have done our duty as citizens. As to the rest, we must leave the court
to convict or acquit, according to its judgment."

"Not at all," Thorndyke dissented. "You are losing sight of our position
in the case. There are two different issues, which are, however,
inseparably connected. One is the fact of Purcell's death, the other is
Varney's part in compassing it. Now it is the first issue that concerns
us, or at least concerns me. If we could prove that Purcell is dead
without bringing Varney into it at all, I should be willing to do so; for
I strongly suspect that there were extenuating circumstances."

"So do I," said Rodney. "Purcell was a brute, whereas Varney has always
seemed to be a perfectly decent, gentlemanly fellow."

"That is the impression that I have received," said Thorndyke, "and I
feel no satisfaction in proceeding against Varney. My purpose all along
has been, not to convict Varney but to prove that Purcell is dead. And
that is what we have to do now, for Margaret Purcell's sake. But we
cannot leave Varney out of the case. For if Purcell is dead, he is dead
because Varney killed him; and our only means of proving his death is to
charge Varney with having murdered him. But if we charge Varney we must
secure a conviction. We cannot afford to fail. If the court is convinced
that Purcell is dead, it will convict Varney, for the evidence of his
death is evidence of his murder; but if the court acquits Varney, it can
do so only on the ground that there is no conclusive evidence that
Purcell is dead. Varney's acquittal would therefore leave Margaret
Purcell still bound by law to a hypothetical husband, with the insecure
chance of obtaining her release at some future time either by divorce or
presumption of death. That would not be fair to her. She is a widow, and
she is entitled to have her status acknowledged."

Rodney nodded gloomily. A consciousness of what he stood to gain by
Varney's conviction lent an uncomfortable significance to Thorndyke's
words.

"Yes," he agreed, half reluctantly, "there is no denying the truth of
what you say, but I wish it might have been the other way about. If
Purcell had murdered Varney I could have raised the hue and cry with a
good deal more enthusiasm. I knew both the men well, and I liked Varney
but detested Purcell. Still, one has to accept the facts."

"Exactly." said Thorndyke, who had realized and sympathized with Rodney's
qualms. "The position is not of our creating, and whatever our private
sentiments may be, the fact remains that a man who elects to take the
life of another must accept the consequences. That is Varney's position
so far as we can see, and if he is innocent it is for him to clear
himself."

"Yes, of course," Rodney agreed; "but I wish the accusation had come
through different channels."

"So do I," said Philip. "It is horrible to have to denounce a man with
whom one has been on terms of intimate friendship. But apparently
Thorndyke considers that we should not denounce him at present. That is
what I don't quite understand. You seemed to imply, Thorndyke, that the
case was not complete enough to warrant our taking action, and that some
further evidence ought to be obtained in order to make sure of a
conviction. But what further evidence is it possible to obtain?"

"My feeling," replied Thorndyke, "is that the case is at present, as your
brother expressed it just now, somewhat theoretical, or, rather,
hypothetical. The evidence is circumstantial from beginning to end. There
is not a single item of direct evidence to furnish a starting-point. It
would be insisted by the defence that Purcell's death is a matter of mere
inference, and that you cannot convict a man of the murder of another who
may conceivably be still alive. We ought, if possible, to put Purcell's
death on the basis of demonstrable fact."

"But how is that possible?" demanded Philip.

"The conclusive method of proving the death of a person is, as I have
said, to produce that person's body or some recognizable part of it."

"But Purcell's body is at the bottom of the sea."

"True. But we know its whereabouts. It is a small area, with the
lighthouse as a landmark. If that area were systematically worked over
with a trawl or dredge, or, better still, with a set of creepers attached
to a good-sized spar, there should be a very fair chance of recovering
the body, or at least the clothing and the weight."

Philip reflected for a few moments. "I think you are right," he said at
length. "The body appears, from what you say, to be quite close to the
Wolf Rock, and almost certainly on the east side. With a good compass and
the lighthouse as a sailing mark, it would be possible to ply up and down
and search every inch of the bottom in the neighbourhood of the Rock."

"There is only one difficulty," said Rodney. "Your worm-tube was composed
entirely of fragments of the Rock. But how large an area of the sea
bottom is covered with those fragments? We should have to ascertain that
if we are to work over the whole of it."

"It would not be difficult to ascertain," replied Thorndyke. "If we take
soundings with a hand-lead as we approach the Rock, the samples that come
up on the arming of the lead will tell us when we are over a bottom
covered with phonolite debris."

"Yes," Rodney agreed, "that will answer if the depth is within the range
of a hand-lead. If it isn't we shall have to rig the tackle for a
deep-sea lead. It will be rather a gruesome quest. Do I gather that you
are prepared to come down with us and lend a hand? I hope you are."

"So do I!" exclaimed Philip. "We shall be quite at home with the
navigation, but if--er--if anything comes up on the creepers, it will
be a good deal more in your line than ours."

"I should certainly wish to come," said Thorndyke, "and, in fact, I think
it rather desirable that I should, as Philip suggests. But I can't get
away from town just at present, nor, I imagine, can you. We had better
postpone the expedition for a week or so until the commencement of the
spring vacation. That will give us time to make the necessary
arrangements, to charter a suitable boat, and so forth. And, in any case,
we shall have to pick our weather, having regard to the sort of sea that
one may encounter in the neighbourhood of the Wolf."

"Yes," agreed Philip, "it will have to be a reasonably calm day when we
make the attempt, so I suggest that we put it off until you and Jack are
free; and meanwhile I will get on with the preliminary arrangements, the
hiring of the boat and getting together the necessary gear."

While they had been talking the evening had closed in, and the workshop
was now almost in darkness. It being too late for the brothers to carry
out the business that had brought them to the wharf, even if they had
been in a state of mind suitable to the checking of inventories, they
postponed the survey to a later date, locked up the workshop, and in
company with Thorndyke made their way homeward.

XVII: In which there is a Meeting and a Farewell

IT was quite early on a bright morning at the beginning of April when
Thorndyke and the two Rodneys took their way from their hotel towards the
harbour of Penzance. Philip had been in the town for a day or two,
completing the arrangements for the voyage of exploration; the other two
had come down from London only on the preceding evening.

"I hope the skipper will be punctual," said Philip. "I told him to meet
us on the pier at eight o'clock sharp. We want to get off as early as
possible, for it is a longish run out to the Rock, and we may have to
make a long day of it."

"We probably shall," said Rodney. "The Wolf Rock is a good departure for
purposes of navigation, but when it comes to finding a spot of sea bottom
only a foot or two in extent, our landmark isn't very exact. It will take
us a good many hours to search the whole area."

"I wonder," said Thorndyke, "what took them out there. According to
Varney's description and the evidence of the button, they must have had
the Rock close aboard. But it was a good deal out of their way from
Sennen to Penzance."

"It was," agreed Philip. "But you can't make a bee-line in a sailing
craft. That's why I chartered a motor-boat for this job. Under canvas you
can only keep as near to your course as the wind will let you. But
Purcell was a deuce of a fellow for sea room. He always liked to keep a
good offing. I remember that on that occasion he headed straight out to
sea and got well outside the Longships before he turned south. I watched
the yacht from the shore, and wondered how much longer he was going to
hold on. It looked as if he were heading for America. Then, you remember,
the fog came down, and they may have lost their bearings a bit; and the
tides are pretty strong about here."

"Yes," said Thorndyke, "and as we may take it that the trouble, whatever
it was, came to a head while they were enveloped in fog, it is likely
that the yacht was left to take care of herself for a time, and may have
drifted a good deal off her course. At any rate, it is clear that at one
time she had the Rock right under her lee, and must have drifted past
within a few feet."

"It would have been a quaint position," said Philip, "if she had bumped
on to it and gone to the bottom. Then they would have kept one another
company in Davy Jones's locker."

"It would have saved a lot of trouble if they had gone down together,"
his brother remarked. "But from what you have just said, Thorndyke, it
seems that you have a more definite idea as to the position of the body
than I thought. Where do you suppose it to be?"

"Judging from all the facts taken together," replied Thorndyke, "I should
say that it is lying close to the base of the Rock on the east side. We
have it from Varney that the yacht drifted down towards the Rock during
the fog, and I gathered that she drifted past close to the east side. And
we also learned from him that the jib had then come down, which was, in
fact, the cause of her being adrift. But the bloodstains on the sail
prove that the tragedy occurred either before the halyard broke or while
the sail was down--almost certainly the latter. And we may take it that
it occurred during the fog; that the fog created the opportunity; for we
must remember that they were close to the lighthouse, and therefore,
apart from the fog, easily within sight of it. For the same reason we may
assume that the body was put overboard before the fog lifted. All these
circumstances point to the body being close to the Rock, and the
worm-tube emphatically confirms that inference."

"Then," said Philip, "in that case there is no great point in taking
soundings."

"Not in the first instance," Thorndyke agreed. "But if we get no result
close to the Rock, we may have to sample the bottom to see how far from
the base the conditions indicated by the worm-tube extend."

They walked on in silence for some time.

Presently Rodney remarked: "This reminds me of the last time I came down
to a rendezvous on Penzance pier, when I expected to find Varney waiting
for me and he wasn't there. I wonder where he was, by the way."

"He had probably gone to post a letter to Mr. Penfield at some remote
pillar-box, where collections were not too frequent," said Thorndyke.

Rodney looked at him quickly, once more astonished at his intimate
knowledge of the details of the case. He was about to remark on it when
Thorndyke asked:

"Have you seen much of Varney lately?"

"I haven't seen him at all," replied Rodney. "Have you, Phil?"

"No," replied Philip; "not for quite a long time. Which is rather odd,
for he used to look in at Maggie's flat pretty often to have tea and show
her his latest work. But he hasn't been there for weeks, I know, because
I was speaking to her about him only a day or two ago. She seemed to have
an idea that he might have gone away on a sketching tour, though I don't
think she had anything to go on."

"He can't have smelt a rat and cleared out," mused Rodney. "I don't see
how he could, though I shouldn't be altogether sorry if he had. It will
be a horrid business when we have to charge him and give evidence against
him But it isn't possible that he can have seen or heard anything."

This was also Thorndyke's opinion, but he was deeply interested in the
report of Varney's disappearance. Nor was he entirely without a clue to
it. His observations of Margaret and Varney suggested a possible
explanation, which he did not think it necessary to refer to. And, in
fact, the conversation was here interrupted by their arrival at the pier,
where an elderly fisherman, who had been watching their approach, came
forward and saluted them.

"Here you are then, skipper," said Philip; "Punctual to the minute. We've
got a fine day for our trip, haven't we?"

"Ay, sir," replied the skipper; "'tis a wonderful calm day for the time
of year. And glad I am to see it, if we are to work close into the Wolf,
for it's a lumpy bit of water at the best of times around the Rock."

"Is everything ready?" asked Philip.

"Ay, sir. We are all ready to cast off this moment," and in confirmation
he preceded the party to the head of the ladder, and indicated the craft
lying alongside the pier beneath it--a small converted Penzance lugger
with a large open cock pit, in the fore part of which was the engine.

The four men descended the ladder, and while the skipper and the second
fisherman, who constituted the crew, were preparing to cast off the shore
ropes, Philip took a last look round to see that all was in order. Then
the crew, who was named Joe Tregenna, pushed off and started the engine,
the skipper took the tiller, and the boat got under way.

"You see," said Philip, as the boat headed out to sea, "we have got good
strong tackle for the creeping operations."

He pointed over the boat's side to a long stout spar which was slung
outside the bulwarks. It was secured by a chain bridle to a trawl-rope,
and to it were attached a number of creepers--lengths of chain fitted
with rows of hooks--which hung down into the water and trailed
alongside. The equipment also included a spirit-compass, fitted with
sight-vanes; a sextant; a hand-lead, which lay on the cockpit floor, with
its line neatly coiled round it; and a deep-sea lead, stowed away forward
with its long line and the block for lowering and hoisting it.

The occupants of the cockpit were strangely silent. It was a beautiful
spring day, bright and sunny, with a warm blue sky overhead and a
tranquil sea, heaving quietly to the long swell from the Atlantic,
showing a sunlit sparkle on the surface and clear sapphire in the
depths. "Nature painted all things gay," excepting the three men who sat
on the side benches of the cockpit, whose countenances were expressive of
the deepest gravity and even, in the case of the two Rodneys, of profound
gloom.

"I shall be glad when this business is over," said Philip. "I feel as
nervous as a cat."

"So do I," his brother agreed. "It is a gruesome affair. I find myself
almost hoping that nothing will come of it. And yet that would only leave
us worse off than ever."

"We mustn't be prepared to accept failure," said Thorndyke. "The thing is
there, and we have got to find it; if not to-day, then to-morrow or some
other day."

The two brothers looked at Thorndyke, a little daunted by his resolute
attitude. "Yes, of course you are right," the elder admitted, "and it is
only cowardice that makes me shrink from what we have to do. But when I
think of what may come up, hanging from those creepers, I--bah! It is
too horrible to think of! But I suppose it doesn't make that sort of
impression on you? You don't find anything repulsive in the quest that we
are engaged in?"

"No," Thorndyke admitted. "My attention is occupied by the scientific and
legal interest of the search. But I can fully sympathize with your
feelings on the matter. To you Purcell is a real person, whom you have
known and talked with; to me he is a mere abstraction connected with a
very curious and interesting case. The really unpleasant part of that
case--to me--will come when we have completed our evidence, if we are
so fortunate--I mean when we have to set the criminal law in motion."

"Yes," said Philip, "that will be perfectly beastly."

Once more silence fell upon the boat, broken only by the throb of the
engine and the murmur of the water as it was cloven by the boat's stern.
And meanwhile the distant coast slipped past until they were abreast of
the Land's End, and far away to the south-west the solitary lighthouse
rose on the verge of the horizon. Soon afterwards they began to overtake
the scattered members of a fleet of luggers, some with lowered mainsails
and hand-lines down, others with their black sails set, heading for some
distant fishing-ground. Through the midst of them the boat was threading
her way, when her occupants suddenly became aware that one of the smaller
luggers was steering so as to close in. Observing this, the skipper was
putting over the helm to avoid her, when a seafaring voice from the
little craft was heard to hail.

"Motor-boat ahoy! Gentleman aboard wants to speak to you!"

The two Rodneys looked at one another in surprise and then at the
approaching lugger.

"Who the deuce can it be?" exclaimed Rodney. "But perhaps it is a
stranger who wants a passage. If it is we shall have to refuse. We can't
take anyone on board."

The boat slowed down, for at a word from the skipper Joe Tregenna had
reversed the propeller. The lugger closed in rapidly, watched anxiously
by the two Rodneys and Thorndyke. Suddenly a man appeared standing on the
bulwark rail and holding on by the mast stay, while with his free hand he
held a binocular to his eyes. Nearer and nearer the lugger approached,
and still the two Rodneys gazed with growing anxiety at the figure on the
bulwark. At length the man removed the glasses from his eyes and waved
them above his head, and as his face became visible both brothers uttered
a cry of amazement.

"God!" exclaimed Philip. "It's Varney! Sheer off, skipper! Don't let him
come along side."

But it was too late. The boat had lost way and failed to answer her helm.
The lugger sheered in, sweeping abreast within a foot, and as she crept
past Varney sprang lightly from her gunwale and dropped on the side bench
beside Jack Rodney.

"Well!" he exclaimed, "this is a queer meeting. I couldn't believe my
eyes when I first spotted you through the glasses. Motor-boat, too!
Rather a come down, isn't it, for seasoned yachtsmen?"

He looked curiously at his hosts, evidently a little perplexed by their
silence and their unresponsive bearing. The Rodneys were, in fact,
stricken dumb with dismay, and even Thorndyke was for the moment
disconcerted. The lugger which had brought Varney had already gone about
and was standing out to sea, leaving to them the alternative of accepting
this most unwelcome passenger or of pursuing the lugger and insisting on
his returning on board of her. But the Rodneys were too paralyzed to do
anything but gaze at Varney in silent consternation, and Thorndyke did
not feel that his position on the boat entitled him to take any action.
Indeed, no action seemed to be practicable.

"This is an odd show," said Varney, looking inquisitively about the boat.
"What is the lay? You can't be going out to fish in this craft. And you
seem to be setting a course for the Scillies. What is it? Dredging? I see
you've got a trawl-rope."

As the Rodneys were still almost stupefied by the horror of the
situation, Thorndyke took upon himself to reply.

"The occasion of this little voyage was a rather remarkable marine worm
that was sent to Professor D'Arcy, and which came from the locality to
which we are bound. We are going to explore the bottom there."

Varney nodded. "You seem mighty keen on marine worms. I remember when I
met you down here before you were in search of them, and so was Phil,
though I don't fancy he got many. He had the bottles labelled ready for
them, and that was about as far as he went. Do you remember that button
you made, Phil, from the cork of one?"

"Yes," Philip replied huskily, "I remember."

During this conversation Thorndyke had been observing Varney with close
attention, and he noted a very appreciable change in his appearance. He
looked aged and worn, and there was in his expression a weariness and
dejection that seemed to confirm certain opinions that Thorndyke had
formed as to the reasons for his sudden disappearance from surroundings
which had certainly not been without their attractions to him. And, not
for the first time, a feeling of compunction and of some distaste for
this quest contended with the professional interest and the sense of duty
that had been the impelling force behind the long, patient investigation.

Philip's curt reply was followed by a rather long, uncomfortable silence.
Varney, quick and sensitive by nature, perceived that there was something
amiss, that in some way his presence was a source of embarrassment. He
sat on the side bench by Jack Rodney, gazing with a far-away look over
the sea towards the Longships, wishing that he had stayed on board the
lugger or that there were some means of escaping from this glum and
silent company. And as he meditated he brought forth from his pocket his
tobacco-pouch and cigarette-book, and half unconsciously, with a
dexterity born of long practice, rolled a cigarette, all unaware that
three pairs of eyes were riveted on his strangely efficient maimed
finger, that three minds were conjuring up the vivid picture of a blue
handprint on a white sail.

When he had lit the cigarette, Varney once more looked about the boat,
and again his eye lighted on the big coil of trawl-rope, with its end
passed out through a fair-lead. He rose, and, crossing the cockpit,
looked over the side.

"Why," he exclaimed, "you've got a set of creepers! I thought you were
going dredging. You won't pick up much with creepers, will you?"

"They will pick up anything with weeds attached to it," said Thorndyke.

Varney went back to his seat with a thoughtful, somewhat puzzled
expression. He smoked in silence for a minute or two, and then suddenly
asked: "Where is the place that you are going to explore for these
worms?"

"Professor D'Arcy's specimen," replied Thorndyke, "came from the
neighbourhood of the Wolf Rock. That is where we are going to work."

Varney made no comment on this answer. He looked long and steadily at
Thorndyke; then he turned away his head, and once more gazed out to sea.
Evidently he was thinking hard, and his companions, who watched him
furtively, could have little doubt as to the trend of his thoughts.
Gradually, as the nature of the exploration dawned on him, his manner
changed more and more. A horrible pallor overspread his face, and a
terrible restlessness took possession of him. He smoked furiously
cigarette after cigarette. He brought various articles out of his
pockets, fidgeted with them awhile, and put them back. He picked up the
hand-lead, looking at its arming, ran the line through his fingers, and
made fancy knots on the bight. And ever and anon his glance strayed to
the tall lighthouse, standing out of the sea with its red and white
ringed tower, and drawing inexorably nearer and nearer.

So the voyage went on until the boat was within half a mile of the Rock,
when Philip, having caught a glance and a nod from Thorndyke, gave the
order to stop the engine and lower the creepers. The spar was cast loose
and dropped into the water with a heavy splash, the trawl-rope ran out
through the fair-lead, and meanwhile Jack Rodney took a pair of
cross-bearings on the lighthouse and a point of the distant land. Then
the engine was restarted, the boat moved forward at half-speed, and the
search began.

It was an intensely disagreeable experience for all excepting the puzzled
but discreet skipper and the unconscious Joe. Varney, pale, haggard, and
wild in aspect, fidgeted about the boat, now silent and moody, now making
miserable efforts to appear interested or unconcerned, picking up and
handling loose objects or portions of the gear, but constantly returning
to the hand-lead, counting up the "marks" on the line, or making and
pulling out various knots with his restless but curiously skilful
fingers. And as his mood changed, Thorndyke watched him furtively, as if
to judge by his manner how near they were to the object of the search.

It was a long and wearisome quest. Slowly the boat plied up and down on
the eastern side of the Rock, gradually approaching it nearer and nearer
at each return. From time to time the creepers caught on the rocky
bottom, and had to be eased off; from time to time the dripping
trawl-rope was hauled in and the creepers brought to the surface,
offering to the anxious eyes that peered over the side nothing on the
hooks but, perchance, a wisp of Zostera or a clinging spider-crab.

Calm as the day was and quiet as was the ocean, stirred only by the
slumberous echoes of the great Atlantic swell, the sea was breaking
heavily over the Rock; and as the boat closed in nearer and nearer, the
water around boiled and eddied in an unpleasant and even dangerous
manner. The lighthouse keepers, who had for some time past been watching
from the gallery the movements of the boat, now began to make warning
signs, and one of them bellowed through a megaphone to the searchers to
keep farther away.

"What do you say?" Rodney asked in a low voice. "We can't go any nearer?
We shall be swamped or stove in? Shall we try another side?"

"Better try one more cast this side," said Thorndyke; and he spoke so
definitely that all the others, including Varney, looked at him
curiously. But no one answered, and as the skipper made no demur the
creepers were dropped for a fresh cast still nearer the Rock. The boat
was then to the north of the lighthouse, and the course set was to the
south, so as to pass the Rock again on the east side. As they approached,
the man with the megaphone bawled out fresh warnings and continued to
roar at them and flourish his arm until they were abreast of the Rock in
a wild tumble of confused waves. At this moment, Philip, who had his hand
on the trawl-rope between the bollard and the fair-lead, reported that he
had felt a pull, but that it seemed as if the creepers had broken away.
As soon, therefore, as the boat was clear of the backwash and in
comparatively smooth water, the order was passed to haul in the
trawl-rope and examine the creepers.

The two Rodneys looked over the side eagerly but fearfully, for both had
noticed something new--a definite expectancy--in Thorndyke's manner.
Varney, too, who had hitherto taken but little notice of the creepers,
now knelt on the side bench, gazing earnestly into the clear water whence
the trawl-rope was rising. And still he toyed with the hand-lead, and
absently made clove-hitches on the line and slipped them over his arm.

At length the spar came into view, and below it, on one of the creepers,
a yellowish object, dimly visible through the wavering water.

"There's somethin' on this time," said the skipper, craning over the side
and steadying himself by the tiller, which he still held. All eyes were
riveted on the half-seen yellowish shape, moving up and down to the rise
and fall of the boat. Apart from the others, Varney knelt on the bench,
not fidgeting now, but still, rigid, pale as wax, staring with dreadful
fascination at the slowly rising object. Suddenly the skipper uttered an
exclamation.

"Why, 'tis a sou 'wester! And all laced about wi' spun-y'n! Surely
'tis--Steady, sir; you'll be overboard! My God!"

The others looked round quickly, and even as they looked Varney fell,
with a heavy splash, into the water alongside. There was a tumultuous
rush to the place whence he had fallen, and arms were thrust into the
water in vain efforts to grasp the sinking figure. Rodney darted forward
for the boat-hook, but by the time he was back with it the doomed man was
far out of reach; yet for a long time, as it seemed, the horror-stricken
onlookers could see him through the clear, blue-green water, sinking,
sinking, growing paler, more shadowy, more shapeless, but always steadily
following the lead sinker, until at last he faded from their sight into
the darkness of the ocean.

Not until some time after he had vanished did they haul on board the
creeper with its dreadful burden. Indeed, that burden, in its entirety,
was never hauled on board. As it reached the surface, Tregenna stopped
hauling and held the rope steady; and for a sensible time all eyes were
fixed upon a skull, with a great jagged hole above the brows, that looked
up at them beneath the peak of the sou'wester, through the web of
spun-yarn, like the face of some phantom warrior looking out through the
bars of his helmet. Then as Philip, reaching out an unsteady hand,
unhooked the sou'wester from the creeper, the encircling coils of
spun-yarn slipped, and the skull dropped into the water. Still the
fascinated eyes watched it as it sank, turning slowly over and over, and
seeming to cast back glances of horrid valediction; watched it grow green
and pallid and small, until it vanished into the darkness, even as Varney
had vanished.

When it was quite invisible, Philip turned, and, flinging the hat down on
the floor of the cockpit, sank on the bench with a groan. Thorndyke
picked up the hat and unwound the spun-yarn.

"Do you identify it?" he asked; and then, as he turned it over, he added:
"But I see it identifies itself."

He held it towards Rodney, who was able to read in embroidered, lettering
on the silk lining "Dan Purcell."

Rodney nodded. "Yes," he said, "but, of course, there was no doubt. Is it
necessary for us to do anything more?" He indicated the creepers with a
gesture of weariness and disgust.

"No," replied Thorndyke. "We have seen the body and can swear to its
identity, and I can certify as to the cause of death. We can produce this
hat, with a bullet-hole, as I perceive, in the back, corresponding to the
injury that we observed in the skull. I can also certify as to the death
of Varney, and can furnish a sworn declaration of the facts that are
within my knowledge. That may possibly be accepted by the authorities,
having regard to the circumstances, as rendering any further inquiry
unnecessary. But that is no concern of ours. We have established the fact
that Daniel Purcell is dead, and our task is accomplished.

"Yes," said Rodney, "our quest has been successful beyond my
expectations. But it has been an awful experience. I can't get the
thought of poor Varney out of my mind."

"Nor I," said Philip. "And yet it was the best that could have happened.
And there is a certain congruity in it, too. They are down there
together. They had been companions, in a way, friends, the best
part of their lives, and in death they are not divided."


THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia


