
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title:      The Square Emerald
Author:     Edgar Wallace
eBook No.:  0600071.txt
Edition:    1
Language:   English
Character set encoding:     Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted:          January 2006
Date most recently updated: August 2007

***** A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *****


Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


Title:      The Square Emerald
Author:     Edgar Wallace






The characters in this book are entirely imaginary and have no relation
to any person either living or dead.


CHAPTER I


LADY RAYTHAM drew aside the long velvet curtains and looked down into
Berkeley Square. It was half-past four o'clock on a cheerless February
evening. Rain and sleet were falling, and a thin yellow mist added to the
gloom of the dying day. An interminable string of cars and taxi-cabs
was turning towards Berkeley Street, their shining black roofs reflecting
the glare of the overhead lights that had just then hissed and spluttered
to life.

She looked blankly towards the desolation of the gardens, a place of
bare-limbed trees and shivering shrubs--stared, as though she expected to
see some fog wraith take a definite and menacing shape, and give tangible
form to the shadows that menaced reason and life.

She was a woman of twenty-eight, straight and slim. Hers was the type
of classical beauty which would defy the markings of age for the greater
part of a lifetime. A fascinating face--calm, austere, her eyes a cold
English grey. You might imagine her the patrician abbess of some great
conventual establishment, or a lady of broad manors defending inexorably
the stark castle of her lord against the enemy who came in his absence.
Analyse her face, feature by feature, put one with the other, and judge
her by the standards which profess to measure such things, and brow and
chin said "purpose" with unmistakable emphasis.

She was not in her purposeful mood now; rather was she uncertain and
irritable, the nearest emotions to fear she knew.

She let the curtains fall back until they overlapped, and walked across
to the fireplace, glancing at the tiny clock. The saloon was half lit;
the wall sconces were dark, but the big lamp on the table near the settee
glowed redly. This room bore evidence of money well but lavishly spent.
The greater part of its furnishings would one day reach the museums of
millionaire collectors; three pictures that hung upon the apple-green
walls were earmarked for the National Gallery.

As she stood looking down into the fire there was a gentle tap at the
door, and the butler came in. He was a tall man, rather portly in his way
--a man of double chins and an unlined face. He carried a small salver in
his hand, a buff oblong in the centre.

Lady Raytham tore open the envelope. It was dated from Constantinople and
was from Raytham. She had been expecting the telegram all that afternoon.
Raytham, of course, had changed his plans. In that sentence was
epitomized his life and career. He was going on to Basra and thence to
Bushire, to see the Interstate Oil Wells or the sites of them. He was
expensively apologetic for two closely written sheets. If he could not
return before April, would she go on to Cannes as she had arranged? He
was "awfully sorry"; he must have said that at least four times.

She read it again, folded the pink sheets, and laid them on the table.

The butler was waiting, head slightly bent forward as though to catch her
slightest whisper. She did not look at him.

"Thank you."

"Thank you, m'lady."

He was opening the door when she spoke.

"Druze, I am expecting the Princess Bellini and possibly Mrs. Gurden. I
will have tea when they come."

"Very good, m'lady."

The door closed softly behind; she raised her sombre eyes and looked at
the polished wood of it with a curious listening lift of her head, as
though she expected to hear something. But the butler was going slowly
down the stairs, a quizzical smile in his eyes, his white, plump hands
sliding in and over one another. He stopped on the landing to admire the
little marble statue of Circe that his lordship had brought from Sicily.
It was a habit of his to admire that Circe with the sly eyes and the
beckoning finger. And as he looked, his mouth was puckered as though he
were whistling.

A sharp rat-tat on the door made him withdraw from his contemplation.
He reached the hall as the second footman opened the door.

Two women came in out of the murk; through the open door he had a glimpse
of a limousine drawing away.

"Her ladyship is in the drawing-room, your Highness--shall I take your
Highness's coat?"

"You can't," said the first and the bigger woman brusquely. "Help Mrs.
Gurden out of hers. Why you wear such horrible contraptions I can't
understand."

Mrs. Gurden smiled largely.

"Darling, I must wear something. Thank you, Druze."

Druze took the transparent silk coat and handed it to the second footman;
the Princess was already stamping up the stairs. She pushed open the door
and walked in unannounced, and Lady Raytham, standing by the fire, her
head pillowed on her arm, looked up, startled.

"I'm so awfully sorry. Push the light, Anita; the button is by your hand.
Well?"

The Princess Anita Bellini struggled unaided out of her tweed coat and
threw it over the back of a chair, jerked off her hat with another
movement, and tossed it after the coat.

People who saw Anita Bellini for the first time gazed at her in a little
awe; there was a certain ruthless strength in every line, every feature.
She was something more than fifty and was just under six feet in height.

The masculinity of the powerful face was emphasized by the grey hair cut
close in an Eton crop and the rimless monocle which never left her eye.
Between her white teeth she gripped a long amber holder, in which a
cigarette was burning.

Her speech was direct, abrupt, almost shocking in its frankness.

"Greta?"

She jerked the end of the cigarette-holder towards the door.

"Being fussed over by Druze. That woman would ogle a dustman! She's that
age. It is a horrible thing to have been pretty once and to have produced
certain reactions. You can never believe that the spirit has evaporated."

Jane Raytham smiled.

"They say you were an awfully pretty girl, Nita--" she began.

"They lie," said Princess Anita calmly. "Russells used to retouch my
photographs till there was nothing left but the background."

Greta floated in, hands outstretched, her big, red mouth opened
ecstatically.

"Darling!" she breathed, and caught both Jane's hands in hers. Anita
Bellini's fleshy nose wrinkled in a sneer.

And yet she should have grown accustomed to Mrs. Gurden, for ecstasy was
Greta's normal condition. She had that habit of touching people, holding
them by the arms, stooping to look up into their faces with her big black
eyes that sometimes squinted a little.

She had been pretty, but now her face was long and a little haggard, the
face of a woman who was so afraid of missing something that she could not
spare the time to sleep. Her lips were heavily carmined, her eyes
carefully made up as though she were still expecting a call to return to
the chorus from which Anita had rescued her.

"My lovely Jane! Exquisite as usual. That dress--don't tell me! Chenel,??
isn't it?"

"Is it?" Jane Raytham scarcely looked down. "No, I think it is a dress I
bought in New York last year."

Greta shook her head speechlessly.

Anita Bellini blew out a smoke ring and tapped off the ash in the
fireplace.

"Greta lays it on thick when she lays it at all," she said, and cast a
critical eye over her hostess. "You're peaky, Jane. Missing your
husband?"

"Terribly."

The irony of tone was not lost on Anita.

"Raytham--what is he doing? The man is ill of money and yet won't take a
day off making it. Where the--oh, here he is."

Druze wheeled in the tea-waggon.

"Give me a whisky and soda, Druze, or I'll perish."

She drank the contents of the goblet at a gulp and handed back the glass.

Anita fixed her monocle more firmly and lit another cigarette. The door
closed behind the butler.

"Druze wears well, Jane. Where did you get him?"

Lady Raytham looked up quickly.

"Does he? I scarcely notice him. He has always been the same so long as I
can remember. He was with Lord Everreed before."

"That goes back a few years; I remember him when he was a young man."

The Princess had an unhappy habit of smiling with her mouth closed. It
was not very pretty.

"It is funny how age comes--thirty to fifty goes like a flash of
lightning."

She changed the subject abruptly and talked about her call of the
afternoon.

"I went for bridge and got a string quartette playing every kind of music
except one with a tune in it."

"It was lovely!" breathed Greta, her eyes screwed tight in an agony of
admiration.

"It was rotten," retorted the grey-haired Anita. "And more rotten
because my sister-in-law was there. The woman's narrowness depresses
me."

Lady Raytham's eyes had returned to the fire.

"Oh!" she said.

"I asked her what she was going to do about Peter--thank heavens she has
a little sense there! Peter has been wiped off the slate. Margaret would
not even discuss him. The only person who believes in him is Everreed--
but Everreed was always a simpleton. He would never have prosecuted, but
the bank forced his hand."

She said this with some satisfaction. She had never liked her nephew, and
Peter hated her--hated her gibes at him when he, the son of a wealthy
man, had preferred a private secretaryship with that great
Parliamentarian, Viscount Everreed, to entering his late father's bank.
She had sat in court with a contemptuous smile on her lips when the
haggard boy had been sentenced for forging his employer's name to a
cheque for five thousand pounds.

The woman by the fire stirred her tea absently.

"When does--"

"He come out? About now, I think. Let me see, he had seven years, and
they tell me that these people get a remission of sentence for good
conduct--three months in every year. Why, the Lord knows. We pay
enormous sums to catch 'em, and as soon as they are safe under lock and
key we go tinkering with the lock to get them out."

"Disgraceful!" murmured Greta.

But Jane Raytham did not hear her.

"I wonder what he will do?" she mused. "Life will go pretty hardly for a
man like Peter--"

"Rubbish!" Anita snapped the word. "For goodness' sake don't get
melancholy about Peter! He has been five years in prison, and at Dartmoor
--or wherever he is--they teach men to use their hands to do something
besides forge cheques. He will probably make an excellent farm hand."

Lady Raytham shivered.

"Ugh! How awful!"

The Princess smiled.

"Peter Dawlish is just a fool. He belongs to the kind of human that is
made for other people's service. If you start worrying about Peter,
you'll shed tears over the partridge that comes to your table. I wonder
what he thinks about Druze?"

Lady Raytham looked up.

"Do you think he still hates him?"

Anita pursed her large lips.

"Druze was Everreed's butler and cashed the cheque; the next day Peter
disappears on his holiday--in reality, on his great adventure. He
returns and is arrested, swears he knows nothing about the cheque, and
accuses poor Druze of forgery--which doesn't save him from
imprisonment."

Lady Raytham said nothing.

"Naturally Peter feels sore--if he still believes Druze was the villain
of the piece. There may be trouble--we needn't deceive ourselves."

Her cigarette had gone out. She opened her bag with an impatient tug and
searched.

"Matches? Never mind."

There was a letter in the bag; she tore a strip from the top and,
bending, lit the paper at the fire.

"Who is Leslie Maughan?"

She was glancing at the signature which footed the letter.

"Leslie Maughan? I don't know him. Why?"

Anita crumpled the paper into a ball.

"Leslie Maughan would like to see me on a personal matter"--Anita
invented the stilted and supercilious accent which she supposed the
writer of the letter might assume. "And Leslie Maughan will be glad to
know what hour will be convenient for me to see him. He is an inventor or
a borrower of money or he has an expedition to the Cocos Islands that he
would like me to finance. To the devil with Leslie Maughan!"

CHAPTER II

DRUZE had come in noiselessly at the door and stood, hand clasping hand.
His face was strangely pale; as he spoke his right cheek twitched
spasmodically.

"Yes?"

"Will your ladyship see Miss Leslie Maughan--?"

"Miss!" snorted Anita, as Jane Raytham rose.

"Miss Leslie Maughan, of the Criminal Investigation Department, Scotland
Yard?"

Lady Raytham put out her hand and gripped the back of the chair; her face
was bloodless, she opened her mouth to speak, but no word came. Greta was
staring at the big woman, but Princess Anita Bellini had no eyes but for
the pale butler.

"I will see her--in the small drawing-room, Druze. Excuse me."

She swept out of the room and pulled the door behind her until Druze had
disappeared round the lower landing. By her right hand was the door of
her own room, and she entered swiftly and noiselessly, switching on the
lights as she closed the door. She stared into the mirror. Ghastly! That
white, drawn face of hers carried confession. Had she been betrayed? Had
they fulfilled their threat?

Pulling out a drawer of her dressing-table, she fumbled for and found a
little pot of rouge, and with a quick, deft hand brought an unaccustomed
bloom to her cheeks.

Another glance at her face in the glass and she went out and sailed down
the stairs, a smile on her lips and in her heart despair.

All the lights were lit in the little drawing-room, and her first
emotion was one of surprise and relief. She had not known there were
women detectives at Scotland Yard, but she could imagine them as
hard-faced, sour creatures in ready-made clothes.

The girl who stood by the table looking down at the illustrated newspaper
that Druze had supplied looked to be about twenty-two. She wore a
straight nutria coat, a big bunch of violets pinned to one revere. As
tall as Jane Raytham and as straight; trim, silken ankles, neatly shod;
dark. The face under the upturned brim of a little felt hat was more
surprising yet. A pair of dark eyes rose to meet Jane Raytham's. The
lips, red as Greta's, yet owning nothing to artifice, were finely
moulded, a firm, round chin, and the hint of a white throat somewhere
behind the protective fur--in some confusion Lady Raytham catalogued the
visible qualities of her unexpected caller.

"You are not Miss Maughan?" she asked.

When Leslie Maughan smiled, she smiled with eyes and lips, and the
dimpled hollows that came to her cheek made her seem absurdly young.

"Yes, that is my name, Lady Raytham; I am awfully sorry to bother you,
but my chief is rather a martinet."

"You are a detective? I didn't know--"

"That there were women detectives?" laughed the girl. "And you're right!
My position is unique. I am assistant to Chief Inspector Coldwell. The
Commissioners, who are rather conservative people, do not object to that.
But I suppose I really am a detective. I make inquiries."

She stood by the table, one hand on her hip, one playing with the leaves
of the picture paper, her unwavering gaze fixed on Jane Raytham.

"I'm making inquiries now, Lady Raytham," she said quietly. "I want to
know why you drew twenty thousand pounds from your bank last Monday."

For a second the woman was panic-stricken; so far lost charge that she
all but stammered the truth. The will that held her silent, apparently
unmoved, was the supreme effort of her life. Then her training came to
her rescue.

The control of her voice was perfect.

"Since when have the police had authority to supervise the banking
accounts of private citizens?" she asked in cold, measured tones. "That
is an extraordinary request. Is it, then, an offence for me to withdraw
twenty thousand pounds from my own account? How did you know?"

"One gets to know things, Lady Raytham."

She was cool, unruffled by the indignation, real or simulated.

"Lady Raytham, you think we are being very impertinent and abominable.
And it is certain that, if you report this matter to Scotland Yard, I
shall be reprimanded. But we expect that."

Jane Raytham had so far recovered towards the normal that she could open
her grey eyes in astonishment.

"Then why on earth have you come?" she asked.

She saw Leslie Maughan draw a deep breath, the ghost of a smile trembled
at the corner of her mouth and vanished.

"Twenty thousand pounds is a lot of money," she said softly. There was a
note of pleading in her voice, and, suddenly, with a cry she could not
suppress, the significance of the visit flashed upon Lady Raytham. They
knew. The police knew the destination or purpose of that money.

Her breath came faster; she could only look into those dark eyes in fear
and try as best she could to order her thoughts. Dark eyes, violet--not
the burnt brown of Greta's, but a violet that was almost black. A
detective--this slip of a girl! She was well dressed, too; the
femininity in Jane Raytham took stock unconsciously. The gloves were from
Renaud's--only Renaud cut that quaint, half-gauntlet wrist.

"Won't you tell me? It might save you so much unhappiness. We try to do
that at the Yard--save people unhappiness. You'd never dream that, would
you? But the police are more like big brothers than ogres--won't you?"

Jane Raytham shook her head; it was a mistake, the only one she made, to
attempt speech.

"No, I won't!" she said breathlessly. "There is nothing to tell--your
interference is unwarrantable. I shall write--I shall write--"

She swayed, and instantly Leslie Maughan was by her side, and the
strength of her grip was the second surprise that Jane Raytham had.

With an effort she wrenched her arm free.

"Now you can go, please. And if I do not report you, it is because I
think you have acted in ignorance, over zeal."

She nodded towards the door, and Leslie slowly gathered up her bag and
her umbrella.

"If you ever want me, you will find my telephone number on my card."

Lady Raytham still held the crumpled card in her hand. Now she looked at
it, and very deliberately walked to the fire and dropped it into the
flames.

"Or the telephone book," said Leslie as she went out.

Druze was in the hall, dry-washing his hands with nervous rapidity. He
hastened to the street door and opened it.

"Good-night, miss," he said huskily, and she looked at him and
shivered. And why Leslie Maughan shivered she did not know, but she had
at that moment a vivid and terrifying illusion.

It was as though she were looking into the blank eyes of one who was
already dead.

CHAPTER III

LESLIE MAUGHAN came striding briskly along the Thames Embankment. It was
a bitterly cold night, and the nutria coat was not proof against the icy
northerner which was blowing. The man who walked by her side was head and
shoulders taller than she. He had the gait of a soldier, and his umbrella
twirled rhythmically to his pace.

"Suicide on the left," he said pleasantly, as though he were a guide
pointing out the sights.

The girl checked her pace and looked back. "Really? You don't mean that,
Mr. Coldwell?" Her eyes were fixed upon the dark figure sprawling across
the parapet, his arms resting on the granite crown, his chin on his
hands. He was a gaunt figure of a man, differing in no respect from the
waifs who would gather here from midnight onward and strive to snatch a
little sleep between the policeman's visits.

"It is any odds," said Mr. Coldwell carefully, "when you see one of these
birds watching the river in that way, he is thinking up a new way of
settling old accounts. Are you interested--sentimentally?"

She hesitated. "Yes, a little. I don't know whether it's sentiment or
just feminine curiosity."

She left his side abruptly and walked back to the man, who may have been
watching her out of the corner of his eyes, for he straightened himself
up quickly.

"Down and out?" she asked, and heard his soft laugh.

"Down, but not out," he replied, and it was the voice of an educated man,
with just a trace of that drawl, the pleasant stigmata which the
Universities give to their children. "Did I arouse your compassion? I'm
sorry. If you offer me money I shall be rather embarrassed. You will find
plenty of poor beggars on this sidewalk who are more worthy objects of--
charity. I use the word in its purest sense."

She looked at his face. A slight moustache and a ragged fringe of beard
did not disguise his youth. Chief Inspector Coldwell, who had come
closer, was watching him with professional interest.

"Would you like to know what I was really thinking about?" There was an
odd quality of banter in his voice. "I was thinking about murder. There
is a gentleman in this town who has made life rather difficult for me,
and I had just decided to walk up to him at the earliest opportunity and
pop three automatic bullets through his heart when you disturbed the
homicidal current of my thoughts."

Coldwell chuckled.

"I thought I recognized you; you're Peter Dawlish," he said, and the
shabby figure lifted his hat with mock politeness.

"Such is fame!" he said sardonically. "And you are Coldwell; the
recognition is mutual. And now that I have hopelessly committed myself, I
presume you will call the nearest City policeman and put me out of the
way of all temptation."

"When did you come out?" asked Coldwell.

The girl listened, staggered. They had been discussing this man not a
quarter of an hour before; she had spent the afternoon thinking of him,
and now to meet him on that wind-swept pavement, he of all the millions
of people in London, was something more than a coincidence. It was
fatalistic.

"Mr. Dawlish, I wonder if you will believe me when I say that you're the
one man in London I was anxious to meet. I only knew to-day that you
were--out. Could you call and see me to-night?"

The man smiled.

"Invitations follow thick and fast," he murmured. "Only ten minutes ago I
was asked into a Salvation Army shelter. Believe me, madam--"

"Mr. Dawlish"--her voice was very quiet, but very clear--"you are being
awfully sorry for yourself, aren't you?"

She did not see the flush that came to his face.

"I suppose I am," he said, a little gruffly. "But a man is entitled--"

"A man is never entitled to be sorry for himself in any circumstances,"
she said. "Here is my card."

She had slipped back the cover of her bag, and he took the little
pasteboard from her hand, and, bringing it close to his eyes, read, in
the dim light that a distant standard afforded.

"Will you come and see me at half-past ten? I shan't offer you money; I
won't even offer to find a job for you cutting wood or sorting
waste-paper--it is a very much bigger matter than that."

He read the name and superscription again, and his brows met.

"Oh yes--really--yes, if you wish."

He was, of a sudden, awkward and uncomfortable. The girl was quick to
recognize the change in his manner and tone.

"I'm afraid I'm rather a scarecrow, but you won't mind that?"

"No," she said, and held out her hand.

He hesitated a second, then took it in his. She felt the hardness of the
palm, and winced at the thought of all that these callosities signified.
In another second she had joined the waiting Coldwell. Peter Dawlish
watched them until they were out of sight, and then, with a little
grimace, turned and walked slowly towards Blackfriars.

"I knew about the smallness of the world," said Coldwell, swinging his
furled umbrella, "but I had no idea that applied to London. Peter! It's
years since I saw him last. He was rather a weed five years ago."

"Do you think he really is a forger?"

"A jury of his fellow-countrymen convicted him," said Mr. Coldwell
cautiously, "and juries are generally right. After all, he needed the
money; his father was an old skinflint, and you cannot run a hectic
establishment and escort pretty ladies to New York on two hundred and
fifty pounds per annum. He was a fool; if he hadn't taken that three
months' holiday the forgery would never have been discovered."

"Who was she?" Leslie asked; she felt that this question was called for.

"I don't know; the police cherchezed la femme--forgive my mongrel French
--but they never ran her to earth. Peter said it was a chorus-girl from
the Paris Opera House. He wasn't particularly proud of it."

The girl sighed.

"Women are hell," she said profanely.

"Both places," suggested Mr. Coldwell, and twirled his grey moustache.
"Both places!"

Near the dark entrance of Scotland Yard he stopped.

"Now," he said, standing squarely before her, "perhaps you will cease
being mysterious, and tell me why you are so frantically interested in
Peter Dawlish that you have talked Peter Dawlish for the past three
days?"

She looked up at him steadily from under the lowered brim of her hat.

"Because I know just why Peter Dawlish is going to kill and whom he is
going to kill," she said.

"Druze--a child would guess that!" scoffed the detective. "And he is
going to kill him because he thinks Druze's evidence sent him to gaol."

She was smiling--a broad smile of conscious triumph.

"Wrong!" she said. "If Druze dies, it will he because he doesn't love
children!"

Mr. Coldwell could only gaze at her.

CHAPTER IV

MR. COLDWELL peered down into the girl's face.

"Let me get this right," he said slowly. "Druze will be killed--if he is
killed--because he does not like children?"

Leslie Maughan nodded.

"I know you hate mysteries--everybody in Scotland Yard does," she said;
"and one day I will tell you just what I mean. Do you remember last
August you gave me a month's vacation?"

Chief Inspector Coldwell remembered that very well.

"I went to Cumberland just to loaf around," she said. "I was most anxious
to pretend that there wasn't such a place in the world as Scotland Yard.
But I've got that prowling, inquisitive spirit that would have made me
the first woman inspector of the C.I.D. if the Commissioners were not
such stuffy, old-fashioned gentlemen. One day I was loafing through a
little village, when I found something which brought me eventually to
this conclusion, that Druze doesn't like children. And one day, when he
discovers the fact, Peter Dawlish will kill him for it!"

"Mysteriouser and mysteriouser!" groaned Coldwell. "You're probably
chasing a boojum. It is the fate of all enthusiastic young officers--not
that you're an officer."

Leslie Maughan had started her police career as a very junior
stenographer at Scotland Yard. Her father had been that famous
Assistant-Commissioner Maughan whose exploits have formed the basis for
so many stories of police work, and he had left his daughter with an
income which put her above the necessity of working for her living. But
police investigation was in her blood, and she had graduated through
successive stages, until the authorities, reluctant to admit that any
woman had an executive position at Police Headquarters, admitted her to
the designation of "assistant" to the Chief of the Big Four.

"She's brilliant--there's no other word for her," he had told the Chief
Commissioner. "And although I don't think it's much of a woman's job,
there never was a woman who was better fitted to hold down a high
position at the Yard."

"What are her chief qualifications?" asked the Commissioner, slightly
amused.

"She thinks quickly and she's lucky." was the comprehensive reply.

This question of luck exercised the mind of Leslie as she walked home to
her flat in the Charing Cross Road. The very fact that that apartment was
hers was strong support for the theory of luck. She had taken a long
lease of a floor above a cinematograph renter's at a time when flats were
going begging. She might have drawn double the rent from a sub-tenant;
but the place was central, comparatively cheap, and she withstood all
temptations to change her abode at a profit.

A side door led to the apartments, and she had hardly closed the door
behind her when a voice hailed her from the top of the stairs.

"That you, Miss Maughan?"

"That's me," said Leslie.

She hung her coat in the narrow hall and went upstairs to the girl who
was waiting on the landing. Lucretia Brown, her one servant, was a very
tall, broad-shouldered girl, with a round and not unpleasant face. She
stood now with her hands on her hips, surveying her mistress.

"I thought you were--" she began.

"You thought I'd been murdered and thrown into the river," said Leslie
good-humouredly. "As you always think if I am not back on the tick."

"I don't trust London," said Lucretia.

It was her real name, chosen by a misguided farm labourer, who, having
heard a lecture on the Borgias, delivered at the parish hall, came away
with a vague idea that the historical character who bore that name was a
worthy creature.

"I never did trust London, and I never will. Have you had dinner, miss?"

"Yes, I've had my dinner," said Leslie, and looked at the clock. "I am
expecting a man to call here at half-past ten, so when you open the
door to him please don't tell him that I'm out and not expected back for
three weeks."

Lucretia made a little face.

"Half-past ten's a bit late for a gentleman visitor, miss. A friend of
yours?"

Leslie could never train her out of a personal interest in her affairs.
In a way, Lucretia was privileged. Her first memory was of the
broad-faced Lucretia pushing a perambulator in which Leslie took the air.

"Is it anybody we know, miss? Mr. Coldwell?"

Leslie shook her head.

"No," she said; "he is a man who has just come out of prison."

Lucretia closed her eyes and swayed.

"Good Gawd!" she said in a hushed voice. "I never thought I'd live to see
the day when you'd be having a convick up to see you at half-past ten
at night. What about asking a policeman to stand by the door, miss?"

"You're much too partial to policemen," said Leslie severely, and the big
maid grew incoherent in her indignant protests.

Half-past ten was striking from St. Martin's-in-the-Fields when
the door bell rang, and Lucretia came in to her, eyes big with
excitement.

"That's him!" she said melodramatically.

"Well, let him in."

"Whatever happens," began Lucretia, "I'm not responsible."

Leslie pointed to the door. He came so lightly up the stairs that she did
not hear his steps. The door opened and Lucretia backed in.

"The gentleman," she said loudly, and cast an apprehensive glance at the
stranger as she sidled out of the room and closed the door.

Peter Dawlish stood where Lucretia had left him, his soft hat in his
hand, glancing from the girl to the cosy room, a half-smile on his thin
face. She saw now how shabbily dressed he was; his shirt was collarless,
his boots grey with mud, the old ill-fitting suit he wore stained and
patched.

"I warned you I was a scarecrow," he said, as though he read her
thoughts. "They gave me a beautiful prison-made suit at Dartmoor, but
it didn't seem the right kind of equipment to face a censorious world, so
I swopped it for this."

She pushed a chair up to the fire.

"Sit down, won't you, Mr. Dawlish?"

"'Mr. Dawlish,'" he repeated. "That sounds terribly respectable."

"You may smoke if you wish," she said, as he seated himself slowly, and
again he smiled.

"I wish, but I have not the wherewithal," and, as she hastily opened a
drawer and took out a tin of cigarettes: "Thank you."

He took the cigarette in his fingers and frowned.

"That is certainly queer," he said.

"What is certainly queer?" she asked.

"These gaspers--I used to smoke them in the old days. Had 'em imported
from Cairo. You can't buy them here; at least, you couldn't when I--
retired. Heigho! Am I being very sorry for myself again? That stung. I
loath these self-pitiers, and it was a revelation to discover that I had
gone over to the majority."

He lit the cigarette and drew luxuriously.

"This is rather wonderful," he said.

"Have you had any food?" she asked.

He nodded.

"I dined like a sybarite, at a small shop in the Blackfriars Road. The
dinner cost sixpence; it was rather extravagant, but I felt I needed
bracing for this ordeal."

"You have no lodging?"

He shook his head.

"No, I have no lodging."

He was twiddling his long, thin fingers. She noted with satisfaction that
his hands were scrupulously clean, and again he seemed to divine her
thoughts, for he looked down at them.

"I don't exactly know what information I can give you, if it is
information you require; and if you had been a male of the species
policeman I should have declined your invitation rather loftily. But a
woman policeman is unique; I've seen them, of course--rather fat little
bodies with squat little helmets. I suppose they're useful."

He noticed that she herself was not smoking, and commented upon it.

"No, I very rarely smoke," she said. And then, in a changed tone: "Do you
mind if I speak very plainly?"

"The plainer the better," he said, and he leaned back in his chair and
sent a cloud of smoke to the ceiling.

"You have no money, of course?"

He shook his head.

"Which means that you'll walk London to--night?"

"It has become a habit," said Peter Dawlish. "And, really, it would be
rather amusing if one weren't so horribly tired. They gave me a little
money when I left prison. It lasted me the greater part of a week; I fear
I was improvident. One gets quite a lot of sleep in the daytime,
especially the sunny days, in odd comers of the parks. And on rainy
nights I know a gardener's tool--house, which is not perhaps to be
compared with the bridal suite at the Ritz, but is cosy. I slept there
last night with an ex--colonel of infantry and a lawyer who lived in the
same ward at Dartmoor."

She eyed him steadily.

"To--night you will sleep decently," she said, in her quiet, even tone;
"and to--morrow you will buy a new suit of clothes and interview your
father."

He raised his eyebrows, amusement in his eyes.

"I didn't realize that you had scraped down to the family skeleton," he
said. "And why am I to do this, Miss Maughan? The suit of clothes would
be a waste of money; my parent would not be impressed by my appearance of
affluence. Rather he would imagine that I had found another good--
natured gentleman who trusted me with his cheque--book. Furthermore, all
this would cost money; and I think you should know, before we go any
farther, that I am not taking any money from you on any pretext."

She had the extraordinary knack of making him feel foolish. He always
remembered afterwards that in the first two meetings with this strange
girl, he had gone hot and cold either at her words or the inflection of
her voice.

"That kind of pride which refuses to take money from a woman is very
admirable." There was a note of cold sarcasm in her voice which made him
writhe. "It is the attitude of mind behind man's subconscious sense of
superiority to the female of the species--not particularly flattering to
a woman, but it must be immensely gratifying to a man! May I ask you
another question, Mr. Peter Dawlish? Do you intend sinking down into the
dregs? Is your vista of life lined on either side by common lodging--
houses, with a pauper's graveyard at the end of it?"

"I don't exactly see what you're driving at."

She had made him angry, and was secretly amused.

"I shall do my best, naturally, to find work. I had an idea of going
abroad."

"Exactly." She nodded. "To one of the colonies. It is the most popular of
all delusions that people without grit or ambition can magically acquire
these qualities the moment they go ashore at Quebec or Sydney, or
wherever their high spirits lead them."

He was laughing now in spite of himself.

"You've certainly got a knack of riling a man."

"Haven't I?" she smiled. "I'll tell you what I was driving at, Mr.
Dawlish. For you to refuse a loan of money now suggests that you're
perfectly satisfied in your mind that you will never earn enough to repay
the loan. The only way you can justify a refusal of money is to believe
that you can never pay it back; that you're going to belong to the bread
lines and the park benches and the public charities."

She saw that her shaft had got home, and went on quickly:

"Of course, you will do nothing of the sort! You've come out of prison
with a grievance against the world, and you're hardly to be blamed for
that. I should imagine you are one of the few innocent men who ever went
to Dartmoor."

He looked at her shrewdly.

"You believe I was innocent?"

She nodded.

"I'm pretty sure," she said, and then; "Do you carry a gun?"

He laughed aloud.

"The price of a Browning pistol would keep me in luxury for two months,"
he said. "No, I carry nothing more dangerous than a tooth--brush."

The drawer from which she had taken the cigarettes was still open, and
she put in her hand and took out a small black cash--box, and jerked
back the lid.

"We will do this thing in a businesslike way," she said. "You will find a
paper and pencil on the desk; sign an IOU for twenty pounds. If you
believe in your heart of hearts that you'll be unable to pay me back,
that a man of twenty--nine or twenty--eight, or whatever age you are,
will never earn a sufficient margin above his cost of living to send back
that money in a year, or two years, then you need not take a cent. And
this little bit of charity, as you call it--"

"I've called it nothing of the sort."

"In your mind you have," she said calmly. "It is very rude to contradict
a lady! Now, Mr. Dawlish, I challenge you. If you think you are
permanently down and out, the incident is finished--and I think you're
finished, too."

She looked at him through her half--closed eyes, nodding slowly.

"You mean I'm not worth salving?" he said, and got up. "I'll accept your
challenge."

He took the pencil, scribbled a few words on the writing--pad, and,
tearing it off, handed it to the girl.

"Produce your twenty pounds."

He was amused in a sour way, but his anger was mostly directed inward to
himself, that he should be angry at all. If anybody had told him, when he
had walked into that room, that he would accept a loan of money from the
girl who had not been absent from his thoughts since he had met her, he
would have laughed at such a suggestion. Yet here he was, counting
solemnly the Treasury notes as they were handed to him, and pocketing
them without one single qualm of conscience.

"I think I'm beginning to know myself," he said. "I started a weakling,
and prison hasn't improved me. No, no, I do not mean that it is a
weakness to accept this money, but it would have been a weakness to have
refused. I'm awfully obliged to you."

She held out her hand.

"Where will you be staying?" she asked.

"I don't know. But I will keep in touch with you. Please don't bother
about me any more. If I can't get a job of some kind I'm really not worth
helping. Why are you doing this? It isn't part of the usual police
procedure."

She shook her head.

"The police help where they can; you ought to know that," she said
quietly. "But I admit that this is a purely personal action on my part.
You are part of a big experiment. It isn't my womanly heart, but my
scientific brain that is dictating just now." And then, going off at a
tangent: "I wish you would shave yourself, Mr. Dawlish; you look too much
like a musical genius to be thoroughly wholesome."

He was still chuckling to himself when Lucretia closed the outer door
upon him with unnecessary violence.

He knew a small temperance hotel where he could sleep that night, a place
in Lambeth, near Waterloo Station. "Temperance Hotel," was rather a grand
name for an establishment which was only a little superior to a common
lodging--house, but he guessed it was too late to get a bed at any of
the Rowton Houses.

He walked briskly down Charing Cross Road and into the Strand, crowded
with cars and taxis, for the theatres were closing, and the northern
sidewalk was almost impassable. And then he thought he saw his mother
preceding another lady into a car, and stopped. Yes, it was Margaret
Dawlish, and the lady with the dirty grey hair was Aunt Anita. He could
afford to grin now, and the discovery was very pleasurable. He could well
imagine that if he had seen that party earlier in the evening, the sight
would have evoked a sneer and just that twinge of self--pity against
which he was trying hard to guard himself.

He turned back, lest in passing they recognized him, and went down
Villiers Street, mounting the stairs to Hungerford Bridge. It was not the
twenty notes in his pocket, a compact, cosy little roll, that made his
heart and his step lighter; he had caught something of the girl's spirit,
had been imbued with a little of her courage and sanity.

Leslie Maughan puzzled him. She was more than pretty;  there was in her
face a spirituality which he had not detected in the face of any woman in
his acquaintance or knowledge. He realized with a start that he had
always disliked clever women. He liked them soft and feminine, and, if
the truth be told, a little silly. But he liked this capable and pretty
young woman.

Leslie Maughan had just enough of the official quality to keep him at a
distance, and yet she was genuinely friendly, as friendly as a sensible
elder sister might be, though in truth she must be years younger than he.
Sometimes he felt a very old man--Leslie Maughan had made him feel like
a child.

He was over the middle of the river now, and there was revealed to him
the pageantry of the Embankment, with its lights reflected in the dark
waters of the Thames; a great Scotsman in lights ornamented a tower on
the south side. He felt himself responding to the glow and colour of it.
And then, for no reason at all, he had an uncomfortable feeling that he
could not trace, but instinctively he looked back. There were several
people crossing with him, but immediately behind him, not half a dozen
yards away, were three little men who moved shoulder to shoulder. They
had the curious high--stepping walk which he had seen in Orientals; a
sort of modified prance. They were not speaking to one another, as
friends might who were walking home together, and, curiously enough, it
was their silence which made him uneasy. Five years in a penal
establishment had not been a good nerve cure for a man of Peter Dawlish's
temperament.

He ran down the steps and found himself in a dim and gloomy street. From
here was a short--cut to the York Road, near where his temperance hotel
was situated. His way led him through a deserted street of tiny houses
that was not quite a slum but was barely respectable. As he turned into
the thoroughfare he glanced back and saw that the three little men were
following. They moved noiselessly, as though they were wearing rubber
shoes. Peter crossed the road and they followed, a little nearer to him.

He was wondering whether it would not be better to turn and face them
till they had passed, and he had decided upon this action when something
fell over his head. He raised his hand quickly to catch at the thin rope,
but too late; the slip--knot tightened about his throat, two muscular
little figures leapt at him, and in another second, he was lying on the
ground, fighting for life, strangled, his head bursting, his hands
clawing at the rope. And then consciousness left him. After an eternity
he felt somebody lifting him up and propping him against a wall; a
brilliant light shone on his face.

Peter put his hand to his throat; the rope had gone, but he could still
feel the deep depression it had made upon his skin.

"What was the game?" said a gruff voice.

He blinked up, could distinguish a helmeted head--a policeman.

"How do you feel? Would you like me to get an ambulance? I can put you
into the hospital in a minute."

Shaking in every limb, Peter struggled to his feet.

"I'm all right," he said unsteadily. "Who were they?"

The policeman shook his head.

"I don't know. They passed me at the end of the street and I thought they
looked queer. Little fellows with flat noses--more like monkeys than
men. And then I saw them go for you and came after them. I think I just
about saved your life, young fellow."

"I think you did," said Peter ruefully, as he felt at his scarred throat.

"Run! I never saw anybody run as fast as they did," said the constable.
"Did you have a row with them?"

"No; I never saw them before in my life," said Peter.

"Humph!" The officer was looking at him dubiously. "Wonder who they was?
They talked in some lingo I didn't understand. I only caught one word, or
maybe it's two--orange pander or bander."

"Orang blanga?" asked Peter quickly, and whistled.

"Know 'em?"

Peter shook his head.

"No, I don't know them. I guess their nationality. Javanese."

The officer was loth to leave him.

"Where are you going now?"

"I'm trying to find a lodging."

He was still far from recovered, for when he took a step the street and
the officer went round in a mad whirl, and but for the policeman's arm he
would have fallen.

"You'll get yourself pinched for being drunk," said the policeman
humorously. "Lodgings? Now, where did I see a lodging?"

He switched on his light, walked slowly down the street, flashing the
lamp upon the windows. Presently he stopped.

"Here you are," he said.

Peter made a slow and cautious way to where the policeman was standing.
The lantern was focused upon a little card in the window:

LODGINGS FOR A RESPECTABLE YOUNG MAN.

"Will this do for you?"

Peter nodded, and the constable rapped gently on the door. He had to wait
some time, but presently there was a heavy foot in the passage, and a
woman's voice asked hoarsely:

"Who is there?"

"It's all right, missis," said the custodian of the law. "I'm a
policeman; there's a gentleman here who wants a lodging."

The door was unlocked and opened a few inches.

"I've got a room, yes; but it's a bit late, ain't it?"

The constable uttered an exclamation of surprise.

"Why, bless me, it's Mrs. Inglethorne!"

"Yes, it's Mrs. Inglethorne," repeated the woman bitterly. "And well you
ought to know, considering the trouble you police have brought on me. My
old man being as innocent as a babe unborn--and our lodger as nice a
young man as ever drew the breath of life."

She peered at Peter in the reflection from the policeman's light; he saw
a bloated red face, a loose mouth, and eyes of singular smallness. She
was short and stout, and wore a red flannel dressing--gown, though
apparently she had not disrobed for the night.

"I can't take you unless you've got money," she said. "I've been done
before."

Peter skinned a pound from the roll and showed it to her.

"All right, come in," she said ungraciously.

Stopping only to thank the policeman for his offices, Peter followed her
into the narrow, evil--smelling passage, and the door closed behind him.

Fate had played its supreme joke on Peter Dawlish when it had led him to
the unsavoury home of Mrs. Inglethorne.

She struck a match, lit a smelly little oil--lamp, and preceded him up a
steep, short flight of stairs to the floor above.

"Here's the room," she said, and he followed her into the front and the
best bedroom in the house.

To his surprise it was fairly well furnished; the bed was a new one, the
walls had been lately papered, the two cheap engravings which constituted
the pictorial embellishment of the apartment were in good taste.

"This was my lodger's room; he furnished it himself," said Mrs.
Inglethorne rapidly. "As nice a man as ever drew the breath of life." She
pronounced the last sentence so quickly that it almost seemed to be one
word.

"Has he left you?"

She glanced at him suspiciously, as though she thought that he was
already informed as to the lodger's fate.

"He's got five for busting a house up at Blackheath. My old man got
seven, and an honester man there never was."

A grim jest this, thought Peter Dawlish, that he, newly from that drab
and drear establishment on Dartmoor, should be offered the vacant bedroom
of one who had taken his place, was probably in the very cell in B Ward
he had occupied.

"Pay in advance--eight shillings. I'll give you the change to--morrow."
Mrs. Inglethorne held out her hand. In the light of the lamp she was even
more unprepossessing than Peter had thought.

He gathered from certain evidence that prohibition would find no vigorous
supporter in her; she took the money he gave her, and, setting down the
lamp, opened a chest, and extracted two new sheets. Evidently, thought
Peter, as he watched the process of bed--making, the burglar lodger was
fastidious in the matter of comfort; the sheets were linen. He discovered
later that the pillows were of down, and that the bed itself was a
luxurious article purchased at great cost in Tottenham Court Road.

"He liked everything of the best," said Mrs. Inglethorne, pausing in her
labours to extol the absent tenant.

She went out soon after, leaving behind her a faint odour of spirituous
liquor, and he undressed slowly by the light of the lamp, preparing for
the first good night's sleep he had had in a week.

The bed was soft--too soft. Although he was desperately tired, he tossed
from side to side in a vain endeavour to sleep. It must have been two
hours before he dozed, and then he woke.

It was a shrill, thin cry that woke him, and he sat up in bed listening.
It came again, from somewhere downstairs. It was a cat, he thought, no
human voice was capable of such an attenuation of sound.

Again the cry. He got out of bed, walked to the door, opened it, and bent
his head, listening. And then the hair of his head rose. It was a child's
sobs he heard, and then a voice.

"I want my daddy! I want my daddy!"

He heard Mrs. Inglethorne's growling voice, as if she had been wakened
from her sleep.

"Shut up, blast you! If I get up to you I'll break your neck!"

And then the voices ceased, and Peter went back to bed. But it was not
until the sound of closing doors in the street told him that the early
workers were abroad that he fell into a troubled sleep, disturbed by
dreams of a child who cried and moaned all the time: "I want my daddy! I
want my daddy!"

CHAPTER V

"104, SEVERALL STREET,

"LAMBETH.

"DEAR Miss MAUGHAN,

"I have lodgings at the above address, and, in spite of the
neighbourhood, they are very comfortable, though my landlady is certainly
the most unprepossessing female. There are six children in the house,
ranging from a few months to a little girl of eight years. So, whatever
are her faults, Mrs. Inglethorne (who drinks gin and has the fiery face
of a Betsey Prig) has served her country most prolifically. I am buying
some new clothes and hope to report in a few days that I am riding upward
on a tide of prosperity."

Leslie Maughan had the letter on the following afternoon when she came
back from her office.

What Mr. Coldwell called "The Dawlish Case," but which she thought about
under quite another title, was completely occupying the girl's mind,
sleeping and waking. It was her first big case, in the sense that never
before had the wheels of investigation moved of her own volition.

There had been more spectacular events with which she had been
associated. She had helped Coldwell in the Kent Tunnel murder; it was her
quick mind which had first grasped the fact that the principal informant
of the police knew too much about the tragedy for one who had not
participated in the crime. She it was who, searching the contents of a
prisoner's pocket, had found the stain of indelible ink upon a silver
coin, and had built upon that slender clue the theory which led to the
arrest of the Flack Gang, and the capture of the plant with which they
had been flooding Europe with forged 1000--franc notes.

She brought to police work the keenest of woman's wits and a queer
instinct for ultimate causes that sometimes amazed and sometimes amused
headquarters. And now she was building up a new fabric, but, as she:
realized, on the shakiest of foundations--a little book of verse found
in a Cumberland cottage.

She took it down from her shelf, a thin volume of Elizabeth Browning's
poems. On the flyleaf was an inscription and eight lines of writing in a
neat hand. A stanza of free verse, and not especially good free verse.
She read it for the fiftieth time.

"Do you recall
One dusky night in June
Over by Harrlow Copse,
Heart of my heart?
Ecstasy lay on your lips,
Nectar of gods was your gift--
All in 'the kiss of one girl'
Joy and despair."

The writer was no poet. Even as a writer of vers libre his effort left
something to be desired.

She put away the book, returned to her desk, and sat for half an hour,
her chin in her hands, her eyes fixed vacantly on the opposite wall. For
the moment Peter Dawlish was off her hands, and though he came back again
and again to her thoughts, it was not in the role of a responsibility.

She took from a drawer the tin of cigarettes she had offered him on the
previous night and examined it absently. She had searched London for this
brand of Egyptian cigarettes, and in the end had found them in the last
place in the world she expected--Scotland Yard. The Chief Commissioner,
an old Egyptian officer, imported them for his own use.

She closed the lid, found an envelope, and, addressing it to "Peter
Dawlish, Esq., 104, Severall Street, London," she enclosed the
cigarettes. It was nearly dark when Lucretia brought in her tea.

"You're not going out again to--night, miss, are you?" and when Leslie
replied in the affirmative: "What about taking me with you, Miss Leslie?"

Leslie did not laugh. "Somehow I can't see you in the setting of a night
club, Lucretia," she said.

"I could stay outside," insisted Lucretia stoutly. "Anyway, I'd never
dream of going into a night club after what the papers say about 'em. I
saw a party getting out of a car the other night--ladies! Why, miss, I
could have carried all their dresses in a little bag! Disgraceful, I call
it!"

Leslie laughed quietly.

"You've got to understand, Lucretia," she said, "that no woman is
properly dressed for dinner unless she feels comfortably nude--don't
faint!"

"Women are not what they was," said Lucretia severely.

"That's the devil of it, Lucretia--they are!" said Leslie.

She had only half made up her mind as to the course she should pursue.
Mr. Coldwell often twitted her about her luck, but her "luck" was largely
a matter of abnormal instinct, and it was in her bones that there was
tragedy in the air. Suppose she saw Lady Raytham again, and this time
spoke not in parables, but in plain English? It required no particular
effort on Leslie's part, for her moral equipment was free from the
faintest tinge of cowardice. She had inquired that morning as to whether
Lady Raytham had carried her threat into execution and had written to the
Chief Commissioner, but apparently her ladyship had reconsidered her
decision. Had Peter Dawlish told her of the attack which had been made
upon him, and which had so surprisingly led him to Mrs. Inglethorne, she
would have called at Berkeley Square before then. But Peter had been
silent on the subject, and Leslie did not know till the next day of that
surprising outrage.

She went to her bedroom and changed her dress; she was dining that night
with Mr. Coldwell at the Ambassadors, which is sometimes called a night
club by the uninitiated, but is in reality the centre of London's smart
life. Over her flimsy gown, which Lucretia never saw without closing her
eyes in mental anguish, she put her heavy fur coat, slipped over her
shoes a pair of rubbers, and sent Lucretia for a taxi. At a quarter--
past seven she was pressing the visitors' bell at No. 377, Berkeley
Square. The door was opened almost instantly by a footman.

"Have you an appointment with her ladyship?" he asked, as he closed the
door upon her.

"No, she hasn't an appointment with her ladyship." Leslie turned in
amazement at the sound of a loud, raucous voice. It was Druze, who had
come into the hall from a door beneath the stairs. The white face was red
and blotchy; his hair untidy; there was a stain on his white shirt front,
and when he walked towards her his step was unsteady. He was, in point of
fact, rather drunk, and Mr. Druze drunk was an exceedingly different
person from Mr. Druze sober.

The whole character of the man seemed to have changed. From being a
shrinking, rather fearful servitor, he had become a blustering, loud--
mouthed bully of a man. "You can get out--go on; we don't want you!" He
advanced towards her threateningly, but the girl did not move. The second
footman had withdrawn to a respectful distance, and was looking with
frowning amusement at the antics of his chief.

"Do you hear what I say? Clear out! We don't want any spying police girls
round here."

It looked as though he would use physical force to eject her, but his
hand had hardly been raised when she said something in a low voice--one
word. The big white hand went down; the blotchy red went out of his face,
and he blinked at her like a man who was trying to swallow something that
would not be swallowed. And then, looking up, she saw a resplendent
figure at the head of the stairs. It was Lady Raytham. "Come up, please."

The voice was hard and metallic. There was neither cordiality nor welcome
in it, nor did Leslie expect any such demonstration. She mounted the
stairs, but before she could reach the landing Lady Raytham had turned
and preceded her into the drawing--room. As she went in, she saw that
her unwilling hostess was not alone. Before the fire stood a figure which
was not wholly unfamiliar; a square, tall, Eton--cropped figure with a
monocle, which fixed her with a keen and penetrating glance.

The contrast between the two women was startling. Lady Raytham had never
looked more lovely, more fragile, Leslie thought, than she did at that
moment. She also was going out to dinner, and she wore a dress of old
gold, and about her neck a magnificent chain of emeralds that terminated
in a square emerald pendant which must have been worth a fortune. Anita
Bellini was in scarlet, a hard, shrieking scarlet that no human woman
could have worn. And yet, for some remarkable reason, it suited her. The
godet was of silver lace, decorated with big green and red stones, and
the thick jade bracelets and ruby necklet gave her an air of barbaric
splendour.

"I am sorry you came, Miss Maughan--it is doubly unfortunate. If Druze
had been normal I should have sent you away without seeing you. As it is,
I feel that at least an apology is due to you for the disgraceful
condition of my servant."

Leslie inclined her head slightly. What she had to say could not be told
before this big, steely--eyed woman who stood with her back to the fire,
the inevitable cigarette between her lips, the shining eyeglass fixed
upon the visitor.

"I wanted to see you alone, if I could, Lady Raytham."

Jane Raytham shook her head. "There is nothing you can tell me that I
should not wish Princess Bellini to hear," she said.

Without turning her head, Anita flicked her cigarette ash into the
fireplace.

"Perhaps Miss Maughan doesn't wish to speak before a witness," she said,
in her hard, deep voice. "If I were Lady Raytham, I should have reported
you last night to your superiors and had you kicked out of Scotland
Yard."

Leslie smiled faintly.

"If you were Lady Raytham, there are so many things you would do,
Princess," she said; "and there would be so many things that it would be
quite unnecessary for you to do."

Anita's eyes did not waver. "Such as--?" she suggested.

If she expected to frighten the younger woman she must have been
disappointed; Leslie's lips were curved in a fixed smile.

"We have now come to the point," she said good--humouredly, "where I
should not like to speak before witnesses either--though some day I may
speak before more witnesses than you can crowd into a room twice this
size; as many, Princess, as can squeeze themselves into Court No. 1 at
the Old Bailey."

She said this without raising her voice, and now, for the first time,
Anita Bellini gave the slightest hint of her emotion. The eyeglass
dropped and was caught deftly and replaced with too elaborate care. The
strong mouth drooped a little, but recovered at once.

"That sounds almost like a threat to me," she said harshly. "Young lady,
I think you're going to lose a job."

Quick as a flash came the answer:

"Before I lose my job, Princess, you will lose a very profitable source
of income."

She did not wait for the answer, but turned to Lady Raytham.

"Will you see me alone, Lady Raytham?"

Jane Raytham's voice shook a little; she was a very bewildered woman.

"I brought you here to apologize to you for Druze," she said
breathlessly, "and you have made use of the opportunity to insult my
friend, a lady who--"

Her voice grew husky and she stopped, as though she could not articulate
further.

There was nothing more to be gained here, unless she was prepared to
blurt her questions before the very woman who she was anxious should
remain in ignorance of the information which had come to her. Leslie had
unfastened her coat in coming upstairs; behind the brown fur Lady Raytham
saw the silk--clad figure in mauve. Princess Anita Bellini smiled. She
had a flair for Paris models.

"They pay you well in the police, my young friend," she said bluntly.
"Who is the lucky gentleman who pays for your clothes?"

"My lawyer until I am twenty--five," said Leslie.

"Fortunate lawyer--who is he?"

Leslie smiled. "You ought to know him; he acted for you in your
bankruptcy."

And with that parting shot she went out of the room, knowing she was a
cat, but realizing that a cat was entitled to what pleasure she might
find in getting under the skin of a tigress.

Half an hour later, Mr. Coldwell unfolded his serviette and shook his
head soberly.

"You are a cat, too. But you're a clever little cat. And when, Tabitha,
did you discover that her Highness was a bankrupt? I confess that is news
to me."

The girl laughed ruefully.

"I read gazettes," she said. "It is depraved in me, but I find them more
interesting than the best sex novel that any schoolgirl has ever written.
The bankruptcy was arranged ten years ago in the quietest way. The
Princess took up her residence in a small country town before she filed
her petition, and it is so easy to keep these country proceedings out of
the London papers. On this occasion she described herself as Mrs.
Bellini. There is no law compelling you to use a foreign title."

"Pussy cat, pussy cat," murmured Mr. Caldwell. "And did she annihilate
you?"

"She was slightly withering," said Leslie carelessly. "But Druze--
dropped! I'm awfully worried about that."

"I don't see why you should be," said Coldwell, and beckoned a waiter.
When the man had taken the order:

"Do you know, you're almost persuading me that there is something big
behind this Dawlish mystery? I don't mean the discovery, which is very
unlikely to be made, that Druze was the forger, after all."

A tall woman had come into the restaurant and was glaring round through
the thick lenses of her horn--rimmed spectacles. She was very straight
and spare, her head covered with a mop of white hair, which lent her an
almost comical air of ferocity. She nodded curtly to the inspector and
went to meet the gesticulating maitre d'hotel.

"That is mamma," said Coldwell.

"Mamma? Whose mamma?"

"Your interesting convict's."

"Margaret Dawlish?" Leslie opened her eyes in astonishment. "This is the
last place I should have expected to see her."

"She dines here every night," said Coldwell. "I have a good idea why."

Leslie looked at Peter's mother again; the square jaw, the thin lips, the
deep eyes, all fulfilled the mental picture she had made of her.

"If you weren't here, do you know what I should do?" she asked at last.

"Whatever it is, don't!" said Coldwell apprehensively. His relationship
with Leslie was a curious one. In the old days of Commissioner Maughan he
had been the Colonel's chief assistant; though he was only a sergeant in
those days, he was admitted very largely to the confidence of that genius
of Scotland Yard, spent long week--ends at Sutton Cawley, and had
assumed a sort of guardianship towards Colonel Maughan's motherless
child. There never was a time within Leslie's recollection that Josiah
Coldwell had not figured largely in her life. He was one of her father's
executors, the best trusted of all his friends, and it was only natural,
when she conceived the idea of adopting police work as a profession, that
he should be her sponsor.

It was not until a very long time after she had put the suggestion to him
that he agreed. At first he had pooh-poohed, then he had grown solemn,
and then mournful; but in the end she had her way.

"If you don't put me there, Uncle Josiah, I shall go into training as a
private detective!"

It only needed this threat to force his capitulation, for private
detectives were contemptible figures in the eyes of this regular
policeman. For him it was a matter for pride that she had succeeded. To--
day, if the truth be told, if she had expressed the slightest hint of
weariness and a desire to return to the obscurity of what is termed
"civilian life," he would have been thrust in the deeps of gloom.

He did not tell her this in the course of the dinner (she had guessed it
easily enough long before), but he did venture to return to a matter
which rather worried him. As the band struck up a dance tune and she rose
invitingly, he groaned and came to his feet.

"I'll be awfully glad, Leslie, when you find a young man to dance these
infernal jazzes with you. How can you expect the high--class crooks of
London to have any respect for a man who dances in public?"

He was over sixty, yet, in truth, no better dancer took the floor that
night. But it pleased him to talk of ha decrepitude.

"I'm not made right," said Leslie, as he guided her through the dancers
who crowded the floor. "Young men have no appeal for me whatever."

Mr. Coldwell peered down at her.

"Are you going to be one of those love--is--not--for--me girls?" he
asked gloomily. "Somehow I can't imagine you running a garage of toy
poms."

Leslie's eyes roved around the room, and presently they rested upon
Margaret Dawlish; hard--faced, inflexible, the type of Roman mother who
could never forgive the humiliation that Peter had brought upon her. How
queer was the average man's conception of the average woman! The
conventional mother, soft, yielding, ready to endure all and forgive all
for the sake of her children, was no figment of imagination, but the
throw--outs were innumerable. Leslie started to count all the instances
she knew, and grew tired of the exercise. She had witnessed, incredible
though it might seem, a mother dancing on this very floor whilst her
child was dying in a nursing home a few streets away. She knew mothers
who could not speak of their daughters without growing incoherent with
rage. And this was the fourth instance of a mother who could sweep her
only son out of memory, out of existence, for some offence he had
committed--not against her, but against society. Margaret Dawlish sat
alone at a little table, very upright, very forbidding, and when the
maitre d'hotel, in the manner of his kind, approached her with a smile,
she dismissed him with a few words, and, raising her lorgnette, made an
inspection of the dancers.

"That woman is granite," said Leslie, as the band stopped and they walked
back to their table.

"Which? You mean Mrs. Dawlish? Yes, I rather think she is on the hard
side. That sort of thing meant a lot to her. She hates this company and
this place, but for five years, ever since her son was sent to prison,
she has made a point of dining here."
Leslie nodded.

"A gesture of defiance. Gosh! these respectable people! They dare not
leave a room for fear somebody talks behind their backs."

It was towards eleven o'clock, and Coldwell had summoned the waiter to
pay his bill, when a footman came from the vestibule and, bending over,
whispered something to him.

"A phone message. I expect it's from the Embankment," he said. "Excuse
me, Leslie."

He threaded a way through the dancers on the floor, and was gone ten
minutes. When he came back she saw his white eyebrows were met in a
frown.

"The Kingston police think they've got a line to those infernal motor--
car bandits," he said.

He referred to a gang which was occupying the public--attention at that
time. Three men who, in hired or stolen motor--cars, had been travelling
through Surrey, holding up isolated residences at the point of a pistol,
and getting away with as much portable property as they could lay their
hands upon.

"I'll see you home," he said as he paid the bill, "and then I'll toddle
down to Kingston. I wish to Heaven the Kingston police would make their
discoveries at a reasonable hour."

"I'll go with you," she said. "I'm not a bit sleepy, and. it's a braw
bricht moonlicht nicht!"

He looked at her dubiously.

"I don't know that you're dressed for a motor--car journey, but if you
wish you can come, along. I have phoned for the police car; it will be
here in a few minutes."

She went out into the lobby to put on the woollen spencer she had brought
in preparation for a cold journey home, and over that her coat. It was
true that she never felt less like sleep; in a sense, she was at a loose
end, and the prospect of doing a little work before she went to bed was a
pleasing one, though in all probability she would play no other part than
that of spectator and audience.

The trip promised to be the more interesting because she had, that day,
been tracing the previous convictions of three men who were suspected of
being the motor bandits--and very commonplace individuals they were.
That had been the most shocking discovery she made when she came to
Scotland Yard--the commonplaceness, indeed the insignificance, of what
is described as the criminal class. Out--of--work plumbers, labourers,
carters, and clerks, with a painter here and there, formed the bulk of
them. The women only had an individuality. There was no habitual woman
criminal quite untouched by romance; their stories were altogether
different, their lives more varied, and, if the truth be told, their
enterprise and inventive qualities more fascinating.

She passed through the swing doors into the street. The night was
bitterly cold and the sky overhead was clear. The bright moon which she
had recklessly inferred was not in evidence, but there were all the other
attractive conditions for a midnight ride.

The car was an open tourer, with a plenitude of rugs, and Mr. Coldwell
fixing the rear screen to shield her face from the cutting air, the
journey promised no discomforts. The car passed swiftly through
Kensington and across Hammersmith Bridge, and in an incredibly short
space of time was running down Kingston Vale. The driver pulled up at the
police station behind a big touring car, which was unattended, and they
got down.

In the charge--room they found the inspector talking to a middle--aged
man, who was apparently the owner of the car. "Sorry to bring you down,
Mr. Coldwell," said the inspector, "but this sounds almost like one of
the motor crowd's little jokes."

The car owner apparently was the proprietor of a small garage. That
afternoon he had been approached by a seemingly decent man who asked him
if he would come to London with the idea of negotiating for an important
journey. The garage keeper, as it happened, had some business in town,
and had met the hirer at a little restaurant in the Brompton Road.

"He seemed all right to me," the garage keeper continued his narrative.
"It was only after I got home that I began to smell a rat. He wanted me
to pick him up at the end of Barnes Common, near the Wimbledon Road, at a
quarter--past ten to--night, and drive him to Southampton. He asked for
a closed car, but I told him I hadn't got one that could do the journey,
and I didn't like the idea anyway. But as he offered me double the fare I
should have asked, and paid half of it down, I agreed."

"Did you ask him why he wanted to go to Southampton at a quarter--past
ten?"

"That was the first question I asked," said the man. "He told me he was
dining with some friends, and that that would mean he would lose the boat
--train--the Berengaria pulls out at five o'clock to--morrow morning,
and all passengers must be on the ship overnight. I've had that job
before, so it wasn't unusual; the only queer thing about it was that,
instead of asking me to pick him up at a house, he fixed this place on
Barnes Common. But he told me he didn't want his friends to know that he
was leaving the next day. At any rate, I fell for him, but as time went
on I began to get suspicious and communicated with the police."

"What sort of looking man was he?" asked Leslie.

"A middle--aged man, miss," said the chauffeur--owner, a little
surprised at a question from this quarter. "It struck me that he'd been
booz--drinking a little, but that's neither here nor there. He was well
dressed, and that's all I can tell you about him except that he was clean
--shaven, had rather a big face, and wore a soft felt hat."

Coldwell turned to the girl.

"Does that describe any of the people we have been looking over?" he
asked.

She shook her head.

"No," she said quietly; "but it rather accurately describes Druze."

"Druze?" he said incredulously. "You're not suggesting that Druze is one
of the gang?"

"I'm not suggesting anything," she said, biting her lip thoughtfully.
"Did you notice his hands, Mr.--?"

"Porter," said the chauffeur. "Yes, miss, I did notice his hands when he
took off his gloves to pay me. They were very white."

She looked at Coldwell. "That is an even more accurate description," she
said.

"You didn't go to the Common, did you?" asked Coldwell.

"No, sir. The inspector went up in my car with a couple of policemen."

"He must have smelt a rat," said the local inspector. "There was no sign
of anybody at a quarter--past ten, and apparently he was very particular
about his being there absolutely on time. He told Mr. Porter: 'If I'm not
there by twenty--five minutes past, don't wait for me.' That sounds
rather like the gang, Mr. Coldwell," he added. "It is an old trick of
theirs to hire a car and arrange to be picked up in some quiet spot--"

The telephone bell tinkled in another room, and he went to the
instrument. He was gone five minutes. When he came back:

"The gang 'busted' a house the other side of Guildford at nine o'clock,"
he said. "The car smashed into a ditch and two of them have been caught
by the Surrey police."

Coldwell pursed his lips.

"That disposes of your theory," he said.

Driving back up Kingston Vale, Coldwell expatiated upon his favourite
theme, which might be headed: "No effort is wasted when you're dealing
with law--breakers."

"A lot of men would grouse about being brought out in the middle of the
night on a fool's errand, but it isn't possible to investigate the reason
why a condensed milk tin has been found in an ashpit without learning
something valuable. And if that hirer was friend Druze--"

"As it was," said Leslie promptly.

"--well, we've learnt something," continued Coldwell. "It brings him
into a new list, so to speak. He's in the people--who--do--strange--
things class, and that makes him stand out from the mass of law--abiding
citizens."

They passed swiftly down Roehampton Lane, climbed the little slope that
carried them over the railway bridge, and had reached the middle of the
common when Chief Inspector Coldwell began to enlarge and illustrate his
theory. Just ahead of them Leslie saw the rear lights of a car moving out
from the side of the road.

"Never despise little cases," he began, "because--"

There was a grinding of brakes; the car stopped so violently that
Leslie's nose touched the glass screen painfully.

"What's wrong?" asked Coldwell sharply. He, too, had seen the car ahead,
and his first thought was that his driver was avoiding a collision.

The police chauffeur was looking round.

"I'm sorry, sir; I was rather startled. Did you see a man lying on the
sidewalk?"

"No--where?" asked the interested Coldwell.

The driver reversed and the car moved slowly backward. They saw a black
something in the darkness, and then, as the machine moved back a few more
feet, the head--lamps showed the figure of a man.

Coldwell got down from the car slowly.

"It looks like a drunk," he grumbled. "You'd better stay where you are,
Leslie."

But his foot had hardly touched the ground before she had followed.

Well enough Inspector Coldwell knew that this was no drunk. The attitude,
the outstretched arms, the legs slightly doubled, told him, before he saw
the little pool of blood on the sidewalk, that there was no life here.

For a second the two stood gazing down at the pitiable figure.

"Druze," said the girl quietly. "Somehow I expected it."

It was Druze, and he was dead. The heavy overcoat was buttoned across his
breast, there was no sign of a hat, and his hands, ungloved, were tightly
clenched. As she looked, Leslie saw a queer green glitter in the light of
the motor--lamps.

"He has something in his left hand," she said in a hushed voice, and,
kneeling down, Inspector Coldwell prised loose the fingers, and the thing
that the dead man held fell with a tinkle to the gravelled path.

Coldwell picked it up and examined it curiously. It was a large, square
emerald in a platinum setting, one edge of which was broken, as though it
had been torn forcibly from a larger ornament.

"That is queer," he said.

She took the emerald from his hand and carried it nearer to the lamp. Now
she knew that she had made no mistake. It was the pendant on the chain
she had seen that evening glittering on Lady Raytham's neck!

CHAPTER VI

IN a few words she told her companion. For his part, he was too worried
about her presence to comprehend fully.

"You had better get into the car, Leslie. Driver, take Miss Maughan--"

"I'll stay here," said Leslie in a low voice. "I'm not very shocked. And
please don't touch that overcoat."

He was stooping to unfasten the button when she spoke.

"Not till you let me see it."

Mr. Coldwell hesitated a moment and then stepped aside, and the girl bent
over the figure, keeping her eyes averted from that white face.

"I thought so," she said. "The second button has been fastened to the
third buttonhole. Whoever killed him, put on his overcoat and buttoned
it. Now you can unfasten it."

Mr. Coldwell sent the chauffeur for assistance and resumed his
examination of the body. The man had been shot at close range through the
heart; the waistcoat had been burnt by the explosion. There were no other
injuries that he could see. One side of the figure was yellow with dust,
as though it had been dragged some distance along the ground.

"I wish you wouldn't--" Coldwell looked round in helpless distress. He
had taken an electric hand--lamp from the car before he sent it away,
and this he had placed on the path so that the rays spread fan--shape
over the body.

"Couldn't you wait at a little distance?"

"Please don't worry about me, Mr. Coldwell," said Leslie. There was no
tremor in her voice, he noted with satisfaction. "I am not going to
faint; you seem to forget that the majority of nurses are women, and
death isn't so horrible to me as some expressions of life. Can I help you
at all? I've got a tiny little pencil lamp in my bag."

He scratched his chin.

"I don't know," he said dubiously. "You might look in the road and see if
you can find any marks of a body being dragged, and then search around a
bit."

She got out the lamp, which, in spite of its smallness, gave a very
bright light, and carried out his instructions methodically. She had not
to look far before she found the traces she sought--a serpentine smear
that reached from the centre of the road to the sidewalk. There were
stains, little red smudges that were still wet when she put her finger to
them.

The traffic conditions were favourable to an undisturbed search, for the
road was unusually free from traffic. One motor--bus lumbered past, a
homeward--bound limousine from town was succeeded by another, and if the
chauffeurs were interested in the spectacle of a man kneeling by what
looked like a heap of rags on the sidewalk, the occupants of the cars did
not apparently share their curiosity.

She paced the trail, judged it to be between twelve and thirteen feet
from the place where the body was found. On the other side of the
footpath was rough common land, grass and bushes in irregular patches.
She began to search the rough; and here she had an unusual reward, for,
passing round a thick low bush, she saw, lying together on the grass, a
number of objects. The first was a fat pocket--book that had been opened
and its contents pulled out, for round about was a litter of papers,
which she collected quickly. Fortunately it was a still night, and there
was no wind to carry them away. The second package was a brown envelope,
and she made a brief examination,

A steamship ticket issued to "Anthony Druze, 1st Class Saloon,
Southampton to New York." In this envelope was a new passport. The third
object was also a pocket--book, brand new--the perfume of the Russian
leather cover told her that. This also had been opened, in such a hurry
that the strap about it had been broken. It was stuffed tight with
thousand--dollar notes.

She collected the three packages and sought for more, but there was none.
And then she took stock of the place where she had found them. They were
immediately behind a big bush which effectively screened all view of the
road. She put her lamp close to the ground and moved it slowly. Here was
a curiously mottled patch of grass; in some places it was grey with
frost, in others wet and crushed. The ground was too hard for footprints,
but without their aid she could reconstruct all that had happened here
less than an hour ago. Somebody had come behind this bush to examine the
contents of the pockets; the papers had been taken out one by one,
examined, and thrown away, and the object had not been robbery. The
tightly filled porte-monnaie proved that. It could not have been a
chance thief who came upon the body; no honest person would have made
this search--it had been somebody looking for a definite thing.

She went back to Coldwell with her discoveries just as the police car
came flying over the railway bridge, followed by a motor--ambulance. She
told Coldwell hurriedly what she had found, and he was not surprised.
"I've been searching his pockets; most of them are inside out," he said.
And then, abruptly: "Where is Peter Dawlish?"

She stared at him open--mouthed.

"Peter Dawlish? What has he got to do--"

And then she remembered Peter's threat, and saw that it was inevitable
that suspicion should attach to him.

"He hadn't a pistol yesterday," she said, "and I doubt whether he's got
one now. If Druze had been shot dead in the street I should think he'd be
under suspicion, but Peter Dawlish would hardly shoot a man, put him in a
car, and drive him to Barnes."

The old man nodded.

"I agree with you, Leslie; but we shall have to pull him in and make
inquiries. Druze has been shot three times; that's rather a queer thing--
and he has been shot through the heart. We shan't know exactly until the
pathologist has seen him, but I think I am right. And, listen, did you
see the footprints?"

He pointed to the smooth granite kerb, and she saw for the first time the
indubitable impressions of a bare foot--the ball of the foot and
toeprints were unmistakable.

He put the three packages Leslie had found in his overcoat pocket.

"Go along and see Lady Raytham, and tell her what has happened. Take this
with you, and, for the love of Mike, don't lose it!"

He put the square emerald in her hand, and she dropped it into her bag.

"If it's the pendant, as you say, find out what has happened to the rest
of the necklace."

He bundled her into the police car, and she was glad to escape, because
by now the large force of police on the spot had been augmented by that
curious crowd which sooner or later gathers from nowhere on the scene of
any tragedy.

The windows were in darkness when she drove up to the house in Berkeley
Square, and, instead of ringing, she wielded the heavy knocker. She had
to wait a little time, and then it was a footman who opened the door, and
his manner and mien were both respectful and a little nervous.

"Do you want--to see her ladyship, miss?" he said. "She's upstairs with
Mrs. Gurden. There is Mrs. Gurden now."

Greta was coming down the stairs. She was in that peculiar style of
evening dress which she affected. Greta made most of her own clothes from
the latest Paris models, and usually in the most unsuitable material.
Their home-madeness was never blatant. They did not proclaim, but
hinted it.

Leslie looked up at the rouged face and the black, staring eyes, and it
required no particular acumen on her part to detect Greta Gurden's
agitation.

"Oh, my dear Miss Whatever--your--name--is," she breathed, "do come up
and see dear Lady Raytham. You are Miss What--is--your--name? Maughan,
isn't it? I'm so glad. Druze has been a perfect beast." She held out her
hand dramatically; it was shaking. "You don't know how glad I am to see
you."

Her eyelids were blinking up and down with a rapidity that fascinated,
and would have amused Leslie in any other circumstances.

"What has Druze been doing?" she asked.

"Won't you come up and see Lady Raytham?" begged Greta. "She'll tell you
so much better than I. My dear Jane can put everything into the most
understandable terms. Druze has been simply awful; made a terrible scene
and walked out, quite suddenly. It's dreadful what servants are coming
to, isn't it? I think it must be the war--"

A cool voice from the darkness above interrupted her flow of disjointed
explanation.

"Ask Miss Maughan to come up. I want to see her--alone."

Leslie went up the stairs, and as she reached the first turn she saw that
the drawing--room door was open. There was no light on the stairs, save
for that which came from the open door. In one corner of the spacious
landing she saw a small wheeled table.

She walked in, closing the door behind her. Lady Raytham was standing
behind a little table near the fireplace. She wore a dark day dress
without ornamentation, and Leslie's quick woman's eyes saw that she had
changed her stockings; the very fine--textured, flesh--coloured
garments she had seen on her earlier that evening, had been replaced by a
slightly darker pair. But only for a second did the details of the dress
interest her. What a change had come to Jane Raytham's face! She was made
--up; that was clear. The delicate flush of her cheeks was neither
natural nor normal in her; she had helped her lips towards a
verisimilitude to a healthy red. Her eyes, however, defied all artificial
aid; they seemed to have sunk into her head; great dark circles, which
even careful powdering could not disguise, surrounded them.

"Have you brought me any news?" she drawled.

It was not like Lady Raytham to drawl.

"I telephoned to you about an hour ago, but unfortunately I could not
catch you; on the whole, I think I prefer that a woman officer should
deal with this case."

"Has he stolen anything?" asked Leslie bluntly, and to her amazement Lady
Raytham shook her head.

"No, I've missed nothing; I shouldn't imagine he would steal. He may have
done, of course; but I shall be able to tell you more about that to--
morrow. He was grossly insulting, and left me at a second's notice."

"Have you been out?"

"Yes; I went to a dinner with Princess Anita Bellini. We intended going
on to the theatre, but I had a headache and decided to return."

"What time did you come back?" asked Leslie.

Lady Raytham raised her eyes to the ceiling.

"It may have been half--past nine--probably a little earlier," she
said. "We dined at a little restaurant which the Princess knows--"

"And then you came back and had another dinner," said Leslie steadily.
"The table is still on the landing--set for two, so far as I could see."

For a second the woman was staggered out of self--control. Her hand went
up to her lips.

"Oh, that?" she said awkwardly. "My friend, Mrs. Gurden, came later, and
--and we gave her some supper."

Leslie shook her head.

"I wish you would be frank with me. Lady Raytham." she said. "The truth
is, you didn't go out to dinner at all, did you?"

For a second the woman made no reply.

"I don't know what I did," she said.

Between despair and suppressed anger her voice was a wail.

"He drove everything out of my mind--oh, if I had known! If I had
known!"

She covered her eyes with her hands, and Leslie heard the sobs she could
not stifle.

"What did he say to you before he went?" she asked inexorably.

Lady Raytham shook her head.

"I can't tell you--he was dreadful, dreadful!"

Leslie had waited this opportunity to fire her shot.

"He is in our hands," she said. "Shall we bring him here?"

The woman uncovered her eyes and stepped back with a little scream.

"Here? Here?" she said huskily. "My God, not here! He must go to the mort
--"

She stopped herself, but too late.

"How did you know he was dead?" asked Leslie sternly.

Under the rouge the woman's face was grey.

CHAPTER VII

"How did you know he was dead?" asked Leslie again. "Who told you?"

"I--I heard." Her voice was hardly more than a whisper.

"Who told you? Nobody knows but the inspector and I, and I have come
straight away from the place where he was found. I left him three minutes
ago."

"Three minutes? I don't understand." And then, as she saw that she had
been trapped for the second time, the colour came and went in Jane
Raytham's face.

"I don't wonder that you are surprised, Lady Raytham. You know that
Barnes Common is a little more than three minutes away, don't you?"

The woman looked round like some hunted animal seeking an avenue of
escape.

"I know he is dead," she said desperately. And then she faced the girl
with a new resolution and a courage which Leslie could only admire.

"I know he's dead," she breathed "I know he's dead. God knows who killed
him, but I found him there. I saw him as my car was passing--on the
sidewalk. I somehow knew it was he and got out. That is how I know. I
should have told the police, I suppose, but--I was frightened, terribly
frightened. I thought I should faint."

"Where were you going when you found his body?"

Leslie's grave eyes were fixed on the woman.

"To--to the Princess Bellini. She has a house in Wimbledon."

"But you couldn't have parted with her for very long when you decided to
follow her."

Jane Raytham licked her dry lips. "She left something behind--the night
was rather pleasant--I wanted the air, so I drove--"

"Won't you sit down, Lady Raytham?" said the girl gently.

The woman looked ready to drop. With a little nod she sank down--to say
that she collapsed would be a more descriptive word--into an easy--
chair that was near at hand.

Humanity was at the back of Leslie Maughan's suggestion, but there was
something else. She had learnt at Scotland Yard never to interrogate
either a prisoner or a possible witness whilst you are on the same level
with them. It was a piece of information that had been conveyed to her by
the greatest criminal counsel of the Bar. "Put a witness on a lower
level," he said, "and he'll tell you the truth."

Now she looked down at the broken woman who was nervously fingering the
arm of the chair, and a wave of pity swept over Leslie Maughan such as
she had never experienced before.

"You were not going to Princess Bellini's, Lady Raytham," she said
gently. "You were looking for Druze--he had taken something of yours."

Lady Raytham gazed at her without answering.

"You thought he had gone to the Princess Bellini's. Is that the way,
across Barnes Common?"

"It is--a way--yes."

"Then you saw the body and recognized it? Saw it in the light of your
head--lamps, as we did? You weren't on your way to Wimbledon at all; you
were coming back. I saw the rear lights of your car."

Lady Raytham was breathing quickly.

"How do you know?" she asked.

"You wouldn't have seen the body otherwise. It lay on the left--hand
footpath as you came towards London, on the farther path as you came from
London. What kind of a car have you?"

Jane told her.

"So you had been to Princess Bellini? And what did Princess Bellini tell
you?"

"She was not at home."

Instinctively Leslie Maughan recognized that Jane Raytham was speaking
the truth now. "So you came back, and you found the body? Searched it?"

The woman nodded.

"What were you seeking?"

Again the quick movement of tongue across parched lips.

"I can't tell you."

Suddenly Leslie looked round. Noiselessly crossing the floor, she turned
the handle quickly and jerked open the door. Mrs. Gurden nearly fell into
the room.

"Are you fearfully interested?" asked Leslie. Her tone was almost sweet.

The discomfited eavesdropper grimaced and tittered hysterically.

"I was Just coming in--really, it was very awkward. My shoe--lace came
unfastened, and I was just stooping--I don't know whatever you will
think of me, but you really must believe me, Miss Maughan, you really
must! I think prying and spying people are simply dreadful, don't you,
dear?"

"I do--dear!" said Leslie dryly, and pointed to the stairs. "Would you
mind sitting on the bottom step until I come down?"

And Greta went tittering down the stairs.

"Was she listening? Was she?" Lady Raytham asked the question with
unusual energy.

"No; I don't think she had been there long. I have an uncanny knowledge
when I am being overheard. I had it just at that moment Lady Raytham,
where is your emerald necklace?"

If she had struck the woman she could not have produced a more startling
effect. Jane Raytham sprang to her feet with a low cry and put out a hand
as though she were warding off some terrible menace. For a second her
beautiful face was distorted with fear.

"Oh, God!" she gasped. "Why do you say that?"

"Where is your necklace? Can I see it?" Jane Raytham thought for a
moment, her chin on her breast, and then slowly raised her eyes.

"Yes. Will you come with me?" she said in a whisper, and Leslie followed
her out of the room into the bedroom on the right that opened from the
landing.

She switched on the lights, and they crossed to a corner of the room
where on the wall hung, apparently, a small Rembrandt in a gilt frame.
The picture must have been a very good copy, but it was no more. When
Jane Raytham touched the frame it swung open like a door, and showed
behind a small, square safe set in the wall. Lady Raytham turned the key
with a hand that shook, not even her iron nerve could conceal her
emotion. Taking out a jewel--box, she carried it to a table, pressed a
hidden spring, and the lid flew open. And there the dumbfounded Leslie
saw the emerald chain--intact. Intact even to the square emerald
pendant.

Leslie picked up the jewel and surveyed it in bewilderment. Then, opening
her bag, she brought to light the emerald that had been found in the dead
hand of Druze and placed it by the side of the pendant on the chain. They
were exactly alike.

"Are there two chains?" she asked.

"No," said Jane Raytham.

"Is that the one you wore to--night?"

She nodded.

Her eyes were flaming. Even under that terrible strain she could not
restrain her natural curiosity.

"Where did you get that?" she pointed.

"We found it in Druze's hand," replied Leslie.

The woman's mouth opened in astonishment.

"You found--nothing else? No other--" Again she stopped quickly.

"No other part of the chain--no. Wasn't it this you were looking for?"

Leslie saw her expression change. Was it relief she detected? Certainly
her tone was lighter and less strained when she spoke. "No, I wasn't
looking for that., Who killed him?"

"Who do you think?"

Eye to eye they stood, silent for the space of a second.

"Why should I suspect anybody?"

Leslie Maughan fired her second shot.

"Shall I suggest a name?" she asked. "Peter Dawlish."

Again that quick upward jerk of the chin, as though she were meeting some
sickening pain.

"Peter Dawlish?" she said loudly. "Peter Dawlish? You're mad--mad to
think Peter Dawlish--"

Without warning she stumbled forward, and Leslie had only time to throw
out her arms and take the weight of her as she fell in a swoon to the
ground.

In a second Leslie had pressed the bell and had thrown open the door. The
footman came running up.

"Open one of those windows, and get me some brandy."

He gaped down at the white--faced woman on the ground.

"Is her ladyship ill?" he asked.

"Don't ask questions; open the window--hurry." And as the French windows
were thrown violently open:

"Now get the brandy."

Before the man had come back, Jane Raytham had opened her eyes and stared
inquiringly up into the face that was bent to hers.

"What happened? I fainted--I'm a fool. Let us go out."

With Leslie's assistance she rose unsteadily to her feet.

"I'd better put your jewel--case back in the safe, hadn't I? Or perhaps
you'd rather do it?"

"It doesn't matter," said the woman listlessly.

And in that moment Leslie Maughan guessed why Anthony Druze had died.

Slipping her arm round Jane Raytham's waist, she took her back to the
drawing--room, insisted upon her lying on the couch, propping a pillow
under her head, and throwing a heavy silken scarf that drooped on a chair
--back over her feet.

"You're very good," murmured Lady Raytham, "and I loathe you so much."

"I suppose you do," smiled Leslie. "And yet you shouldn't, because I
haven't been at all unpleasant."

Jane shook her head in agreement.

"I haven't suggested--and will you keep very quiet when I tell you this?
--I haven't suggested that you will be under suspicion of shooting
Druze."

She had no need to be a reader of faces to realize that this possibility
had never occurred to Jane Raytham.

"I?" she said incredulously. "But how absurd! Why should I shoot? Oh, but
that is impossible! It is impossible that anybody should think such a
thing!" And, in spite of Leslie's warning, she struggled erect. "You
don't think so, do you?"

She was on her feet, peering into the girl's face, her hand gripping
Leslie's wrist fiercely.

"You don't think so? I hated Druze! I hated him, hated him!" She stamped
her foot in her fury. "You don't know what it has meant to me--every
morning to see his face, every minute liable to his presence. Do you
realize what that meant? I had to school myself so that I didn't shudder
at the sight of him, and the mock humility of his 'Yes, my lady,' and
'No, my lady,' that I might sit unmoved at my own table and face my own
husband, and appear oblivious to the horrible masquerade--"

She stopped, exhausted by her own vehemence.

Leslie waited a moment, and then:

"What is Anthony Druze to you?"

Lady Raytham stared at her.

"To me--you mean--what do you mean?"

Suddenly she burst into a paroxysm of laughter--it was dreadful to see
her.

"Oh, you fool--you little fool! Can't you guess? Don't you know?"

And then suddenly she ran out of the room. Leslie heard her bedroom door
slam and the snap of the turning key and knew that her interview was
ended.

CHAPTER VIII

IT was two o'clock when a taxicab stopped in Severall Street, Lambeth,
and a very weary girl alighted. The detective whom she had asked by
telephone should meet her was waiting at the corner of the street and ran
towards her.

"You want Mrs. Inglethorne's, don't you, Miss? The house is on the
opposite side of the road."

He hurried across the street and knocked at a door. Twice and three times
he knocked before a sash went up and the voice of Peter Dawlish asked:
"Who is it?"

He had hardly asked the question before he recognized the girl.

"I'll be down in a second."

But before he could descend, the landlady herself made an appearance. She
was a little tremulous of voice, more than a little whining, when she
recognized the familiar countenance of the detective.

"Whatcher want? There's nobody here except my young man lodger, and he's
straight--a policeman recommended him--"

"This lady is from Scotland Yard, and she wishes to see him, Mrs.
Inglethorne," said the detective soothingly. "Don't get worried."

"Worried! Me workin' my fingers to the bone and my old man in 'stir,'
though as innocent as a babe unborn--"

By this time Peter Dawlish had descended.

"Do you wish to see me?"

She nodded.

"Where can I see you? Can you come out and sit in the cab for a few
minutes?"

"Certainly."

"There is another favour I want to ask. Will you be very annoyed if I ask
you to allow this police officer to search your room?"

He was struck dumb for a second.

"Certainly. Why, is something lost?"

"Nothing." She turned to the detective and gave him instructions in a low
tone; he pushed past the affrighted landlady and went upstairs.

"Now come into the cab. You won't catch cold?"

He laughed irritably.

"I'm so hot with righteous indignation that I would melt an iceberg!" he
said.

He stepped into the taxi and pulled the door tight.

"Now, Miss Maughan!"

She looked sideways at him; the white face of the lantern illuminating
the taximeter formed a reflector that gave some light to the interior of
the car.

"What have you been doing all evening?" she asked.

"From what hour?"

"Eight o'clock."

"I've been in the house. A job came to me this morning addressing
envelopes, and I've been working since seven till within a few minutes of
your arrival. About two thousand of them are already addressed; I think
that accounts for my time. I only had the envelopes and lists at six--
thirty. Why--what has happened?"

"Druze is dead."

"Dead?"

"Murdered; his body was found on Barnes Common somewhere between 11.45
and midnight."

He whistled softly.

"That is a bad business. How was he killed?"

"Shot--at close range."

He was silent for a time.

"Naturally, after my wild and woolly threats, you suspected me. Come up
and see the envelopes--my bedroom is the only decent room in the house."

She hesitated, then, stretching out her hand, pulled back the lock of the
door.

Mrs. Inglethorne was past surprising. She stood at the foot of the
stairs, an old ulster over her dressing--gown, and watched the two go up
without comment.

"There is nothing here, miss," said the detective before he caught sight
of Peter. "Nothing except these." He indicated with a wave of his hand a
deal table covered with small envelopes neatly packed.

Leslie smiled.

"You needn't have told me you'd been working here, Mr. Dawlish," she
said; "it is like a smoke--room."

The aroma of cigarettes still hung about in spite of the open windows;
the tin she had sent to him was on the table, only half--full.

"I've been a little extravagant," he said apologetically; "but the
temptation was great."

The detective still lingered by the door, evidently in two minds as to
whether it would be proper to leave them in this peculiar environment.
Leslie saved him the responsibility of a decision by: "Thank you very
much. I will be down in a minute or two," she said.

She sat at the foot of the bed, her arm over the rail, and looked at
Peter. She would not have recognized him; he was clean--shaven, spruce.
There was a certain buoyancy in his attitude which was new to her. Good
looking, too, and in spite of his nearly thirty years and all that he had
suffered, remarkably youthful. It added a piquant interest to her
scrutiny that she knew so much about his past--much more than he
guessed.

A husky voice hailed them from the foot of the stairs. "Would you like a
cup of tea, miss?" Peter Dawlish looked at the girl with a smile. "She
really makes rather good tea," he said in a low voice.

"I should love one," she nodded, and he called softly down the stairs and
came back.

"I'm scared of waking Elizabeth," he said, and added: "You look fagged."

"Which means that I look hideous," she retorted with a frank smile. "I
won't bandy compliments with you, or I would congratulate you upon the
marked improvement which the barber has brought about. Did you know Druze
very well?"

"Not very well," he said.

"Tell me something about him--all that you know."

He frowned at this, evidently trying to remember matters that had passed,
facts that had gone out of his recollection.

"He came to Lord Everreed's place soon after I took up my post," he said.
"My aunt, the Princess Bellini, recommended him--"

"The Princess recommended him?" she said quickly. "Why, was he in her
service?"

"Yes," he nodded. "He was with Aunt Anita in Java for years. Her husband
held some sort of minor post on one of the plantations; he was, I
believe, a fairly poor man. After his death she came to England, and
Druze came with her; in Java she had afforded the luxury of a butler--
living is rather cheap there--but when she came to England she got rid
of him. I have a distinct recollection of the letter she wrote to Lord
Everreed, which I answered. I call her 'aunt'," he explained, "although
she was only the half--sister of my father, and, in reality, no relation
to me at all. How long Druze remained with Lord Everreed, of course I do
not know. From the date of my conviction that page of history is closed.
But a few years after I had gone to prison I heard in a roundabout
fashion--I think it was in a letter which an old servant of ours wrote--

that he had gone into the service of Lady Raytham."

She thought over this for some time.

"When were you arrested?"

"Seven and a half years ago."

She looked up in surprise.

"Then you served the full sentence?"

He nodded.

"Yes. I am not on ticket--of--leave. The truth is, I was rather a
troublesome prisoner--I suppose most prisoners are who have the delusion
of innocence. Why do you ask?"

"I have reason to believe that the Princess thought you only served
five," said the girl. "But that really doesn't matter. I suppose she's of
an age that--I'm being cattish. Now, tell me something more."

"You look a very sleepy cat," he smiled, and at that moment there came
through the door a strange little figure.

How old she was it was difficult to tell, but Leslie guessed her to be
six, though she was tall for that age. She was painfully thin, and her
little arms, which carried with solemn attention a cup of tea, were
hardly more than of the thickness of the bones that showed through the
flesh. Her face, pinched and thin and translucent, had a beauty which
made the girl catch her breath. She raised two big eyes to survey the
visitor, and then the long lashes fell on her cheeks.

"Your tea," she said.

Leslie took the cup gently from the child's hand and set it down.

"What's your name?" she asked, and as she put her hand on the yellow
head, the little creature shrank back, her face puckered with fear.

"That's Belinda," said Peter, with a smile.

The child wore a ragged old mackintosh over a night--gown that had once
been of red flannelette, but which had washed to the palest of pinks. Her
hands, lightly clasped before her, were almost transparent.

"I'm Mrs. Inglethorne's little girl," she said in a low voice. "My name
is 'Lizabeth--not Belinda."

She raised her eyes quickly to the man and dropped them again. The
gravity of her tone, the low sweetness of her voice, amazed Leslie
Maughan. For a second she forgot that she was too tired to be interested
even in the bizarre.

"Won't you come and talk to me?"

The child glanced at the door. "Mother wants me--".

"Talk to the lady!"

Evidently Mrs. Inglethorne, at the bottom of the stairs, had good ears.
The child started, looked apprehensively round, and came sidling towards
Leslie.

"What do you do with yourself?" asked Leslie. "Do you go to school?"

Elizabeth nodded.

"I think about daddy most of the time."

Leslie remembered that daddy was at that moment serving his country in
Dartmoor.

"I keep him in a book; he's very nice--ever so nice--"

The child nodded soberly.

"In a book?" asked Leslie. "What kind of a book?"

A voice outside the door supplied an answer. Mrs. Inglethorne must have
crept up the stairs the better to listen.

"Don't take no notice of her, miss; she's a bit cracked. Any good--
looking feller she sees in a book she says is her father. Why, she used
to take the King once, and then Lord What's--his--name, and when I
think of her own poor dear father, that worked his fingers to the bone
and got a 'stretch' for nothing, as innocent as a babe unborn, it's very
hard."

Elizabeth was tense now; her big eyes narrowed, her ear turned to the
door. It was an attitude of apprehension, and Leslie's heart ached for
the child. She smoothed her hair, and this time the little girl did not
shrink.

"I'll send you some wonderful pictures, and you'll be able to make up
fathers and uncles and all sorts of nice things from them."

Stooping, she kissed the child, and with her arm about her painfully thin
shoulders, led her to the door. On the landing the unhealthy--looking
Mrs. Inglethorne smirked and squirmed, a picture of gratitude for the
lady's condescension.

"I'm going to be very interested in Elizabeth," said Leslie, her steady
eyes on the woman. "You won't mind if I come round sometimes to see how
she is getting on?"

Mrs. Inglethorne made a fearful grimace which was intended to express her
pleasure.

"How many children have you?"

"Five, miss."

The woman was looking at her curiously, possibly fascinated by her first
meeting with the female of the hated species.

"Five in this little house?" Leslie raised her eyebrows. "Where do you
keep them all?"

Again the woman wriggled, this time uncomfortably.

"In the kitchen, miss, except the two girls; they sleep in my room."

"I'd like to have a look at your kitchen."

"It's a bit late, and you'd wake 'em up," said Mrs. Inglethorne after
hesitation.

But Leslie waited, and reluctantly Mrs. Inglethorne went down the stairs,
the girl following. The kitchen was at the back of the house, approached
by a narrow passage. It was a room barely ten feet square, cold and
miserably furnished. In the unsatisfactory light of the oil--lamp the
woman carried, she saw not three, but four, little bundles; one, a child
which could not have been three years old, slept in a soap box on the
floor. Its coverlet was a strip of dusty carpet, which had been roughly
cut to fit the shape of the box. Two children were huddled together under
the table, wrapped in an old army overcoat. The fourth lay in a corner
under a flour sack, so still that she might have been dead; a girl of
eleven, sandy--haired, sharp--featured, who shivered and groaned in her
sleep as the light of the lamp came upon her face.

"It's very 'ard on a woman who's got five mouths to fill," whined Mrs.
Inglethorne; "but I wouldn't part with 'em for the world. And it's warm
in the kitchen when we've had a coke fire going all evening."

Leslie went out of that sad little room sick at heart. Poverty she had
seen and understood. Possibly these unfortunate children were as well off
as thousands of others in the great metropolis. The weaklings would die;
the fittest survive and presently drag their stunted bodies to a free
school, where they would be taught just enough to enable them to write
their betting slips and read the football reports intelligently.

Peter was waiting for her at the foot of the stairs.

"I think I'll go home now. I'm rather tired," she said. "Most likely you
will be interrogated tomorrow either by Mr. Coldwell or an officer from
the Yard. I think the best thing you can do is to go up and interview
him."

And then, abruptly: "Have you seen your mother since you have been free?"

He shook his head.

"My parent has expressed her wishes on the matter in unmistakable terms.
We were never en rapport, so to speak, and perhaps it is a little too
late now to attempt to arrive at mutual understanding."

She looked down at the floor, her lips pursed.

"I wonder," she said, and held out her hand. "Goodnight, Peter Dawlish."

He took her hand, held it for a second, and then:

"You're rather wonderful. I'm getting a new angle on life," he said.

She had one more call to make. Inspector Coldwell had promised to wait at
Scotland Yard until she returned with her report, and she found him
sipping coffee in the lobby, and told him briefly the result of her
visit.

"I never thought Peter knew much about it. What does he know of Druze?"

He listened intently until she had finished.

"Rum! All the paths in this maze lead back to the Princess Bellini. Yes,
I'll see Peter; I'll wire him in the morning," he yawned. "It is time all
honest people were in bed. I'm going to take you home."

Her cab was waiting, and though she had no need of an escort, he pointed
out that her way was largely his.

"What we're going to do about Lady Raytham, I don't know. I'm taking it
for granted that you have discovered a whole lot that you haven't told
me."

"Not a whole lot, a little," she admitted.

Mr. Coldwell scratched his head.

"That little is usually crucial. However, I am not going to discourage
you. Keep your mystery--a little romance in police work has a wonderful
tonic value."

The cab carried them across deserted Trafalgar Square, and a few seconds
later stopped before the door of Leslie's flat.

"I suppose you know all that is to be known about the case?" he said,
with a touch of the sardonic, as he handed her out of the cab. "Whilst I,
a poor old muddle--headed copper, am groping round like a blindfolded
man in a fog."

"I think I know a lot," she admitted, with a tired smile.

Coldwell was amused.

"The complacency of the woman! Here she is, keeping all her clues up her
sleeve, ready to spring them out and reduce police headquarters to a
bewildered pulp! Know all about Druze, do you?"

"I know a lot about him."

"Fine!" said Coldwell.

She had the door open now, and he waited until she was in the passage
before he dropped his bombshell.

"Promise me you won't come out and ask questions, but will go straight up
to bed, if I tell you something?"

"I promise," she said.

He put his hand on the knob of the door, ready to shut it.

"Arthur, or Anthony, Druze, as he was variously called, was a woman!"

The door slammed on her; before she recovered from her stupor she heard
the rattle of the cab as it moved away.

CHAPTER IX

DRUZE--a woman! It was incredible--almost impossible! Yet that shrewd
old man would not have jested with her. She dragged herself up the
stairs, her limp body aching for rest, her mind very wide awake and
alert.

Druze a woman! She shook her head helplessly. And then she remembered
Lady Raytham's hysterical laughter. "What was Druze to you?" Jane Raytham
knew!

Leslie was too sane, too big, to feel foolish. She stopped on the landing
and, leaning heavily on the balustrade, she recalled the hairless face
and figure of the portly butler. All her theories must go by the board. A
scaffolding must be erected on a new foundation.

She found Lucretia Brown huddled up in a chair before a dead fire fast
asleep. Lucretia had never been trained out of her habit of "waiting up."
It was her firm conviction that only this practice of hers saved her
mistress from a terrible fate. She woke with a start and came reeling to
her feet.

"Oh, miss!" she gasped. "What time is it?"

Leslie glanced at the mantelpiece.

"Three o'clock," she said, "and a fine morning! Why aren't you in bed,
you poor, knock--kneed girl?"

"I'm not knock--kneed, and never was," protested Lucretia. "Three
o'clock, miss? What a time!" She shivered. And then, morbidly curious:
"Has anything been up, miss?"

"More things are 'up' than will ever came down, I think," replied Leslie,
as she dropped into a chair. "There's been a murder."

"Good Gawd!" said the shocked Lucretia. And then, with pardonable
curiosity: "Who done it?"

"If I knew 'who'd done it,' I'd be a very contented female." Leslie
stifled a yawn. "Run the bath, Lucretia, make me some hot milk, and don't
wake me till ten o'clock."

"If I'm awake then," said Lucretia ominously. "I never see such a place
as this. You turn night into day, as the Good Book says--London's a
modern Babbyling! Did he have his throat cut?" She returned to the
tragedy.

"No, I'm sorry to disappoint you; but it was quite ghastly enough."

She dragged herself to her feet and went to her desk, turning over the
letters that had arrived by the night mail. There was one which looked
promising. She tore off the end of the envelope, read its contents, and
locked the document away in a drawer. Ten minutes later, before Lucretia
had run the water from the bath, Leslie Maughan, snug between sheets, was
sleeping dreamlessly.

She woke with a dim remembrance of the rattle of teacups and of
Lucretia's calling her. Half opening her eyes, she saw the cup by her
bedside. She was horribly tired; bed was a warm and luxurious place. She
must have dozed, for the sound of voices wakened her.

Her bedroom led from her sitting--room, and the door---was half--open.
Two people were speaking--Lucretia and somebody else whose voice was
familiar.

"I will wait. Please don't wake Miss Maughan specially for me."

Leslie sat up in bed. Through the closing door which the maid was
jealously guarding, she saw the big, straight figure of a woman. Lady
Raytham! In an instant she was  out of bed, thrust her feet into
slippers, and pulled her dressing--gown about her. She stopped only at
the mirror to brush back her hair.

Lady Raytham was standing in the middle of the study, a. bright coal fire
was burning, and the room, at that early hour of the morning, had a
special attraction for its young owner. But Jane Raytham's presence
seemed, for some unaccountable reason, to lend it a new distinction, as a
great bunch of Easter lilies or a bowl of narcissus might have done.

"Good--morning. I'm sorry to be so early. I hope I did not disturb you."

She was polite, almost frigidly so, and Leslie could only look at her in
wonder. All the evidence of distress and terror that had marked her face
on the night before had vanished--all except that dark tint under the
eyes.

"Won't you sit down? Have you had breakfast?" asked Leslie practically.

Lady Raytham shook her head. "Please don't bother about me; I have plenty
of time and can wait," she said.

There was a certain resentful admiration in her gaze; she was thinking
how few women of her acquaintance were presentable at such an hour and in
such circumstances. She had never seen Leslie Maughan in the daytime
before, and not only did she stand the test of the cruel morning light,
but she looked even prettier. She liked the poise of the girl and the
readiness with which she accepted this sensible suggestion and
disappeared into the bathroom, the gawky maid, her arms laden with
garments, following. By the time she came out, Lucretia Brown had laid a
little table; huge blue coffee cups and china racks bristling with crisp
brown toast.

"No, I couldn't eat, thank you." Lady Raytham shook her head. "I will
have some coffee."

Leslie looked significantly at the door and Lucretia regretfully
disappeared.

"Yes, I slept," said Jane Raytham listlessly. "I don't know how or why,
but I did. I suppose I just couldn't sleep any more. There is nothing
about the murder in the newspapers."

Leslie made a mental calculation.

"There wouldn't be; it will be in the evening press. I know all about
Druze."

"You know--about her?" Jane Raytham looked at her steadily.

"What was her name?" asked Leslie, but the other woman shook her head.

"I don't know; she was always Druze to me."

"Did your husband know--"

"That she was a woman?" She shook her head. "No. Poor Raytham! He'd have
had a fit! But then, he never notices anything."

She had married the first Baron Raytham when he was a little over fifty,
bachelor--minded, a man of set habits, who had found himself most
unexpectedly a Benedict and was a little aghast at the discovery. For the
greater part of a year he had striven to be the model husband, and had
been something of a bore. The domestic habit was foreign to him. Society
and all its dainty etceteras he loathed. Before the end of the first year
of their married life, he had given up all attempt to interest himself in
the new complexities which marriage had brought. Thereafter he devoted
his energies and thoughts to his concession; his boards of directors,
balance--sheets, and all the precious things which were life to him, and
Jane Raytham was left very much to her own devices.

"My husband is very seldom in London--probably not two months a year. He
has"--she hesitated--"other interests." ,

Very wisely, Leslie did not pursue the subject. She, too, had heard that
Lord Raytham had carried into married life a loose string or two that
were substantially attached and which he was unwilling or unable to drop.
Leslie was too versed in the ways of the world to be shocked at this; too
sophisticated to be anything but mildly amused at the inefficiency of
man, who finds it so easy to get rid of a wife and so difficult to
discharge a mistress.

"You name is Leslie, isn't it?" And, when she nodded:

"I wonder if you would mind my 'Leslie--ing' you? You're not so
formidable as I thought. I--I rather like you. My name is Jane--if you
ever feel friendly enough to 'Jane' me--I've been abominably rude to
you, but now I've come to ask you for favours."

Leslie laughed. "I owe you an apology," she said and the other woman was
quick to see her meaning.

"About Druze? It would be a beastly idea, only--women are such queer
fools, aren't they? You can hardly pick up a Sunday newspaper that
specializes in such matters without having proof of these strange--
mesalliances. No, I knew Druze was a woman; that made everything so
hideous. It besmirched me, made me cringe when I thought of it--I wonder
if you will believe me when I say that that was almost my heaviest cross
--almost."

"What was really the heaviest?" asked Leslie quietly.

Lady Raytham fetched a long sigh and looked out of the window.

"I don't know--it is rather difficult to compare these things." And
then, quickly: "Of course, I know now which is the heaviest, but that is
so new and so crushing that I dare not let myself think about it.
Something Druze said to me before she went out; something she told me
that froze my blood." She closed her eyes and shuddered, but recovered
instantly. "That is why I got my car and went in search of her. She told
me a little but not everything, and I had to know! My first thought was--
you'll think I'm a hypocrite--that Peter had killed her. If I thought at
all! I don't think I cared. I had only one idea in my mind, to find
something she had boasted about."

"Not the necklace?"

Jane Raytham smiled contemptuously.

"The necklace! As if I cared for that. I'm making a clean breast of
everything--up to a point. The necklace you saw at the house last night
--"

"Was a copy; I know that," said Leslie quietly. "An exact replica of the
real emerald chain, and valueless? When you didn't bother to put it back
in the safe, I guessed."

Eye met eye, each striving to read the other's thoughts.

"What else did you guess?" asked Jane Raytham, after a long silence, and
then: "No, no, don't tell me. I want to feel that nobody knows that--
nobody! You will tell me that I am trying to create a fool's paradise
myself, and I'm a moral coward--I wonder if I am?" And then, obliquely:
"Have you seen Peter?"

"I saw him last night, yes. He knew nothing about the murder--not so
much as you," said Leslie.

The woman ignored this challenge. "I wonder how much you do know,
Leslie?"

It was a strain to ask the question. Even as she had her reservations, so
also had Leslie Maughan. The truth must come from Jane Raytham or not be
truth at all.

"I know you were being blackmailed; that the necklace you gave was part
of the price; the twenty thousand pounds, which I imagine was all you
could raise in cash, was the other part. I guess also that Druze was a
blackmailer. Am I right?"

Jane nodded; there was a perceptible brightening of her face as though,
fearing to hear worse, she was experiencing relief at the limitation of
the girl's knowledge. "How long have you been paying?" She did not
answer, and Leslie repeated the question.

"I don't know. Quite a long time." Another silence. The truth was not to
come yet, then: only a measure of it.

"Do you want to tell me any more?" she asked.

Jane Raytham drooped her head. She wanted to tell--just as much as this
frank and friendly girl knew, hoping against hope that the more precious
secret would remain with her, and yet almost praying that Leslie Maughan
 would suddenly drag forth the grisly skeleton and expose it to her eyes.

"Yes--I want to, terribly! But I shan't. I can't bring myself to put
things into words. And I want your help--how badly I need it! But, my
dear, you're police, part of the machinery of Scotland Yard. I've told
you too much already. I shall be living in a flutter of fear all day--"

"I'm Leslie Maughan in this flat," said Leslie, smiling. "Just a sort of
little sister of the human race! But I'll warn you that I am determined,
as far as I can, to find the murderer of that wretched woman. Short of
that information you can tell me anything."

Jane shook her head ruefully.

"I don't know who killed Druze. I will not swear that, but I will tell
you on my word I don't know; I do not even suspect. Anita wanted to know.
I called on her this morning; she is like a woman distraught. I never
knew she felt so deeply; the police have been there to inquire whether
Druze called. I suppose you told them last night what I had told you.
Poor Anita! She was terribly fond of Druze,  who was once in her service.
She always contended that he hadn't been and talked about him as though
he were the merest stranger. But that, I think, was her pride--she hated
the thought that she had ever been so poverty--stricken that she was
obliged to let him go--her, I mean: the habit of years takes a lot of
breaking. I have thought of Druze as a man and spoken of him as a man so
long that it is difficult to get out of the trick."

"One question I want to ask you, Lady--Jane, I'd better call you. It
will be almost as difficult a habit to get into. Did Druze forge Lord
Everreed's name, as Peter Dawlish thinks he did?"

Jane Raytham shook her head.

"That is impossible," she said simply.

"Why impossible?"

The answer took Leslie Maughan's breath away.

"Because she could not read or write!"

CHAPTER X

"DRUZE was illiterate, but, like all illiterate people, had acquired a
certain form of culture and was very clever to conceal this misfortune. I
think, in fact I know, she had the schooling of an average child, but she
was just incapable of learning--the Council Schools and even the Public
Schools are full of people like that, of girls and boys familiar with the
most obscure sciences who have never tasted these elementary arts."

Leslie thought quickly.

"Her signature was on the passport?"

"I wrote it," said the surprising woman. "She told me she wanted to go
across to France for a week--end trip and asked me if I would sign the
passport form. That was only a few weeks ago, so it is fresh in my mind.
Now tell me what I am to do? The police will come to me, and I am
prepared to tell them the truth, though I cannot see how I can help
them."

"The whole truth?" asked Leslie significantly.

Jane Raytham looked at the girl for a long time before she answered.

"As much as I've told you--not as much as you guess," she said in her
even voice.

Leslie carried her cup of coffee to the desk.

"Would you like me to write down the gist of what you have said, and sign
the statement?" she asked. "That may save you an awful lot of trouble."

Jane hesitated.

"Is it necessary? I suppose it is," she said. "Yes, if you would be so
kind."

For ten minutes she watched the girl as her pen flew over the paper, and
took the pages from her as they were written.

"You have put my case more cleverly than I could have put it myself," she
said with a little smile. "I almost think you're sympathetic."

"You don't know how sympathetic I am," said Leslie, rising from her chair
to make way for the other.

Lady Raytham sat down, read the last sheet again, and had dipped her pen
in the ink, when the sound of voices came from outside the door. It was
Lucretia's raised protest, and a deeper voice, which Leslie instantly
recognized, and, running to the door, threw it open. The Princess Anita
Bellini stood on the landing, glaring through her monocle at the defiant
Lucretia.

"You can't come in; Miss Maughan's engaged," she was saying. "I don't
care if you're a princess or if you're the Queen of Sheba. When Miss
Maughan's engaged nobody can--"

"That will do, Lucretia. Come in, Princess." The big woman strode into
the apartment without a word of thanks, not even deigning to look at the
defiant maid. "Where is--?" she began, and then she saw Lady Raytham at
the desk. "What are you writing, Jane?" she demanded loudly. "You're not
being such a fool as to make a statement to the police, are you?"

"Lady Raytham is merely telling me as much as I already know," said
Leslie.

"Jane, you must not sign it. I forbid it!" There was a tremor of anger in
the hard voice, and, looking at the woman, Leslie saw how deeply the
tragedy must have affected her. She seemed ten years older. The big slit
of a mouth was downturned at the ends, the eyes red and inflamed.

Very calmly Lady Raytham affixed her signature. "Don't be foolish,
Anita," she said quietly. "The police are entitled to know certain things
about Druze."

"What have you told them? Can I see this precious document?"

She reached out her hand, but Leslie was before her, "Let me read it to
you, Princess," she said, and placed the desk between herself and her
furious visitor. That Princess Bellini was in a cold tremble of rage was
patent. She read without interruption to the end.

"Jane Raytham, you're a fool to sign a thing like that!" stormed the
woman. "Let them find things out without committing yourself to paper.
This girl has tricked you into a confession--"

"Confession?" said Leslie, with a smile. "How absurd! Lady Raytham knew
that Druze was a woman; it was impossible that she should not. And, as
she says, she has only told us what we already knew. And what you already
knew."

"I knew nothing," said Anita Bellini harshly, her baleful eyes fixed on
the girl. "Except that you have tricked Lady Raytham into making a
statement which will involve her in considerable trouble."

Leslie faced her squarely, and for the first time Anita Bellini became
dimly and uncomfortably conscious of the strength of this inconsiderable
person. They had met before, and the honours of that meeting had not
rested with the Princess. But she had thought of Leslie as a girl with a
certain glibness of tongue, a gift of smart repartee, but without any of
the especial qualities that she might expect in a foe worthy of her
heaviest metal. But now it had dawned upon her that, whether she was
"Coldwell's pretty typist," as she had contemptuously referred to her, or
whether she was "a Scotland Yard underling," she was certainly a factor
to be considered and forestalled. And if she had any doubt on the
subject, Leslie Maughan's first words would have dispelled it.

"Lady Raytham has made a statement, and you also will make a statement,
Princess," she said, "either before or after the inquest."

The woman surveyed her with an oddly sly look that was unnatural in her.

"I don't know how you can bring me in," she began, and her tone was
milder than it had been.

"You employed Druze. Apparently you knew she was a woman, and are
acquainted with her early history," said Leslie quietly. "That is quite
sufficient to bring you into any inquiry which the police set afoot."

Anita Bellini took out her monocle, polished it on her handkerchief, and
returned it to her eye.

"Possibly I was rather precipitate," she said. "But I think you should
make allowance for my--whatever I have said. I have been awfully upset
by Druze's death. Would you read the statement again?"

It was a very simple record of the information which Lady Raytham had
given to the girl, and, when she had finished reading: "No, there is
nothing in that," said the Princess. "I suppose this evidence has to come
out. Does it mean that we shall be called at the inquest? I couldn't
stand that, I couldn't!"

In that instant Leslie detected a tremor in the woman's voice. Anita
Bellini, the formidable, had a weak spot, after all. But she recovered
herself very quickly.

"If everybody had his due, Peter Dawlish would be under arrest," she
said, and, ignoring the protests of Jane: "The man hated Druze; you know
that quite well, Jane. He threatened her; I can prove it!" And then, in a
conciliatory tone: "I hope we're not going to be bad friends, Miss
Maughan. If I can help you I will. Is there any more you can tell me than
appears in the evening newspaper?"

"Nothing," said Leslie shortly.

They left together soon after, but before they departed, Leslie found an
opportunity of speaking a few words to Jane Raytham.

"I don't want you to tell anybody about the necklace," she said in a low
voice, as she accompanied her down the stairs. "Especially about the
emerald that was found in Druze's hand. You promise me? Or have you
already told?"

Jane Raytham shook her head. "I wondered why you hadn't put that in the
statement," she suggested. "But you may trust me; I shall not speak about
it, even to Anita."

At that moment the voice of the Princess hailed her from the foot of the
stairs, and further conversation became impossible.

Leslie arrived at Scotland Yard just before twelve, and was mounting the
stone stairs as Peter Dawlish came down.

"A clean bill," he said with a smile. "At any rate, that is the
impression Coldwell gives me. It seems that your detective man's search
was a very thorough one. I suppose you know that he searched me also?
And, by the way, Belinda sends her love."

"Belinda?" Leslie was momentarily bewildered. "Oh, you mean the little
child, Elizabeth. How wicked! I had almost forgotten her!"

"She hasn't forgotten you," laughed Peter, and with a cheery wave of his
hand went on.

She found Mr. Coldwell in his big, comfortable office, the stub of a
cigar between his teeth, his bristling brows gathered in thought.

"Just going to phone you," he grumbled. "I've seen that man of yours, and
I'm satisfied that he had nothing to do with the crime."

"'That man of mine' being Peter Dawlish?" she said calmly. "You give me
quite a proprietorial feeling."

From her bag she took the statement that Lady Raytham had signed and laid
it on the table before him. He read it through carefully, folded it up,
and slipped it into a drawer.

"Did you tell Anita Bellini about the emerald we found in Druze's hand?"
he asked.

"No," she said. "That's the last thing in the world I should have told
her. I asked Lady Raytham not to tell either. Why?"

He smiled grimly.

"Thought you hadn't," he said. "Her Serenity called me on the phone five
minutes ago, and said she'd read in one of the newspapers that something
very valuable had been found on Druze's person. I haven't seen all the
newspapers, but those I've read make no mention of the emerald, and I
don't see why they should, unless they are psychic. The Princess
suggested, rather than said, that you had confirmed this mythical
newspaper report."

Leslie shook her head in admiration. "That woman is certainly a quick
worker," she said. "What did you tell her?"

Mr. Coldwell relit his cigar with the exasperating deliberation of his
age.

"I told her that we had found something valuable--a packet of money. She
seemed kind of disappointed."

The telephone bell shrilled; he picked up the receiver, listened in
silence for a time, and then: "All right, I'll come down," he said. "The
Lambeth police have got a quaint clue; a kind of ready--made one, but it
should be investigated, as it has to do with your Peter. Would you like
to come along?" She looked at him steadily.

"If you refer to him as my Peter again, I shall be very offensive to you,
Mr. Coldwell," she said, and Coldwell scratched his chin.

"Somehow he seems to belong to you; I don't know why I get that
impression."

Her eyes wandered to a comer of the room, and for the first time she saw
the two big travelling trunks. They were new and bore the label of the
Cunard Steamship Company.

"Druze's," he said laconically. "We'll go through those when we come
back."

It was at the corner of Severall Street that the taxicab stopped. The
local sub--divisional inspector was waiting, and with him a detective.

"Let me have a look at that paper," said Coldwell immediately, and
Leslie, who had not heard the one-sided conversation on the telephone,
wondered what was coming next.

The inspector took a dirty slip of paper from his pocket--book and gave
it into Coldwell's hand. He fixed his glasses and read, then passed the
slip to the girl. The message was written in pencil and in an illiterate
hand.

"Dawlish keeps his gun under a loose board in his bedroom just as you go
inside the door."

"Where did this come from?" asked Coldwell.

"It was delivered at the station just before I telephoned to you. A
street lad brought it along; he said it had been handed to him by a man,
who gave him a few coppers for his trouble. I thought it best that you
should know."

They walked down the street towards Mrs. Inglethorne's house, and the
door was opened immediately by that lady, who was surprisingly clean and
spruce. She seemed surprised, but was certainly not agitated by the
appearance of the police officers.

"Yes, sir, Mr. Dawlish has just come in. Shall I call him down?"

"No, thank you; we'll go up."

Coldwell mounted the stairs and knocked at the door of the front room,
and a voice bade them come in. Over the inspector's shoulder, Leslie saw
that Peter was sitting at a deal table, pen in hand, a stack of addressed
envelopes before him. He shifted his chair round, and his eyebrows rose
in astonishment.

"Hullo!" he said, obviously taken aback by the character of the call. "Do
you want to see me again, inspector?"

Coldwell took in the room with a glance. "I have information that you've
a gun concealed under this floor," he said. "If you don't mind, I'll make
another search."

"Fire ahead," said Peter, without a moment's hesitation.

Coldwell turned back to the door, lifted a corner of the faded carpet,
and saw the loose board immediately. To lift it up was the work of a
second. Thrusting in his hand, he pulled out a long black Browning
pistol. Peter's face went white; his jaw dropped in an amazement that
could not have been simulated.

"Anything more here?" asked Coldwell, and, kneeling, thrust in his hand
and groped about. Presently he found a small package wrapped in cloth and
brought it to the light. He unwrapped it slowly.

''My Gawd!" gasped a hollow voice.

Mrs. Inglethorne had crept up the stairs and was an interested spectator.
And if her profanity was inexcusable, there was reason enough for her
astonishment, for in the centre of that dirty rag lay three large diamond
rings, the least valuable of which must have been worth a hundred pounds.

"Do you know anything about these, Dawlish?"

Peter shook his head.

"No; I'm not a burglar," he said, with a return of his old good spirits.
"That branch of the profession is not my forte--and that little find has
every appearance of being the proceeds of a very old burglary."

Coldwell looked at the wrapper; it was thick with dust. Even as he turned
back one comer of the rag a fine cloud arose.

"Do you know anything about these, Mrs. Inglethorne?"

She shook her head.

"Or the pistol?"

The woman was paralysed; her face had gone a ghastly grey as she realized
the enormous significance of that find. There they had lain, month after
month, at least 500 worth of jewellery, the results of one of her
lodger's little coups, and she none the wiser.

"Never--seen--it!" Mrs. Inglethorne found a difficulty in breathing.

"This has been used as a hiding--place before," said the inspector, as
he laid the pistol and rings upon the deal table.

He examined the Browning, noted its make and number, and, having
carefully removed the magazine and dislodged the cartridges from the
chamber, smelt at the barrel.

"It has been fired recently, I should imagine; it still smells of
cordite. Is this yours, Dawlish?"

"No, sir; I've never seen it before."

"Humph!" The inspector sat down on the bed in exactly the place where the
girl had sat the night before. He looked round for Mrs. Inglethorne, but
that untidy woman had vanished.

"Nobody told you about that hiding--place?"

"No, sir--"

"Hullo, Elizabeth!" It was Leslie's interruption. The frail child stood
in the doorway, shyly smiling at the beautiful lady of her dreams.

She whispered something that the girl could not catch, and Leslie went
nearer to her, took the two thin hands in hers, and, stooping, kissed the
pale cheeks.

"Tea?" she said with a laugh. "No, dear, I don't think we want tea. It
was very nice of you to come--"

The child's eyes were fixed on the table; they were wide open, and in
their depths Leslie saw a look of fear.

"What is it?" asked Leslie.

"That big gun," whispered the child. "Mother had it this morning, and I
was so frightened."

The sharp--eared Coldwell heard.

"Your mother had it this morning, my dear?" he said kindly. "Where did
she have it?"

"In the kitchen. A gentleman left it--a little gentleman with a yellow
face. Mother brought it into the kitchen and said we all ought to be
killed."

She clapped her hands to her mouth with an exclamation of fright, for
only then did she remember the strict injunctions laid upon her. Coldwell
strode out of the room to the head of the stairs and called Mrs.
Inglethorne in a stentorian voice. It was a long time before he had an
answer, and then, by the tremulous voice, he guessed that part of the
conversation between himself and the child had been overheard.

"Come up here," he said curtly, and Mrs. Inglethorne came lumbering up
the stairs.

"The pistol came to your house this morning--from whom?"

The woman's mouth was dry with terror. She blinked from one to the other.

"A gentleman brought it," she gulped. "He said it belonged to Mr. Dawlish
--and would I put it under the floor--without a word of a lie, sir, if I
never move from here."

Coldwell's gimlet eyes searched her unwholesome face.

"You told me you had never seen the pistol before. Who sent it?"

She shook her head. "I don't know, sir. I've never seen the man before in
my life, if I never move---"

"You'll move!" said Coldwell grimly, "And darned quick, if you don't tell
me the truth!"

But to her story she stuck, swearing by numerous gods, some of whom were
unfamiliar to Leslie, that she knew nothing whatever of the pistol except
that it had been brought there by a perfect stranger who she thought was
a friend of Peter Dawlish.

To Leslie Maughan's astonishment, the inspector appeared to accept this
story, and to find nothing venial in the act of concealment.

"You did a very foolish thing, Mrs. Inglethorne. The next time a perfect
stranger comes and asks you to conceal firearms in your lodger's room,
you had better notify the police."

He slipped the pistol into his pocket, and looked round for Elizabeth,
but she had vanished.

"That lets you out, Dawlish," he said. "At least, it does for the moment.
If I were you, I would make an inspection of the room and see if there
are other likely hiding--places where stuff could be planted."

He had a consultation with the local inspector, and then he and Leslie
walked back to their cab.

"You've let her down rather lightly, haven't you, Mr. Coldwell?"

He gave her a quick sidelong glance. "Minnow fishing never did appeal to
me," he drawled. "Especially while one of the big pikes are hovering
around, and it's the pike I'm after. And if this minnow doesn't lead me
to him, I'll be astonished."

"You accept Peter Dawlish's story?"

He nodded, as he handed her into the cab. When he had followed and had
slammed the rackety door and the machine was in motion, he explained.

"The detective who searched the house last night found that loose board
and the hole underneath. He might have missed the diamond rings, but he
couldn't have missed the gun. Therefore, I knew it had been planted
since. Peter might have put it there, of course, but the odds were all
against that theory. The true story was the one told by the child. The
little yellow--faced gentleman was probably one of the three who
attacked Dawlish last night."

For the first time she learnt of that surprising outrage which had been
committed in Severall Street the night Peter had visited her.

He admitted a little irritably that the case had gone outside his own
experience.

"Here's a woman who has been masquerading as a man for the past fifteen
years, found dead, with an emerald in her hand, worth, at a rough guess,
a thousand pounds. She was shot at close quarters with the pistol I have
in my pocket--"

She gasped.

"You don't mean that?"

He nodded.

"I do mean it. I'd like to bet a month's pay that I'm right. You think a
murderer would be crazy to put the very weapon in the hands of the
police, knowing that the pistol has a number and its purchase can be
traced--unless it was bought in Belgium, which is extremely likely. You
haven't seen Druze since she was found, have you? Well, I'm not advising
you to--all the details about her can be passed on. There's a big black
--powder burn at the base of her right thumb--that is to say, on the
back of her hand. First thing I noticed when I examined the body was that
powder burn."

"How did that come there?" asked Leslie.

"She fired an automatic--five or six shots in rapid succession--and got
the backfire. One shot wouldn't have burnt her; it must have been at
least five. Look!" He showed his own hand, and a raw red mark, faintly
tinged with black. "I was firing an automatic this morning to see what
would happen, and I've got exactly the same mark as she has. I'm only
making a guess, Leslie, but my guess is that Miss or Mrs. Druze was
killed in self defence; that she started the gunplay and got the worst of
it."

Leslie caught her breath. "Then where is the other body?" she asked
quickly.

He stared at her open--mouthed.

"Other body?"

"She killed somebody first," said Leslie quickly. "Killed or desperately
wounded. Such a woman as Druze would not carry a pistol unless she knew
how to use it. If she knew how to use it and fired first, then somebody
was badly hurt."

The old man took off his hat and scratched his head.

"That's the natural conclusion to reach," he said; "and I didn't reach
it. And why I didn't reach it I don't know. Just let me think this out,
will ye?"

The silence was unbroken until they reached Scotland Yard.

"I'm still thinking it out," he said dismally as he stepped out of the
cab behind her and paid the taxi--man.

There was a bearded man in the hall, doctor written in every line of him.
He was talking to the officer at the desk and evidently Coldwell was
being pointed out to him, for he walked to the door to meet the inspector
as he entered.

"You're Mr. Coldwell? My name is Simmson. I am Dr. Simmson, of Marylebone
Road."

"Yes, doctor?" said Coldwell, politely attentive.

"A friend of mine has suggested that I should go to Scotland Yard and
report rather a curious circumstance," he said awkwardly. "I have never
done such a thing before, and I'm a little at sea as to how I should
begin. But I have a patient who is suffering from a gunshot wound, and I
am not quite satisfied as to how she received her injury, which is a
slight one"--Coldwell was all attention now--"through the calf; no
artery has been injured. And really, I feel I'm being terribly disloyal
to a patient--"

"What is her name?" asked Coldwell.

"Mrs. Greta Gurden," was the reply.

CHAPTER XI

GRETA GURDEN occupied an apartment on the first floor of a house in
Portman Crescent. Hers was one of those artistic little flats that
reflected every taste but her own. She slept in a red lacquer bed,
ornamented by golden devils, a bargain acquired many years before in the
Caledonian Market, and renovated by her own hands. Life is rather a
tragedy for the lonely woman; there was a shadowy husband very much in
the background, but he had either run away from her or was in a lunatic
asylum or something equally unsatisfactory. She was one of the thousands
who were endeavouring to keep a ten establishment on a seven and a half
income. By profession she was a journalist; she  edited a mildly
scurrilous little paper called Mayfair Gossip, which enjoyed a very
limited circulation, and in truth took up very little of her time. It was
certainly not in the paper's interest that she fostered the delusion that
her life was one of hectic gaiety. For she was to be seen occasionally at
the most exclusive night clubs; more frequently at less exclusive
establishments of the same order, her visitations being governed entirely
by her wealth and the taste of her escort. And numerically she had many
friends. Her expansiveness and lack of reticence, which had been tersely
and uncharitably condensed into the vulgar word "gush," however it might
sicken the more sophisticated, was very pleasant to those who discovered
from her for the first time how important or good--looking or well--
dressed they were, what taste, discrimination, or tact they displayed
upon every conceivable occasion, and how anxiously or impatiently Greta
was looking forward to their next meeting.

There were young men who took her out to dinner or to supper or to
dances; and there were middle--aged men, fathers of families, whose
hearts she fluttered with the promise of adventure never to be fulfilled,
who escorted her to the less expensive places of popular amusement. There
 were, too, women who hovered everlastingly on that no--man's--land
between Suburbia and Mayfair, who courted her society and influence,
under the mistaken impression that she had the entree to the most select
circles.

Mayfair Gossip was entirely the property of Anita Bellini, and it was an
unprofitable concern, a fact Anita never failed to emphasize when she
called on a Friday for her weekly stipend, her only regular source of
income. The Princess was good in other ways: she gave her an occasional
dinner, a discarded dress or two, marched her off to afternoon concerts,
and employed her as a sort of unpaid secretary. Occasionally, windfalls
came the way of Greta Gurden: fifty pounds here and there for some little
service which she had rendered. And she had always a use for the money--
new curtains to buy, a fascinating Chinese cabinet, or something that
looked like a fascinating Chinese cabinet, a carved ivory Madonna, a fair
copy of a master's art. She had a passion for picking up entirely
valueless articles, and her dining--room was cluttered up with imitation
oak, Birmingham--made suits of chain armour, Benares brass from the same
enterprising city, a gutted spinet that served only as a sideboard for
the display of imitation Bristol ware--there was even a pair of antlers
over the doorway, and Greta was not above suggesting to her awe--
stricken visitors that the twelve--pointer had been shot by her when she
was the guest of the Duke of Blank at his little hunting--box in
Inverness-shire.

She enjoyed the services of one who was charlady in the morning and maid
in the afternoon, and only to this unemotional lady was the real Greta
ever revealed.

Mrs. Gurden lay in bed with a bandaged leg, and between terror that
memory brought, fear of blood--poisoning and its horrible consequences
(amongst other duties she contributed the health notes to Mayfair
Gossip), anger at the inaction which her wound imposed, and irritation
with the world in general, she was a difficult patient.

Greta could not afford to neglect her daily duty to herself. Her face was
indistinguishable under a mud pack, designed to preserve the face from
the ravages of age, and her hands were enclosed in complexion gloves. Two
dark eyes glared oddly from the mask of grey, and she spoke with some
difficulty, due to the dried earth that plastered her cheeks. Just now
she had an additional reason for annoyance.

"Tell her I can't see her and I won't see her--tell her to come back at
twelve o'clock."

"She's from Scotland Yard, ma'am."

"I don't care, I won't see her."

The obedient charlady disappeared into the outer room. Greta heard the
murmur of voices, and after a while the woman came back.

"She says she'll wait till you're ready. She wants to know how you hurt
your leg."

Greta had no need to stifle her fury: a sudden panic descended upon her.

"Bring me some hot water--"

It took some time to remove the renovating mud, a little longer time to
substitute perfumed creams and powder. A brief glimpse through an open
door had revealed to Leslie Maughan the cause of the delay. She waited
patiently being a woman having some sympathy with woman's losing fight
against the ravages of time and care. When at length she was admitted, it
was the old Greta who smiled ecstatically.

"My dear! How wonderfully good of you to come! So sweet of you! I was so
hoping that I should have another opportunity of meeting you. The
Princess is rather difficult, isn't she? I did so want to have a little
chat with you the last time we met. I admire your style awfully. Won't
you sit down somewhere? Yes, I've had an awful accident. I was cleaning
my husband's pistol and it went off, but fortunately no bones were
broken."

"Where did this happen?"

It was on the tip of Greta's tongue to say "here," but she thought better
of it.

"At a country house where I was staying for the weekend. People are so
careless. Imagine leaving a pistol loaded! I nearly died of fright!"

"What country house was this?" asked Leslie.

Greta knit her brows.

"What was the name of the place?--I don't know the people very well.
Somewhere in Berkshire."

"Was your husband there, Mrs. Gurden?"

"Er--no--but he had been staying at the place; left his box behind. I
was rummaging through it and found his pistol, and it looked so awfully
rusty and dirty that I thought I would clean it."

"Who else was hurt besides you?" asked Leslie quietly.

Greta shot a swift, suspicious glance at the girl.

"Nobody, thank goodness," she said.

Leslie waited a second, then: "Was this before or after Druze was
killed?"

Under the rouge Greta's face went suddenly grey and pinched. She sat bolt
upright in bed and stared at the girl.

"Dead?" she said huskily. "Druze is dead? It's a lie."

"Druze is dead! She was found last night on Barnes Common shot!"

"'She'?" The woman's forehead was puckered into lines. "'She'? What are
you talking about? I was speaking of Druze."

"So was I," said Leslie. "Druze was a woman; you know that."

The open mouth, the wide eyes, every visible expression of amazement
revealed without question Greta Gurden's ignorance of the "butler's" sex.

"A woman--good God!" She sank back on the pillows, exhausted by her
emotion, her eyes fixed on the ceiling. But for those wide--open pools
of darkness, Leslie would have thought that the woman had fainted.
Presently she spoke.

"I've nothing to tell you: I shot myself by accident. I know nothing
about Druze--nothing. Why should I? The accident occurred when I was in
the country. I won't talk to you--I won't."

She almost screamed the words. Leslie realized that it would be cruel to
question her more closely; the woman was so distressed that she might
have hesitated even if she had not feared the effects of a further cross
--examination upon one who was in the surgeon's hands.

"I will come along and see you when you're a little better, Mrs. Gurden,"
she said.

 Greta made no answer.

As Leslie's cab turned out of the street, it passed a big Rolls swinging
round to enter the unpretentious thoroughfare, and the girl had a glimpse
of the Princess. How she wished now that on some pretext or other she had
stayed, that she might see the meeting between these two.

Anita Bellini mounted the stairs and, entering the apartment without
knocking, summarily dismissed the charwoman, and Mrs. Hobbs, not unused
to such cavalier treatment, departed meekly.

"Has Maughan been here?" she demanded, as she strode into Greta's room.

Her eyes narrowed as she caught sight of the haggard face.

"I see she has," she said grimly. "What did she come about?"

Greta raised herself on her elbow and pushed her pillow to support her;
she was trembling so that after a second she rolled back on the pillow
with a groan.

"She wanted to know how I was wounded," she said at last.

"What did you tell her?" asked the Princess impatiently. "For Heaven's
sake, pull yourself together, my good woman! How did she know you were
wounded, anyway? Did you send an announcement to the newspapers?"

"I don't know how she knew, but she did. I told her that it was an
accident, that I was cleaning my husband's pistol and it went off. Anita,
is it true?"

"Is what true?" asked the Princess roughly.

"Is it true that Druze is dead?"

"Yes," curtly.

"And that she was a woman?"

"I thought you guessed," said the Princess Anita. "Of course she was a
woman."

"My God, how awful!"

Anita Bellini's cold glance transfixed the invalid.

"What is the matter with you?" she demanded harshly, "Druze was--"

She stopped short: "How long are you going to be in bed?"

Greta shook her head. "I don't know; the doctor says another week, at
least."

"Did you tell her anything more? Really, Greta, you're not to be trusted
--though I never dreamt that nosy little devil would find out about your
being shot. I suppose the doctor reported it."

She stared down at the woman speculatively. "I suppose I'd better give
you some money," she said, with no great enthusiasm. "You look awful--
you know that? You're not wearing well, Greta. All the mud in the world
will not take those wrinkles from under your eyes. Why, you're old."

The red in Greta Gurden's face was natural; it came and went. Fury blazed
in the dark eyes, for now Anita Bellini had touched her upon the rawest
place of Greta's self--esteem, and put into words, at this incongruous
moment, all that this poor little poseuse feared. But it was Anita
Bellini's way, to go off at spiteful tangents, to sting and hurt those
from whom she expected unswerving loyalty, and it was characteristic of
her that at this moment, when her mind and spirit were tensed to meet the
very real dangers which threatened her, she could go out of her way to
humiliate her creature.

"You aren't able to attend to Gossip, of course. You're having the
letters sent here?" she asked, and, when the woman nodded silently: "The
last batch were valueless--there was a little bit about the Debouson
woman, but I knew all about that. She isn't worth a penny; in fact,
there's a bankruptcy petition out against her husband. You had better
write a spicy paragraph about her--that is all the information is
worth."

She was walking about the room as she spoke, stopping now and again to
look, with a contemptuous lift of her lips, at the tawdriness of the
imitations with which the room was stocked.

"I'm going to Capri in the spring," she said. "The new villa has been
bought--I suppose I'd better take you along with me."

She did not see the malignity that shot from the dark eyes.

"The paper will have to go. It is becoming more and more useless. If you
had had a spark of genius in you, Greta, you would have made that into a
property. You are sure you told that detective girl nothing?"

"Nothing," said Greta, regaining control of her voice.

"What is this?"

Anita had stopped before a big secretaire, pulled down the flap, and was
examining a number of letters, neatly tied in bundles.

"Are those the papers of mine that I asked you to put in order?"

"Yes."

The Princess detached one letter front a bundle, read it, and tossed it
back.

"Most of these things can be burnt," she said. "You found nothing of
importance?"

"No--nothing."

Something in Greta's tone made the other turn her head.

"What's the matter with you?"

And then the pent--up fury of Greta Gurden burst forth. She was sobbing
with rage, almost unintelligible in her anger.

"You treat me as if I was a servant--patronizing, I hate your beastly
way of talking to me! I'm not a dog. I've served you like a slave for
twelve years, and I won't be talked to as you talk to me--I won't! I'd
sooner starve in the gutter! I suppose I am getting old--I know I am--
but you needn't throw it in my face. You're always talking about my
looks. If you can't say anything nice, say nothing at all. I'm tired of
it."

"Don't be a fool!" scoffed the Princess. "And don't be hysterical. You've
got your future to consider, and you're not going to help by quarrelling
with me. You can't go back to the chorus."

"That's the sort of horrible thing you would say!" stormed Greta. "I
think you're loathsome! I won't do another stroke of work for you--"

She ended in a passion of weak tears, and Anita Bellini did not attempt
to mollify her, knowing from past experience that in an hour or two she
would have a penitent message from her slave asking forgiveness for this
outburst; for this was not the first time that Greta had revolted, only
to come to heel at the snap of Anita's whip.

With this assurance she took her ungracious leave, and had hardly left
the street before all thought of Greta was out of her mind. The Princess
Anita Bellini had other matters, more weighty, to think of.

There was very little for Leslie Maughan to tell to her chief, but he did
not seem greatly disappointed.

"We'll leave her alone for a while. If you once start badgering these
people, they build up an unbreakable alibi, and that's bad for trade."

He looked glumly at the trunks in the corner of his room.

"We'd better dispose of these," he said. "I'll get in a clerk to write
down the inventory as you call them out."

He rang for his secretary, the girl who had taken Leslie Maughan's place
on her promotion, and, stooping before the first of the cabin trunks, he
unlocked it and threw back the lid. For half an hour Leslie was lifting
out articles of wearing apparel, and one little mystery was solved when
she came upon a parcel of men's clothing. They were of the ready--to--
wear type, the parts roughly tacked. One of them, however, must have been
fitted, for it was half--sewn, and a small tailor's roll in a pocket of
the trunk explained how Druze had avoided the embarrassment of a tailor's
fitting. She was evidently a good sewing woman, for the half--finished
garment was beautifully tailored. There was nothing, however, in the
first trunk that threw any light upon the mystery of her death.

The second box held a surprise; it was filled with women's clothing.

"She was going to drop her disguise when she got to the United States,"
Leslie concluded, and with this view Mr. Coldwell agreed.

At last the second box was emptied, but again there was nothing that
could afford the slightest clue.

"There's a suitcase; we only discovered it this morning. It was in the
parcels office at Waterloo," said Coldwell.

He opened a cupboard and took out a crocodile--skin travelling grip and
put it on the table. It was locked, but suitcase locks respond to almost
any key, and at the second attempt it was opened. Here the girl found
such articles as she would expect an ocean traveller to carry: sponge--
bag, soap, a small jewel--case containing a gold watch and guard, a
diamond--encircled wrist--watch, and a small diamond bar brooch. A silk
dressing--gown, a pair of slippers, and a few odds and ends completed
the contents.

"Nothing here," said Leslie.

She ran her had round the silken lining of the case, and suddenly her
fingers stopped. She felt a thin oblong package under the silk. Reaching
out she took Coldwell's scissors from his desk and cut through the silk.
Inserting her fingers, she drew forth an envelope. It was closed and bore
no inscription. She tore off the end and drew out an oblong document. It
was a marriage certificate, performed apparently by the Rev. H. Hermitz,
of Elfield, Connecticut.

"Good Lord!" said the startled Coldwell, reading over her shoulder.

For a moment the words swam before the eyes of the girl, and then out of
the blur they appeared with staggering clearness. It was a document
certifying that Peter James Dawlish had been joined in holy matrimony
with Jane Winifred Hood--and Hood was Lady Raytham's maiden name!

She read it again, then put the document into the inspector's hands.

"Then they were married," she said evenly. "That was the thing I wasn't
sure about."

CHAPTER XII

PETER DAWLISH found it very difficult to concentrate his mind upon his
work, and although his task was purely mechanical he stopped from time to
time and allowed his thoughts to wander; and inevitably they wandered
towards that grey building on the Thames Embankment, and a room somewhere
in its dark interior where a girl was sitting. He could see her face very
clearly. He sighed and took up his pen again, and cursed himself for the
folly of dreams.

Far better for him, he thought, that, if he could not concentrate upon
his work, he let his mind go roving westwards to the bleak moor and those
ugly prison buildings that are set in a fold of it; to the carved sneer
on the stone arch under which he had walked, heavy--footed, towards the
golden--bearded warder who stood by the iron gates and counted the
prisoners in and out; to the long, smelly "ward," and the vault--like
cells with their gaily coloured blankets; to the stretch of bogland from
which the convict workers returned soaked to the skin to their lukewarm
dinners; to the barnlike laundry, the silent punishment cells, and the
cracked asphalt where the prisoners walked in a ring on Sunday mornings.
An ugly memory, but at least one of accomplishment, and substantially
past. Much better than letting your fancies go straying towards the
straight figure of a girl with violet eyes and red lips that curved
everlastingly in laughter.

He had reached the S's in the list, the Simpsons and Sims and Sinclairs.
It was ill--paid work, his employer being a bookmaker of dubious
probity; but, so far as he was concerned, he had been paid something in
advance, and he bad been promised another job to follow.

Very resolutely he had dismissed from his mind all thought of his mother.
Even in Dartmoor he had excluded her from his thoughts. If he remembered
at all, it was by the letter that had come to him on the day of his
conviction. His father had died that week; he had been sinking for
months, and had never been conscious of his son's shame. That had been
Peter's one comfort, until he received his mother's letter, telling him
that in a lucid hour of consciousness old Donald Dawlish had struck his
name from his will. So Peter went down from the dock with the bitterness
of death in his heart--beside that knowledge of his father's last act,
the seven years' sentence was as nothing.

At six o'clock, Elizabeth brought him his tea. She was unusually solemn
and silent, and when he attempted to start a little conversation with
her, she was so embarrassed that he did not attempt to pursue this
course.

He went out for an hour, strolling through the Lambeth Cut amidst a
medley of hawkers' stalls with their glaring acetylene lights. He had
some comfort from this contact with his fellows. As he returned, he was
opening the door of the house with a key which the woman had given him
that day, when he remembered that he had not seen Mrs. Inglethorne since
the visitation of the police.

He went upstairs, lit the oil--lamp, and, putting a paper bag full of
biscuits which he had bought on the table before him, he settled down to
his task. Eight o'clock was striking when he heard the squeaking of motor
--car brakes as it stopped before the door, and, going to the window, he
pulled aside the shade and looked down. It was too dark to distinguish
the visitor, but his heart leapt at the thought that it might be Leslie
Maughan, and he opened the door and waited. This time he heard Mrs.
Inglethorne's voice, and after a while she called up to him sourly.

"A lady to see you, Mr. Dawlish."

"Will you ask her to come up, please?"

He went back into the room and waited. The step on the stairs was slower
and heavier than Leslie's. And then there came through the open doorway
the last woman in the world he expected to see--his mother.

Her cold eyes went from him to the littered table.

"Fine work for the son of a gentleman!" she said in a hard voice.

"I've known worse," he replied coolly.

She closed the door behind her, as though she knew something of Mrs.
Inglethorne's irrepressible curiosity.

"I never expected I should see you again," she said, declining with a
gesture the chair he pushed forward to her; "but having given the matter
a great deal of thought, I have decided that I ought to do something for
you. I am buying and stocking a small farm for you in Western Canada, and
I am making you a small allowance to enable you to live, even if the farm
fails, as it probably will. You will leave for Quebec on Saturday week; I
have booked a second--class passage for you." And, when he was about to
speak: "I don't want you to thank me. I shall feel happier when you have
left the country. You have brought everlasting disgrace upon your
father's name, and I do not wish to be reminded constantly of the fact."
Here she stopped.

"You were altogether wrong when you thought I was about to thank you," he
said quietly. "In the first place, I have no intention of accepting your
charity, and in the second place, I have no aptitude for farming either
in Canada or in England."

"I have booked your passage," she said, with an air of finality.

"Then there will be a vacant bed going cheap on the Atlantic Ocean!"
replied Peter with a half--smile.

She looked round the room contemptuously, and again her eyes went to the
table.

"So you'd rather do this waster's work?"

"Waster's work, I agree," he nodded; "but infinitely more intellectual
than mending boots or washing convicts' laundry--my last occupation. I
expect nothing from you, mother. For some reason which I have never quite
understood, you have hated me ever since I was a child. I have no wish to
reproach you with being 'unnatural.' You have been under the thumb of
Anita Bellini ever since I can remember."

"How dare you!" Her voice was vibrant with anger. "'Under the thumb!'
What do you mean?"

"I only know that Anita Bellini has withered every good feeling in every
good woman who has been brought into contact with her. I only know that
she is evil--what hold she has over you, God knows. It has been
sufficiently strong to rob me of the one gift which is every man's right
--a mother's love. I dare say that sounds a piece of sickly
sentimentality, but it is a big thing--a very big thing."

"You have had what you deserved," she interrupted brusquely. "And I did
not come here to discuss my duty. If you prefer to go to Australia
instead of Canada--"

"I prefer Lambeth to either place at the moment," he said coldly.

She shrugged her shoulders ever so slightly.

"You have made your bed and you must lie on it. I have done all that is
humanly possible, more than could be expected, remembering how you have
humiliated--me and made my name--"

"My father's name," he corrected.

He got under her guard there, and to his wonder the comment to which
irritation drove him produced a remarkable effect. Her face flushed; the
hard mouth grew harder.

"Your father's name is my name," she said harshly.

Her eyes were blazing; he had never seen her so moved.

"I will give you twenty thousand pounds to leave the country," she said.
"That is my final offer."

He shook his head.

"I shall never want money from you," he said, and, walking to the door,
opened it, and she left the room without another glance at him.

Why had she come? He wasted half an hour of precious time puzzling over
this extraordinary action on her part. He had spoken no more than the
truth when he had said that from his childhood she had displayed an
antagonism towards him which, in maturity, had puzzled him more than any
other experience in his life. Antagonistic? She hated him! And, curiously
enough, his father had known of her feeling, and though he had never made
any direct reference to the enmity, had gone out of his way to make up
for the affection the mother denied him. It was his father with whom he
had corresponded throughout the days of the war; his father who had met
him when he came home from France on leave; his father who had come day
after day to the hospital to sit by the bedside of his wounded son; and
when Peter had been discharged from the army, it was Donald who had found
him the secretaryship, and had planned for him a great career in the
world of politics. It was a puzzle beyond unravelment. Peter took up his
pen again and tried, by a concentration of his exigent present, to forget
the bitter past.

It was twelve o'clock when he put down his pen and rubbed his cramped
hands. Throwing up the window to let out the smoke, he munched a biscuit
and meditated; and then his face brightened, and his thoughts went
unresistingly towards Leslie Maughan. Then through the open window he
heard unsteady steps coming along the paved sidewalk. It paused before
the door of the house; there was a rattle of the key. Mrs. Inglethorne
often went out, and as often returned with that same unsteady footstep.
Presently the door slammed, and her muttering came up to him from the
passage.

It was the first time he had seen or heard her that day. Usually, she did
not go out at nights, but stayed at home to receive the curious callers
who came at odd moments. They always knocked once with the knocker, and
once with the flat of their hands, and generally they carried a parcel or
package, big or small. There was a whispered colloquy in the passage, the
chink of money, or, more rarely, the rustle of Treasury notes, and they
went out again--without their parcels. This, Peter had seen and had not
seen. Prison had taught him the wisdom of blindness, and he had not
spoken to Mrs. Inglethorne of the furtive men and women who came slinking
down Severall Street at those hours when the police patrol was well out
of the way.

Leslie Maughan! He smiled a little at the thought of her, more at his own
madness. What barriers separated them--barriers more real, more
invincible, than the difference between Scotland Yard and Dartmoor
Prison! It was worse than madness to think about her--

The scream that brought him to his feet was shrill and charged with fear
and mortal agony. In two strides he was at the door and had pulled it
open.

Now he heard it plainly--the whistle and fall of a whip, the terrified,
frantic cries for mercy. He ran down the stairs in the dark and tapped at
Mrs. Inglethorne's door. From inside the room came a deep, heart--
breaking sound of sobbing.

"Who's that?" asked Mrs. Inglethorne defiantly. "Go away and mind your
own business!"

"Open the door, or I'll break it open!" cried Peter in a cold fury.

"I'll send for the police if you interfere with me!" yelled the woman.

His answer was to throw his weight against the flimsy door. The catch
broke with a snap, and he was in the foul bedroom. Elizabeth lay cowering
on a filthy camp bed, clad only in a coarse nightdress. Her head was
pillowed in the crook of her arm, and convulsive sobs shook the thin
shoulders. Her face aflame, Mrs. Inglethorne stood at the foot of a big
brass bedstead, one hand holding herself steady, the other grasping an
old dog--whip.

"I'll learn her to go talking about me!" she said thickly. "After all
I've done for her!"

There was another child there, a girl who was apparently the same age as
Elizabeth. She, however, enjoyed the luxury of Mrs. Inglethorne's ample
bed, and was so used to this exhibition of the woman's wrath that she was
asleep.--

"Where is your coat, Elizabeth?" asked Peter gently.

The child looked up, her eyes swollen, her face red, and cast one fearful
glance at her mother.

"Whatcher goin' to do?" asked Mrs. Inglethorne unsteadily.

"She will sleep in my room for the night," replied Peter. "To--morrow I
will make other arrangements for her, and if you give any trouble I shall
send for the police."

Mrs. Inglethorne was amused in her way.

"Send for the police!" she scoffed. "I like that! An old lag sending for
the police! And they'll come, won't they?"

"I think so," said Peter quietly. "They will come, if only to discover
why you never use the back room upstairs as a bedroom; why it is always
kept locked, except after your visitors' calls."

The smile died from the woman's face.

"As far as I'm concerned," Peter went on, "you can 'fence' till the cows
come home. But I'm not going to have you beating this child while I'm in
the house. And when I'm out of it, and out of it for good, I'll see that
she is well looked after."

The woman's face was mottled with fear.

"'Fence'!" she spluttered. "I don't know what you mean by that low word!
If you mean I receive stolen property, then you're a liar!"

"Let me call the police and settle the matter," said Peter.

The threat sobered her.

"I don't want any police in my house. The kid annoyed me, and it's a hard
thing if a mother can't cane her own children without being interfered
with. If she wants to sleep upstairs she can, but she'd be better off
down here, Mr. Dawlish. You haven't got any accommodation for a little
gel."

Which was true.

"All right, get into bed, Elizabeth." He covered her up with the
pitifully thin bedclothes, and, without apology, took Mrs. Inglethorne's
heavy coat that lay over the bed--rail and put it on top. "Sleep well,"
he smiled, and patted her cheek.

She was safe for the night. What happened in the morning depended
entirely on the view which Leslie Maughan took of a scheme that was
beginning to take definite shape.

Mrs. Inglethorne was a fence, a buyer of stolen property. He had lived
too long in association with the worst criminals of England to have any
doubt upon the point, and, squinting through the keyhole one day in his
curiosity, he had seen enough to remove the last remnants of doubt that
remained.

He went to bed, determined to interview Leslie at the earliest
opportunity, and it was not only on Elizabeth's account that the thought
pleased him.

When he arrived at the flat in Charing Cross Road next morning, Lucretia
did not recognize him, and scowled fearfully at the suggestion that he
should be admitted. She looked at his shabby attire and shook her head.

"It's no good your trying to see Miss Maughan. You'd better call on her
at Scotland Yard. She's very busy now."

"Who is it, Lucretia?"

Leslie was leaning over the rails of the landing; she could not see the
visitor, but she could hear the uncompromising note in Lucretia's voice.

"A young man wants to see you, miss. What's your name again? Dawlish."

"Oh, is that you, Peter Dawlish? Come up, will you?"

Peter ran up the stairs, followed by the muttered protests of the maid.

"You're in time for breakfast. How are the envelopes going?"

"They're melting!" he said.

He was conscious of a certain indefinable change in her tone. It was not
that she was more serious, but there seemed some listlessness about her,
as though she were tired. It was almost an effort to talk. She looked
weary, he saw, when they passed from the dark landing, and he commented
on this.

"I've been up half the night," she said, "wandering about in a very cold
garden, watching an elderly lady searching the ground with an electric
lamp. That sounds mysterious, doesn't it?"

She pointed to a chair and Peter sat down.

"It sounds almost romantic. Where was this?"

"At Wimbledon." She waved the matter out of discussion. "Well," she
asked, "what brings you to West Central London at this unholy hour?"

Her grave eyes were fixed on his; there was something of reproach in
them, something of hurt. He was puzzled; he felt that he had fallen short
in her estimation, that she was disappointed with him for some reason. So
strong was this impression that he grew uncomfortable under her gaze, and
as though she were aware of this, she dropped her eyes to the table and
began slowly to stir her coffee.

"I've come on a fool errand, with a wild and impossible suggestion."

And then he told her of what had happened overnight, of the merciless
flogging which Mrs. Inglethorne had administered.

"The woman is a fence," he said, "not in a very big way. I think she
specializes in furs and silk lengths."

She knew something of the genus fence, but he told her what he had learnt
in Dartmoor, of fences who visited the scene of prospective robberies and
priced the lot, practically paying for it, before it was stolen; of
skilful men and women who would stand outside a small jeweller's shop and
with one comprehensive glance assess the thieving value of the whole. He
told her of "dead" stores--stores which were locked up at night, where
nobody lived on the premises, and of "live" stores, where there was
either a watchman or a proprietor and his family sleeping on the floors
above.

"I am not reporting this officially--I mean the fence part of it, but
the child is ill--used. The other little kids get a whacking now and
again, but I should think she gets hers all the time."

"What do you wish me to do?" she asked, looking up at him.

"I don't know." He had a sense of awkwardness. "I had a wild idea that
possibly you might be able to find--to do something with her."

"You mean take charge of her?"

She was smiling at him.

"Yes, I suppose I did mean that," he said after a second's thought. "It
sounds fantastic and impossible now, but Elizabeth has got a grip on me.
Probably it is my own rather unhappy childhood which is responding to her
wretchedness."

She laughed.

"I'll make your mind easy at any rate," she said. "I had already
considered the possibility. In fact I discussed the matter with Lucretia
last night before I went out to dinner, and Lucretia was wildly
enthusiastic. I have a spare room here; she could go to the Catholic
school in Leicester Square. The only point is that we get Mrs.
Inglethorne's consent."

"She had better," he said grimly, and her lips twitched.

"Really, you're almost ferocious when you're taking up the causes of
other people," she said. "I wish you'd be a little energetic in your
own."

"Aren't I?"

She shook her head.

"Not very," she answered, in her quiet way. "Why don't you see your
mother--"

He grinned.

"She saved me the trouble and came last night."

"To Severall Street?" she asked in astonishment, and when he nodded: "Was
it--a pleasant--encounter?"

"A normally strained interview," he answered cheerfully. "She endeavoured
to instil in me a passion for agriculture, and Canadian agriculture at
that. I love Canada: you can't even take a week--end trip into Canada
without loving it. But the prospect of milking cows in Saskatchewan
didn't appeal."

"She wanted you to go abroad? Why?"

He shrugged his shoulders.

"I suppose she rather feels there isn't room enough for both of us in
London."

She thought the matter over for a minute.

"Didn't your father leave you any money?"

"He cut me off without the proverbial shilling."

The lightness of his tone, she suspected, was assumed. Coldwell had told
her how much Peter had loved his father,

"He altered his will at the eleventh hour--the day before I was
sentenced--and left me nothing. Poor old dear! I haven't the slightest
grudge; how could I? He was the best father that ever lived."

She had said she rarely smoked; she took a cigarette from her bag now and
lit it without looking at him. Indeed, for the next four minutes, as he
talked about his envelope addressing and his future, it seemed that she
was more interested in the blue vapour that floated from the end of her
cigarette than in his narrative.

"You're unfortunate."

She put down the cigarette, carefully took out a spoonful of coffee from
the cup and dropped it on the glowing end as it lay in the saucer.

"You're unfortunate, Peter Dawlish, both as a son--and as a husband!"

He did not speak.

"Terribly unfortunate," she went on moodily. "I think you must have been
born under a very unlucky star. I'm not asking you for confidences--
you'd hate me if I did." Presently:

"How did you know?" She fetched a long sigh.

"How did I know? Oh, I only knew yesterday for sure. I'd guessed for a
long time--ever since I went on my holidays into Cumberland and found a
little volume of Elizabeth Barrett Browning's with an inscription in
doggerel blank verse on the flyleaf. It was when I saw that the first
letter of every line reading from below upwards made the words 'Jane
Hood' that I first guessed. But I wasn't certain--about the marriage.
There was no record at Somerset House."

"We were married in America."

She nodded. "I know that now; but why?"

He stared past her out of the window. Here, she thought, was a man who
really regarded life as a terribly serious business. She was glad of
that.

"Jane was very unhappy at home; her people were rotten. Her father kept a
gambling house, and her mother--" He shrugged. "I fell in love with her.
If I hadn't been a fool I would have gone to my father and told him the
truth and then, in all probability, there would have been no cause for
unhappiness. But I was aware that he knew Jane's people and knew that
they were rotten. We went away to America together and were married in a
little town in Connecticut. I suppose you know that? Her father was
American born. From the first day the marriage was a ghastly mistake.
Jane thought I had unlimited money. I had to pawn her jewels to get home,
and there was a fearful scene when we landed at Liverpool. We were both a
little crazy, and agreed then and there to separate. I went back to Lord
Everreed's house to find detectives awaiting me at the railway station. I
haven't seen or spoken with Jane since."

"Has she divorced you?"

He shook his head. "I don't know. Things like that are possible in
America, but I've had no notification."

Leslie bit her lip. "If she hasn't--she's committed bigamy. You realize
that?"

"I realize that," he said shortly. "Which means that I--cannot free
myself without betraying her--I can't do that. I couldn't expose her to
imprisonment."

There was a tense and painful silence.

"Is that all?" she asked. "All you have to tell me?"

"You did not need telling, I think," he said, a little bitterly.

"No." She lit another cigarette; the flame of the match quivered
unsteadily. "You're very unfortunate, Peter Dawlish."

She blew out the match with deliberation and put it carefully in her
saucer by the side of the sodden cigarette.

"You knew nothing about Druze, of course, or you would have told me. When
did you say your father disinherited you?"

"The day before I went to prison."

She considered this.

"Tell me, Peter--you don't mind my calling you Peter? I feel rather
sisterly towards you just now--what was the relationship between your
father and mother? Cordial?"

He shook his head.

"No; they were never cordial, they were polite."

She bit her lip, looking at him absently.

"Did you ever see the Princess Bellini at your father's house?"

"Only once," he replied: "Father disliked her--"

"She was a sort of aunt, wasn't she?" Leslie interrupted.

"I've never exactly fathomed the relationship. I've always understood
that the Princess Bellini's brother married my mother's sister."

She rose from the table abruptly, for no apparent reason.

"Peter Dawlish," she said, and her voice shook a little in spite of her
assumption of banter, "if you were cursed with my intense curiosity you
might be a very much happier man."

"What do you mean?" he asked.

"I'll tell you--some day. And now let us get back to our muttons; and
our muttons for the moment are poor Elizabeth. The only difficulty in the
way is Mrs. Inglethorne. As a loving mother, she may very well object to
her child being taken from her. Obviously, I cannot use the same argument
as you have done. If she is a 'fence' and a law--breaker, it is my duty
to inform Mr. Coldwell and have her arrested. If she isn't a law--
breaker, we shall have to get after her from another angle. That sounds
terribly businesslike. I think I'll go back with you to Severall Street
and see Mrs. Inglethorne myself. She may be amenable to reason."

They went by bus to the southern end of Westminster Bridge and walked
along York Road together. Just before they reached Severall Street they
saw a small motor--lorry turn into the main road, and mechanically,
Leslie, who had a weakness for such mental registrations, turned her head
to note the number. It was a favourite trick of hers to carry fifty or
sixty motor--car numbers in her head and jot them down at the close of
the day--a practice into which Mr. Coldwell had initiated her. As she
looked round--"Lady!" A shrill voice called her.

"Who was that?" she asked, but Peter had not heard. They reached the
house, and he opened the door and called Mrs. Inglethorne, but it was one
of the children who answered.

"Mother's gone out. Her and Elizabeth." Sometimes the woman took the
child with her when she went shopping, Peter explained.

"I'm afraid I've brought you on a long job," he said. "She may be out for
hours."

Leaving her for a moment in the passage, he ran upstairs to his room,
intending to show her one of his small treasures, the photograph of his
dead father. He reached the head of the stairs, and then stopped, aghast.
The door of the mysterious locked room which adjoined his own was wide
open, and when he strode in he saw it was empty. Mrs. Inglethorne was a
quick worker, and, in the space of time between his departure and his
return, had removed all evidence of her guilt.

He went into his own room, pulled open the drawer of the table where he
kept his few treasures, and had taken out the small leather--covered
portfolio when he saw some writing on the pad; a few scribbled words in a
childish hand.

"She has taken me away.--ELIZABETH."

He tore off the corner of the blotting--paper and went back to the girl.

"I was afraid of this," she said in a low voice. "Do you remember the cry
'Lady!' as we passed the motor--van? Where is the nearest telephone
booth?"

At the corner of the street was a little general shop, which had a
telephone sign, and Leslie almost ran into the shop. There was some delay
before the instrument was disengaged, but in a few minutes she was
connected with Scotland Yard and was talking to Coldwell.

"The number of the car is XY 63369," she said. "There is no doubt
whatever that it contains stolen property, but it is the little girl I
want."

"I'll send out a call," was Coldwell's reply. "We may not pick it up
before to--night; on the other hand, we may be lucky."

"Where are you going now?" asked Peter when they were outside the shop.

"Back to the house," said Leslie. "I want to look at that room."

"They cleared everything."

She nodded. "Thieves in a hurry are very careless people, and perhaps
Mrs. Inglethorne isn't so clever as she imagines."

The room was apparently bare; the only article of furniture it contained
was a long table, and by the dust--marks on this Leslie was able to
judge the extent of the property that had been stored. On either side of
the rusty fireplace was a cupboard. Both of these she opened and found
empty, except for a little heap of rubbish at the bottom. The second,
however, was locked. With a table--knife borrowed from the kitchen she
forced back the catch and pulled open the door. There was nothing very
much there, but enough. Three bolts of silk, one still bearing the label
of the wholesaler from whom it had been stolen.

"Thieves in a hurry are very careless," she said, with the light of
battle in her eyes; "and it really doesn't matter whether Mrs.
Inglethorne is hanged for a sheep or a lamb, so long as she's well and
truly hanged!"

She sent Peter to the police station, and went down to interview the
children. A grubby lot of little people they were, very pale, very
starved looking, except one, who apparently was in charge in Mrs.
Inglethorne's absence. She was the little girl, Leslie learnt later, who
had slept in the woman's bed, and, unlike the others, she bore a striking
facial resemblance to her mother.

"You didn't find nothing, did you?" She was frankly hostile. "You've got
to be up very early to catch my old woman, missis!"

And then, turning to the silent semicircle of children who constituted
the remainder of Mrs. Inglethorne's family, she ordered them peremptorily
away. "Go and play in the back yard."

Poor little starvelings! Leslie's heart bled to see them. She sought, by
delicate inquiry, to discover where Elizabeth had been taken, but the
preternatural cunning of the child she questioned baffled her.

Peter came back in a very short time, accompanied by a uniformed
inspector and a plain clothes officer. They made an inspection of the
silk and carried it off with them to the station.

"This may affect you a little, Peter Dawlish," said Leslie when they were
alone. "The children will be removed to the workhouse this afternoon, and
Mrs. Inglethorne will be arrested immediately on her return, so that you
will have the house to yourself."

He laughed.

"I'm not depressed," he said.

He walked with her as far as Westminster Bridge, and at parting she asked
him a curious question.

"What would you do if you had half a million pounds?"

He looked at her in astonishment and laughed.

"That isn't my favourite dream," he said. "But I think the first thing I
should do would be to send to America to discover whether I have been, as
you would say, 'well and truly' divorced."

"Indeed?" Her tone was a trifle cold. "Is that necessary--when Jane
Raytham is within a penny bus ride?"

And with a nod she was gone.

Peter returned to the house and found it very difficult to resume his
work or concentrate his mind upon lists. He had hardly started before the
police officials came with an omnibus to take away the children, and they
departed with no visible reluctance, except in the case of the girl whom
Leslie had interviewed.

At four o'clock in the afternoon Mrs. Inglethorne came into the house in
triumph, and without going into the kitchen, mounted the stairs and
stood, arms akimbo, her red face made hideous by a self--satisfied
smirk, confronting her lodger.

"Well, did you bring in the police?" she demanded. "And what are you
going to do with Elizabeth?" And, when he did not answer, she shook her
fist at him. "Out you go, out of my house, you 'nose'! I'll learn you to
go prying around and threatening me! You leave this room at once, or I'll
send for a policeman." [Nose--police informer.]

"I think I'll stay," he said good humouredly.

"Oh, will you?"

She went to the door and roared for Emma. There was no answer.

"I can save you a lot of trouble, Mrs. Inglethorne," said Peter, putting
down his pen. "Your children have been taken away to the workhouse."

She staggered back against the wall, her big mouth open wide.

"W--why?" she stammered.

"It is usual to take children to the workhouse when their parents are
arrested and there are no other relatives to look after them," he said.

"Arrested?" she screamed.

He nodded to the window, and she staggered past him and, pulling up the
sash, looked out. Two men were standing on the opposite sidewalk, and one
nodded as to an old friend. She recognized the detective--sergeant who
had arrested her husband.

"They can't touch me!" she screamed. "They can't touch me! It's my word
against yours."

"Unfortunately you left a few bolts of silk behind in the cupboard,"
answered Peter.

Mrs. Inglethorne was in a state of collapse when the detectives came in
to arrest her.

The motor--lorry had been traced; the driver and a man who accompanied
the car had been driven to the nearest police station, where the plunder
was checked and exhibited in preparation for the charge which would
follow. They either could not or would not, however, give any information
concerning the child, and when Leslie went to Lambeth to interview Mrs.
Inglethorne in her cell, she was no more successful.

"Find her!" rapped the woman. "She's in good hands, that's what she is.
I'm not saying anything. If you want her, find her--that's my last word
to you!"

Leslie did not notify Peter that she was coming to Lambeth. Passing up
Severall Street on her way home, she saw the light in the upstairs window
and guessed that he was still working hard. A postman rapped at the door,
and she waited a while until it was opened, as she guessed, by Peter, and
almost turned back just to say a word to him. And if she overcame this
deplorable weakness, it was not lightly done.

"Leslie Maughan," she said to herself, mounting the steps of Hungerford
Bridge, "do you know what you are doing? Shall I tell you in the
vulgarest terms? You're chasing a married man! Leslie, that isn't done--
not in the best society."

She was uncommonly weary when she dragged herself into her own sitting--
room, deciding to forego the duty she had planned. This was a second call
upon Greta Gurden. That afternoon there had been a consultation at
Scotland Yard, but matters had not developed sufficiently to justify the
issue even of a search warrant.

After a light dinner she took out the letter she had received two nights
before, spread the foolscap on her desk and examined it carefully. It was
a queer story she read, even in the stilted terminology of an elderly
country parson, who employed such words as "primogeniture" and felt it
necessary to sprinkle his pages with quotations from Horace, mostly in
Latin. The writer was the vicar of a small Devonshire vicarage near
Budleigh Salterton, and he had, as he said in a preliminary flourish,
"reached the four score of the prophet." He wasted a page in explaining
how he came to reach these years, and employed "mens sana in corpore
sano" at least twice in the first folio.

He knew the Druze family very well; they lived in his village and had
done so for hundreds of years. He himself had baptized Alice Mary Druze
and Annie Emily Druze, and several other members of the Druze family
which he thought it was necessary to enumerate by their full names (it
had necessitated long researches in ancient registers). The Druze family
had for generations farmed some 40 acres of poor land on the edge of
Dartmoor. They were "a wild family with a bad history," and here the
reverend gentleman, who was also something of a scientist, branched away
from the main track to a discourse upon heredity which would have done
credit to a Lombroso.

Old father Druze was a lunatic and had died mad; his grandfather had
committed suicide (there was a record in the parish registry and a note
that he had been buried at the cross--roads, in the proper manner for
such as take their lives). Druze's grandmother had also a history of
sorts. The clergyman remembered her as a "respectable woman," though
inclined to gaiety, and he even felt it necessary to retail a hundred--
year--old piece of scandal, something that had happened at Widdicombe
Fair.

Alice was illiterate; he had extracted a note of this fact from the
register of the church school. Annie, on the other hand, was a diligent
scholar and "showed surprising proficiency in the study of the so--
called dead languages," so that she "speedily secured a respectable
situation with a haberdasher in Exeter, a Mr. Watson. She was a
God-fearing young woman, a communicant, and eventually married a well--
to--do farmer in the neighbourhood of Torquay." The farmer's name Leslie
jotted down on her pad.

The third of the daughters, Martha, was of an "exemplary character,
though of no great educational attainments." About her the clergyman was
very explicit, for it was he who had obtained her a post, first as still
room maid at a Plymouth hospital, and afterwards, on his recommendation,
as a probationary nurse. It was believed that she went to South Africa
and "married a prosperous carpenter."

When Leslie had traced Druze to that little Devonshire village, and
wrote, with no great hope, to the vicar, she hardly expected so
voluminous and conscientious a record of the family history; for he even
sent photographs of tombstones which marked the departed Druzes of the
eighteenth century!

If she had only read this before, she thought, she could not have been
shocked by the discovery that "Arthur Druze" was a woman; for apparently
there was no male member in that family, except the semi--lunatic father
and a remote uncle who for some reason wasn't called Druze at all. She
read through carefully, took down an atlas and a gazetteer from her
bookshelf, and finally locked letter and data in the drawer. Her work was
by no means finished for the night, though she was dropping with
weariness. She had a number of letters to write. Before she had left the
office, Mr. Coldwell had given her the names and addresses of a dozen
people who would be helpful to her in the search she was making.

At eleven o'clock they phoned from Scotland Yard to tell her that there
was no news of Elizabeth. Mrs. Inglethorne, confronted as she was with a
long term of imprisonment, possibly of penal servitude, refused any
information about the child, except that she had gone to "her aunt's."

Lucretia brought her coffee. The girl had an irritating trick of
expressing her disapproval by audible tut-tuts, and twice did she tut-
tut into the room and out again At last she extinguished all the lights
in the room save the table lamp.

"You've got to go to bed, miss," she said firmly. "I'll have you on my
hands if I'm not careful. And what about this young girl?"

Leslie rose stiffly from her desk, gathered the letters together and
stamped them.

"She is not coming to--night," she said. "Post these, Lucretia. I'll
wait for you to return and then you can go to bed."

She heard the door open and guessed, by the cold draught that swept up
the stairs, that Lucretia had followed her usual practice of leaving the
door ajar whilst she went to the nearest pillar--box, which was some
distance from the flat.

It was part of the night's routine that Lucretia should take the letters;
almost a ritual that Leslie should stand in the open doorway of her
sitting--room until she heard the girl return.

The maid could not have been gone half a minute before the street door
below closed softly. She heard the gentle thud of it.

"Is that you, Lucretia?" she called down into the dark hall.

There was no reply.

Her flesh crept, for no reason that she could understand; a cold shiver
went down her spine. Leslie Maughan was not a nervous girl. Her duty and
association with Coldwell had taken her into many uncomfortable
situations, and unless it was because she was very tired, there was no
particular reason for nervousness. But her sensation was something more
than the unease which comes to the strongest nerves when they are left
alone in a house. It was a premonition, a warning, indeed a certain
knowledge, that there was somebody in the hall below who should not be
there.

She went back into the room, closed the door quietly and slipped in a
bolt she had had fitted. She switched on the lights that Lucretia had
extinguished, and, going to the window, pulled the curtains apart and
lifted the sash. Charing Cross Road was fairly well crowded with people.
It was a clear night and a few paces away she saw two policemen
patrolling, and presently she discerned Lucretia making her way hurriedly
across the road. The maid came beneath the window simultaneously with a
policeman; Leslie called her and she looked up.

"Tell the policemen I want them to come in," she said. "Here is the key--
catch!"

One of the officers caught the key deftly.

"Anything wrong, miss?" he asked, knowing her.

"I think somebody has come into the house whilst my maid went out to post
a letter. You left the door open, did you, Lucretia?"

"Yes, miss, I did," confessed the agitated Lucretia. "I forgot to take
the key."

"Well, hurry--" she began.

At that moment all the lights in the room went out.

She sat on the sill and swung out her legs, her eyes fixed on the door,
which was visible in the light of a street standard. A faint creaking
sound came to her ears and she saw the door move slightly--the bolt was
straining under some enormous pressure. Then a voice from the pavement
below hailed her.

"The street door won't open, miss," said the policeman's voice.

She looked back at the door. The slot of the bolt was giving under the
strain.

"Can you catch me?" she asked.

The two men ran to the pavement beneath her.

"Jump!"

Again she looked back. At that moment, with a crash, the door opened. She
had a dim vision of two stunted figures, then, bracing her hands on the
sill, she jumped.

It was not a dignified landing, but for the moment Leslie Maughan was
less interested in her dignity than her safety, A crowd had already
gathered, attracted by the unusual happening, and there appeared from
nowhere an inspector of police, a resourceful man who, having heard the
story, immediately stopped an omnibus and ordered the driver to bring his
big machine on to the sidewalk immediately beneath the window. Standing
on the rail of the bus, one of the policemen reached the window--sill
and climbed inside, and was followed by the inspector. There was no sound
of the struggle which the morbid crowd expected. A few minutes later the
door below was unbolted and Leslie and the trembling Lucretia went into
the passage.

They found the hall window on the first landing wide open. A police
whistle buzzed in the street; in a very short time the block would be
surrounded.

"No, they haven't cut the wire, as far as I can see," said the inspector,
examining the wall of the passage with his lamp. "Where do you keep your
fuse--box?"

"I think it is near the door," said the girl.

It proved to be within easy reach. The flat had been darkened by the
simple expedient of removing the fuses. They found them intact on the
floor and replaced them, and an inspection was possible. Except for the
broken door, no damage had been done to the flat. Whoever the intruders
were, their time had been too short to conduct a search of the room. The
drawers of the desk were untouched.

"They hadn't much time, had they?" said the puzzled inspector. "I can't
understand this job--if they were ordinary burglars they would have
cleared just as soon as they knew you had spotted them."

Half an hour later, and before the police had departed, Mr. Coldwell came
on the scene. By this time every roof and yard in the vicinity had been
searched; night watchmen had been aroused from their surreptitious sleep,
and a small army of police detectives had examined every window that
might afford a possible means of escape. But no sign of the intruders was
discovered.

"I don't like this," said Leslie.

Mr. Coldwell shook his head. "You'll have to find other lodgings for a
while. Tomorrow you had better transfer your belongings and Lucretia to
my house at Hampstead."

For five minutes he discussed in a low voice the theories he had formed,
the plans he had made.

"I don't think it is necessary to leave a policeman in the house," he
said at last, and a little yellow man, curled up on the top of the high
bureau in Leslie's room, screened from observation by the old--fashioned
friezes of the wardrobe,  was relieved.

He heard the policeman go clattering down the stairs, and after a while:

"Just phone me if you're at all nervous, Leslie--goodnight."

Coldwell's voice sounded from the hall; there was the slam of a door--
the little yellow man, who spoke and understood English very well, did
not smile to himself, because he was of a race that seldom smile.

Leslie came into her bedroom with a yawn, gathered her sleeping things
and disappeared into the bathroom. The listener heard the sound of
running water, heard her bid a reassuring good--night to the tremulous
servant, and then the door of the bedroom opened and closed, the light
was extinguished, there was the creak of a bed, and after a while the
sound of deep, regular breathing.

For an hour the yellow man lay, not moving a muscle, and then, reaching
up, he caught hold of the wooden moulding, testing its strength, and was
satisfied. He felt. the long, queer--shaped knife that was in his belt,
running his thumb along the edge, before he gripped it between his teeth
and, with the agility of a cat, and supported only by his sinewy fingers,
drew himself clear of the wardrobe, and dropped noiselessly on to the
carpet.

The wardrobe hardly creaked as he moved; save for the soft pad of his
bare feet and the breathing of the sleeper, there was no sound. Holding
the knife lightly in his right hand, he groped along the pillow with his
left, ready to pounce upon and strangle the scream before it rose.

There was no head on the first pillow, none on the right---the bed was
empty. He straightened himself up quickly, half--turned as he heard a
sound from behind him, but it was too late. An arm of steel flung round
his throat, the knife hand was gripped at the wrist and twisted so
sharply that the weapon fell to the floor.

"I want you!" It was Coldwell's voice. He lifted the little figure
without difficulty, and reached out his hand to turn on the light. At
that moment the prisoner recovered himself, and with amazing strength
twisted round to face the detective. Coldwell realized that he had in his
hands something with the ferocity and suppleness of a wild cat, something
that growled and clawed and kicked so that not a limb of him was still.
The unexpectedness of that furious onslaught threw him for a second off
his balance. He drove out with his right, but as though he could see in
the dark, the assassin dodged, and in another second he was free and had
flown through the open door. Coldwell followed, but too late. With one
leap the little man crashed through sash and pane and dropped unharmed to
the street below. A policeman made a dive at him, but he ducked, flew
across the road, and disappeared down a court by the side of a theatre
towards St. Martin's Lane.

"Didn't even see him," said Coldwell bitterly, when he called the girl in
from Lucretia's room. The detective's face was scratched, his collar
torn. "It was rather like tackling a young tiger."

Leslie had turned on the lights and they saw the extent of the damage. He
must have dived for the lower sash head first, for the upper window was
untouched. There was not a scrap of glass remaining, and the cross
supports of wood were smashed to splinters.

"I've heard of such things being done," said Coldwell, "and I've seen
them done--on the stage. But never in real life and through three--
quarter inch moulding."

Leslie was still dressed. She had been waiting in the maid's room, a
pistol on her lap, till the sound of the struggle brought her out, just
too late. Mr. Coldwell disappeared into the bedroom and returned with the
ugly and curious--shaped knife which the man had dropped.

"Eastern," he said, as he felt the edge gingerly. "Malayan, I guess."

He also had been sitting on a chair immediately to the right of the
wardrobe, but until he made an examination later he had not known from
what place his assailant had come.

"I thought he'd come back through the window," he mused. "That's one of
the curiosities of human nature, Leslie; jot it down in your notebook. We
always look under things for hidden criminals--we never look over; and
yet the cleverest fellow that ever got away from the police was a
steeplejack who hid for a fortnight at the top of a smoke stack. Ever
wear garters, Leslie?"

She laughed softly.

"That sounds almost indelicate to me," she said. "No, I won't go very
deeply into the question, but I don't wear garters."

He was quite serious.

"Wish you would--just to oblige me. One garter, anyhow. I meant to give
it to you to--day."

He drew something out of his pocket, and she gasped.

"You really wish me to wear this?"

He nodded.

"A little heavy, but I wish you would," he said.

He insisted upon staying the night, and to make doubly sure, had a
policeman put on duty in the hall below. Early as the hour was when she
went out to her bath, she found him up and dressed, studying the morning
newspaper.

"Wonderful how you miss things when you're away from the Yard for a few
hours," he drawled.

She turned back from the open door of the bathroom; when Mr. Coldwell
drawled there was something sensational to come.

"What have we missed?" she asked. It was not entirely curiosity which
made her ask.

He looked at the newspaper again and took off his glasses.

"Peter Dawlish was arrested last night."

She gazed at him in horror and amazement.

"Arrested? On what charge?"

"Threatening to murder Princess Anna Bellini," was the staggering reply.

CHAPTER XIII

MRS. GRETA GURDEN seldom permitted herself the luxury of brooding upon
her injuries. She was no philosopher, and it was sheer necessity which
made her disregard the irritations, petty and great, of life, and
concentrate her mind upon pleasant things. But she found herself helpless
with a leg that throbbed and throbbed, and the memory of Anita Bellini's
insolence rankled as sorely. She was propped up in bed with a heap of
papers on her lap, and though there was no immediate need for the work
she had taken in hand, and, in truth, sought it only as a relief from
boredom, she permitted herself the illusion that she was the victim of a
taskmistress who was not satisfied with her normal and heavy exactions,
but must needs add to her offence this tormentation of a sick woman.

Old letters, old bills, a receipt or two, a few ancient telegrams about
nothing in particular, dozens of letters dealing earnestly with forgotten
accounts, an interminable correspondence between Anita and a house agent
--she turned the pages one by one, sorting the sheep from the goats.

Presently she came to an old letter typewritten on plain paper--Anita,
like her dependent, had used a small portable typewriter for years. The
letter was unfinished; halfway through the Princess had changed her mind,
or probably substituted this for another, and had tossed the rejected
scrap aside, to be gathered to the heap which had accumulated and which
was now being sorted.

She read the letter through as far as it went; she was sourly amused.
Anita must have been in a careless mood when she threw this away. The old
instinct of service told her that it ought to be destroyed at once; she
gripped the paper to tear it, thought better of her impulse, and began to
consider certain possibilities. To say that she felt bitterly against
Anita Bellini at that moment would be to grade her emotion charitably.
She was "getting old," was she? She had lost her looks and was unlikely
to get a job in the chorus. Anita had taken it for granted that she would
be for ever satisfied with the humiliating position of companion. Capri
was to be a kind of bonus.

The Princess was a woman of temperament, sometimes feverishly elated,
sometimes savagely depressed. Yet in all her permutations of mood, she
had been consistently contemptuous of her hireling. Greta grew red and
hot and cold at the memory of the insults which this woman had heaped
upon her, and the hand that held the letter shook. And then an idea began
to take shape in her mind; it was half formed when she called Mrs. Hobbs.

"Get my address book."

She was a systematic woman, and entered without fail the location even of
chance acquaintances who might be of no value to her. She ran her thumb
down the index till it stopped at D; the last entry on the crowded page
was "Peter Dawlish."

"Give me an envelope, please, and my fountain pen; and take this letter
to the post--no, bring my little typewriter."

The obedient Mrs. Hobbs carried the tiny machine, which was a replica of
Anita's, and laid it on the invalid's lap. Greta inserted the envelope,
typed the address, and while the instrument was being removed, inserted
the torn sheet of paper and licked down the flap of the envelope.

"Go to the General Post Office--you'd better take a bus each way--and
post this. If anybody asks you whether you've posted a letter for me,
you're to say no."

It was not the first time Mrs. Hobbs had received similar instructions.

The houses in Severall Street are not equipped with letter--boxes, and
postmen have learnt by experience that inserting letters under doors
which are backed by coarse fibre mats is a difficult and sometimes an
impossible proposition.

Peter heard the heavy rat--tat of the postman, and, going downstairs,
opened the door.

"Dawlish?" asked the postman.

"That is my name," said Peter, in surprise. He took the letter and closed
the door. Had he followed the practice of Severall Street and its people,
which is never to go to the door without making a scrutiny up and down
the street, he could not have failed to see Leslie on her way home.

His first thought was that it was a letter from her, but when he brought
it to the light of his room, he saw that it was typewritten and had been
posted in the City. He opened the envelope and took out a sheet of
typewriting paper. It was discoloured, and one corner had been torn off.
He looked at the date and had a mild shock.

"July 7th, 1916."

1916! And yet (as he saw) it had been posted that afternoon. There were
just three or four lines, the last of which stopped abruptly in the
middle of a sentence. Only dimly did he comprehend the significance of
the fragment.

"DEAR JANE,

"Druze has found a very good home for your son in a middle--class
family. There are no other children. He will be well cared for. And--"

Scribbled below in pencil, and almost indecipherable, were the words:
"Martha's servant."

He must have read the letter a dozen times before he understood. ,

"Jane's son--Jane's little son." He came to his feet slowly, his limbs
trembling, the paper swimming before his eyes.

Jane's son--his son! The consciousness of fatherhood momentarily
overwhelmed him. Jane had had a child. He had never dreamt--somewhere in
the world was a little boy, fatherless--his little boy! He grew hot at
the thought. And then, in a frenzy of impatience, he took up his coat,
struggled into it, and, not stopping to extinguish the lamp, ran down the
stairs and out of the house.

The bus that carried him to Piccadilly seemed to crawl. He got down at a
traffic block at Bond Street, half walked, half ran, into Berkeley
Street, and came at last to the dark portals of Lady Raytham's house. It
was past ten. She might be out. But he would wait for her--all night if
necessary. He hated her at that moment, and there was jealousy behind the
hate. He hated her for not telling him, for excluding him from the
knowledge and inspiration of their gift. Perhaps he was being brought up
as Raytham's child, to call him "father." Peter grew insanely furious at
the thought.

To the new butler who opened the door all callers were as yet strange;
Peter seemed no stranger than others, and he was met civilly.

"What name shall I tell her ladyship?" he asked.

"Mr. Peter," said Peter, after thought.

He was shown into the small drawing--room, and paced up and down like a
caged animal until he heard the door open and, turning, met face to face,
for the first time in eight years, the woman of The Adventure.

She was pale but very calm and sure of herself as she closed the door
behind her. For a while they stood, looking at one another. She had
matured, grown more beautiful; the old graceful carriage was unchanged;
the enticing lines of her had come to a greater perfection. He had grown
older, she thought; was much more of a man than  when she had known him
before. His face had formed; resolution and strength and a balance that
had been missing; in his eyes she read something that chilled her.

"You wish to see me--Peter?" she asked.

He nodded.

He was trembling; feared to speak lest his voice betrayed him.

"What is it you wish to see me about?"

"I want my child." His voice was low; the words seemed to choke him, so
that he ended on a cough.

"You want--your child?"

She shook her head so slightly that if he had not been  watching her
closely the gesture would have escaped him.

"Will you tell me what you mean?"

She was fencing. She wanted time to take all this in. He had shocked her
very badly.

"Why pretend, Jane? You know what I want, and what I mean. Where is our
child?"

She passed her hand wearily across her eyes.

"I don't know," she said. She made no attempt to evade the question,
accepted his knowledge, startling as it was. "I don't know. Is it worth
while knowing? He is very happy. I did what was best, Peter. I told
nobody. When I went to Reno--"

"You have divorced me?"

She did not answer. A lie trembled on her lips and was instantly rejected
impatiently.

"No, I have not divorced you," she said. "They would not grant me a
divorce because you had not been served with the papers or something of
the sort. I don't understand the law very well. I was a fool, of course."

Another intense silence.

"That puts me in your hand, doesn't it?" she went on. "Though I don't
imagine you will--"

He stopped her with an impatient gesture.

"I'm not thinking of you and I'm not thinking of me," he said. "I am
thinking of the boy. Jane, you horrify me! You don't know where your own
child--! Good God! I thought he might not be here, but that you should
tell me so quietly and calmly that you've lost track of him--as if he
were a--"

She shook her head.

"I don't know. Honestly, Peter, I don't know. I was terrified when I knew
he was coming. I just dimly remember seeing the little thing, and then
they took him away--we had arranged it beforehand."

"Who are 'we'?"

"Anita was very good to me, and so was Druze. It was only then I
discovered that Druze was a woman. I had to pay for it afterwards--
Druze's knowledge, I mean. I don't really remember the child--only just
that vague, queer impression like the elusive memory of a dream Peter, be
a little pitiful. I was in a terrible condition; my father was writing
asking me to make up my mind about Raytham. You knew he wanted to marry
me? Raytham had lent father a lot of money, and I was afraid, terribly
afraid, of what would happen if father came to learn--about the marriage
and everything. He knew I'd been to America, of course; I was supposed to
have taken an engagement to sing--you remember that, don't you, Peter?
But he didn't know I'd returned, or what had become of me. I had to send
all my letters to a friend in New York to be posted back to him."

She stopped.

"Where is the child? That is all I want to know."

She shook her head.

"Druze knew. She told me something just before she went out--she had
been drinking, Peter. She told me a ghastly thing." Her voice broke.
"Terrible, terrible!" She covered her eyes again, and he waited, his
heart a heavy stone.

"This ghastly thing--what was it?" he said at last.

"She said"--this needed courage to think; it was a torture to say--
"that even she didn't know where the child was; that she had handed the
boy to the first person who, for a consideration, offered to adopt him;
and all the time I had been comforting myself with the thought that--
that he at least was being brought up happily, however much a blackguard
his foster--father was."

"What do you mean?" he demanded.

"I've been paying money, big sums of money," she said at last, "as I
supposed to the man who had adopted him, and who, learning of my marriage
to Raytham, had for years blackmailed me. Too late I discovered that this
blackmailer was mythical, that it was Druze who was robbing me all the
time."

Peter drew a deep breath.

"How awful! How perfectly awful!" he whispered. "Just disappeared into
the mass--and you allowed him to go. I can't understand that. I thought
that women--"

She stopped him with a weary gesture.

"I don't understand women either. I wish I'd kept him and had faced all
the trouble that would have followed. You know about it for the first
time, Peter, and you have the support of your righteousness. It has been
a bad dream for me--an eight--year--long discomfort. And now it is a
nightmare," She pressed her throbbing temples. "I can't sleep for
thinking of him. That little mite of a boy--my boy and yours--perhaps
being starved, or dead perhaps, or suffering."

She screwed her eyes tight as though to shut out a horrible vision.

"Does Bellini know?" He was like ice now.

"Anita?" She looked at him in surprise. "No; why should she? You hate
Anita, of course. I'm not really--fond of her. She's difficult. But she
was very helpful to me, Peter."

He looked at her steadily.

"Who was Martha?"

He saw from her frown that she did not understand him.

"Do you know a woman called Martha?"

She shook her head.

"I don't remember anybody of that name. Why?"

"Martha's servant had the child. Bellini knows. And what Bellini knows, I
will know."

He made as though to leave the room, but she barred the way.

"Peter, will you forgive me? I've been a fool--a wicked fool, Peter. I'd
gladly change places with my own kitchen--maid to undo all the past. You
loathe me, don't you?"

"No, I don't loathe you," he said quietly. "I'm awfully sorry for you in
a way; but I'm disappointed in you too, Jane. You've been a weakling."

"Have I? I suppose I have." She saw him, a blurred figure, through a mist
of tears. "I suppose I have. And one pays dearer for weakness than for
wickedness, I think. Where are you going?"

"I'm going to find the child."

She threw out her arms in a gesture of despair.

"Find the child! If only you could! Peter, if you could bring him to me--
"

"You!" He laughed harshly. "The child belongs to me! To me--do you hear?
You had him and lost him. If I find him I will keep him."

He brushed past her, threw open the door, and stalked through the hall
into the night.

He had still the greater part of the twenty pounds left that Leslie had
given to him, and at this moment of crisis he must spend; he could not
afford to economize. A taxi--driver accepted with some reluctance his
order to drive to Wimbledon Common. It was a long journey, and he had
time to put in order the confusion of his mind.

Anita Bellini knew; he was confident of that. And if she knew, he should
know. Her residence was a mansion standing in two acres of ground on the
fashionable side of Wimbledon Common; a big, somewhat old--fashioned
house, garnished with the square towers and big Gothic turrets which were
the joy of the Victorian architects. It had something of a medieval
appearance, and seemed to be a veritable castle of despair when he
ordered the cab to wait. The cautious man demanded something on account,
and wisely, as it proved.

He strode up the gravelled drive. No light showed in any window; even the
transom above the massive front door was lifeless. He pulled the bell and
the faint clang of it came back to him. After a long time he heard the
rattle of chains, the shooting back of a bolt, and a faint light was
reflected behind the fanlight. The door was opened a few inches by a very
old man with dirty white hair and wearing the slovenly uniform of a
footman. Peter saw that the longer chain was still fastened to the door,
and that the aperture was not big enough to squeeze through.

"You're Simms, aren't you?" He remembered the ancient. "I want to see the
Princess."

The old man made the grimace that Peter remembered.

"You can't see the Princess; she's not at home," he said, in a loud,
cracked voice.

"Tell her Peter Dawlish wishes to see her, and if she will not let me in
she can come to the door," he said.

He was not prepared to have the door slammed in his face, yet that was
what happened. He waited for five minutes, and then he heard the lock
turn. This time he saw Anita. She wore a long green dress, smothered as
usual with beading which glittered in the dim hall light.

"What do you want?" she asked.

"I want to speak to you privately."

"This is as private an interview as you'll get," she said coolly.

The reflection of the hall light on her monocle produced an eerie
illusion. It was as though she was glaring at him with one malignant,
golden eye.

"What do you want?" she repeated. "If it's money, you can't have it. This
is not a charitable institution or a home for convicts."

In the pause that followed he made a mental calculation as to the
strength of the chain that held him from admission. He might at a pinch
break it and force an entrance--he was prepared to go to any mad lengths
to get the information he sought. "Where is my child?" he asked.

Not a muscle of the big face moved. "I didn't know you'd been raising a
family. Surely I'm the last person in the world to be acquainted with
your vicarious progeny."

"Where is Jane's child? Perhaps you'll understand that."

She had been taken aback by the first question, he was sure. The length
of time that elapsed before she answered betrayed her.

"So you know that, do you? The child? I'm afraid I can't tell you. I have
something better to do than to keep track of the indiscretions of my
friends, and certainly I do not concern myself with the bastards of
convicted forgers."

"You lie," said Peter quietly. "You know I was married to Jane."

Anita Bellini chuckled. "The marriage was illegal--didn't you know that?
You didn't comply with certain formalities--"

"I have seen Jane to--night. She has no doubt about its legality. Where
is my son?"

"Where you will never find him." All the pent--up malignity of the woman
suddenly took expression. Her face, never attractive, was contorted by
rage to an appearance that was almost ludicrous. "Where you will never
find him! In the slime and the mud where his father belongs--dead, I
hope!"

A sudden insane fury possessed him. He was scarcely human, saw the
hateful face of this woman through a redness, and flung himself against
the door. It jerked back with a crash and suddenly flew open. The chain
was broken.

To him she was no longer a woman, but some obscene devil that had taken
human shape. He wanted to kill her, to grip that big throat and choke the
life out of her. As the chain broke, she stepped back, and he found
himself looking into the black muzzle of a pistol.

"Don't move," she said gratingly. "Don't move, Peter Dawlish. I am
justified in shooting you in defence of my life."

She did not see his hand move. The pistol was struck down from her grip
and fell with a clatter on the floor, and, in his mad anger, with murder
in his heart, his hand was outflung. Then somebody called him.

"Peter!" At the sound of the voice his arm dropped, paralysed  with
amazement. A woman was in the hall; she had come out of a room at the
foot of the broad stairway; a woman in black silk, white--haired, hard--
faced--it was his mother!

"Come in here."

She pointed to the open door of the room, and he walked past her without
another glance at Anita Bellini--shrinking back against the wall,
frightened for the first time in her life.

It was a small study furnished in the Oriental fashion; there was a great
silken divan, and a shaded lantern hung from the ceiling. Something more
modern he saw; a telephone on the tiny octagonal table. The receiver was
off; he had interrupted her in the act of telephoning.

"What is the meaning of this?"

Mrs. Dawlish had assumed the old pontifical air that he knew so well and
detested so much.

He was still shaking, but he was calmer.

"I presume you don't need to be told--you must have heard. I came to
your friend--"

"To the Princess Bellini," interrupted the woman.

"Yes?"

"--to discover where was my child."

"Really?" The grey eyebrows rose. "I was not aware that I was a
grandmother."

The old devil rose again in him.

"Then your hearing is affected," he said harshly. "You know--of course
you know! The whole damned gang of you know! You know about Jane, you
know about my marriage, you know about the child. Perhaps you know where
he is."

And then, to add to the fire of his fury, he saw her smile.

"You have always been a fool, Peter. I suppose you will be a fool to the
end of your days," she said. "You had better go back to your envelope
addressing and forget there are such things in the world as children. I
have been trying very hard to do the same for the past seven years."

She was a surprising woman, for without warning, she came back to the
offer she had made to him.

"You would be well advised to go to Canada or Australia, or any other
place that takes your fancy," she said, and went on in a conversational
tone to discuss the advantages which might accrue.

He was puzzled. Then it occurred to him that she was talking to gain time
--for what? His back had been to the door, and now he edged round until
it was under his view. But if Anita Bellini contemplated any treachery,
there was no visible or audible evidence.

He heard the front door bell ring, and an exchange of voices in the hall,
and then the door opened, and two men entered, and it was not necessary
that he should be very experienced in such matters to realize that they
were detectives. His mother's narrative stopped automatically. Her white,
skinny finger pointed to him.

"This man is Peter Dawlish--an ex--convict!" she said. "I charge him
with threatening to murder my friend, Princess Anita Bellini."

A quarter of an hour after, the taxicab which Peter had employed to bring
him to Wimbledon deposited him at the police station, and he was sitting,
dazed and wrathful, behind the locked door of a police cell.

CHAPTER XIV

"I CAN'T believe it." Leslie stared at the inspector. "His own mother
charged him? How monstrous!"

Mr. Coldwell had reached an age where it was almost impossible to
surprise him.

"Queer, isn't it? But, Lord bless you, mothers do rum things. I've known
cases--but you've heard about 'em too, Leslie. Peter went down to
Wimbledon to raise hell for some reason or other. It appears his mother
had heard the fuss he was making at the door and telephoned for the
police before he broke in. It might have been bad for him if he were a
convict on licence, but fortunately he's time--expired, and he has only
to say that it was a family quarrel to get bound over. I don't think he
will be called upon for a defence, anyway."

Leslie Maughan nibbled at the end of her glove, a devastating habit of
hers in moments of perturbation.

"I really can't believe it, though, of course, it must have happened.
What was his mother doing down there? And  why on earth did Peter do such
a mad thing?"

Coldwell smiled.

"Go down and ask him," he said. "I'll give you a note to the inspector,
and you might have a few minutes' talk with him before he appears in
court. It is very unlikely that they  will remand him to Brixton. If the
Princess has got horse sense she will get him acquitted. Mrs. Dawlish is
pretty sick and sorry that she allowed herself to charge him. I can tell
you that because, as soon as I heard about the case, I phoned up the
station and the sergeant in charge told me that Mrs. Dawlish came to the
police station at seven o'clock this morning to see if she could get her
name taken out of the record. She'd allowed her spite to lead her astray,
and she knows that when it comes into court, the story of a mother
charging her son is going to make a pretty big newspaper sensation. That
is why I think that the charge may be withdrawn."

When Leslie reached the police station she found that Peter had been
transferred to the cells adjoining the court, and her own card was
sufficient to obtain an interview. He met her with a rueful smile.

"You see me again in my natural environment," he said cheerfully.

"Why did you go to Bellini's?"

"I wanted to learn something," he said, and he would not explain any
more.

She told him of the inspector's prophecy, but he seemed careless as to
whether the charge would be supported.

"It was certainly a facer," he said. "I didn't expect my mother to take
that line. I suppose until then I had not realized how bitterly she hated
me. They may go on with the charge, knowing that, in any circumstances, I
should not tell what brought me to Wimbledon."

She did not press him for any further particulars. The interview took
place in the passage adjoining the court; policemen and prisoners were
passing every few seconds, and the conditions were not favourable to
confidences. She told him of her own alarming experience, and when she
had finished he whistled.

"That explains everything--the chain on the door and old Simms being on
guard. I never saw the old devil again after I broke in."

She made no attempt to hide her astonishment. "I don't see why a chain on
Anita Bellini's door explains a little yellow man in my rooms," she said.

"It does--most emphatically."

Just then his name was called by the court usher, and she followed him
into court. Peter had hardly been put in the steel pen when the detective
--sergeant who had arrested him stood up and addressed the Bench.

"This case, your Worship, arose from a visit which the prisoner paid to
the house of the Princess Anita Bellini last night. The prisoner, who is
a very distant relative of the Princess's, had some sort of grievance,
and the argument became so heated that her Highness was compelled to
telephone for the police. The Princess has no wish to prosecute the
prisoner in the circumstances, or to bring a family quarrel into court,
and in these circumstances I don't propose to produce any evidence, your
Worship."

"But the charge is attempted murder," said the presiding magistrate.

"The charge was only taken last night," explained the detective, "and it
was the intention of the police to ask for a remand. But the Princess has
modified her statement, and I am advised that a conviction could not
follow on the evidence that she would offer. In those circumstances, I
ask your Worship to discharge Dawlish."

The magistrate nodded, and that was the end of the proceedings. Peter
walked out of the dock and joined the girl in front of the police court.

At first he refused her invitation to drive him back to town.

"You're coming with me," she said firmly. "I have a lot of things to say
to you and a list of questions as long as Lucretia's grocery order.
Probably you will not answer them, but that is beside the point."

They were crossing Putney Common when she leaned over and spoke to the
driver, and, slowing down, he brought the car to the edge of the path.

"Let us go a little walk," she said, and no sooner were they out of
earshot than: "Why did you go to Princess Bellini's last night, Peter
Dawlish?" she asked.

"To find out something."

"What did you want to know?"

Should he tell her? He could not understand himself. Why should he
hesitate to take her into his confidence, she who knew so much? And yet
he felt an unaccountable shyness. It was as though the confession would
make a perceptible difference in their curious friendship. At last he
blurted out the truth.

"Jane had a child," he said.

She stopped, and her deep violet eyes met his.

"Your child--well?"

He was astonished by the coolness with which she received this momentous
news.

"Did you guess?" he asked.

She shook her head.

"I knew," she answered quietly. "It was born at a little farm called
Appledore, near Carlisle."

He was momentarily paralysed.

"You--knew--all the time?" he stammered.

"I knew all the time," she repeated. "I knew you had a child, before I
knew you were married. It was at Appledore that I found the book of
poems, and your little blank verse. And that was why I wasn't quite sure
you were married. Naturally, she would call herself Mrs. Dawlish in the
circumstances."

They were passing a park bench and she caught his arm and drew him down.

"I'll tell you all about it, shall I?" And, when he nodded:

"I was spending a holiday in Cumberland, and I suppose it was fate that
led me to this very farmhouse. The old lady, Mrs. Still, who owned the
place was a widow, and rather a garrulous old soul, but very kind. It was
only natural she should tell me of the interesting people who had stayed
with her. One of the most interesting was a pretty girl, whose baby was
born in the very room I occupied. She came in February, before the season
had started--there is a season in Cumberland, you know--and stayed till
the beginning of April. She called herself--it doesn't matter what she
called herself, but it was not Jane Dawlish. The child was born on the
17th of March, St. Patrick's Day. The old lady, who was half--Irish,
remembered that fact because she had sent a bunch of shamrock up to the
pretty lady the morning the child was born."

"Who was with her?" asked Peter huskily.

"Two women--a nurse, and somebody who was obviously Anita Bellini. No
doctor was called in; apparently the other woman was a maternity nurse,
and it was not necessary to call for medical assistance. My old Appledore
lady never saw the baby; she wasn't even sure when it was taken away, but
she thought it was on the second day following the birth, because that
was the day a man came from London. The 'man' was obviously Druze. She
arrived just before Mrs. Still went into Carlisle to do her mid--week
shopping, and when she returned Druze had gone. The old lady did not know
that the baby had gone too until the end of the week, when she asked to
be allowed to see it and was told that it had been sent off to a warmer
climate. The only thing she knew was that it was a boy; the nurse had
told her that, and the Appledore lady was rather disappointed, because,
as she said, the pretty lady had been praying and hoping for a girl. Why
she should pray or hope for a baby of either sex is a little beyond me,
but I have no reason to doubt the truth of the old lady's statement. She
showed me very proudly a little book that the 'pretty young thing'--she
generally called her that--was in the habit of reading, a book of poems;
and then I saw your ridiculous acrostic. Just about this time I was
rather intrigued by certain things which had happened to Lady Raytham--

we had, in fact, information at Scotland Yard that she was paying
blackmail, and I naturally connected the two events: her appearance here
under an assumed name, the birth of the child, and the fact that she was
paying out large sums of money from time to time for some unknown
service. When, about an hour before I left the farm, old Mrs. Still said
that she had heard one of the women speak about 'Peter,' I was pretty
sure I was on the right track."

"Do you know the name of the nurse? Was it Martha--?"

"Martha!" She sprang up and stared at him. "Martha? What do you know
about Martha?"

He was a little dumbfounded by the effect of his words.

"Tell me--tell me quickly," she said impatiently, and he produced from
his pocket the letter he had received, and which had brought him to Jane
Raytham.

She looked at the pencilled words.

"Martha's servant. That was Druze's sister," she said suddenly. "She had
the child. Peter, I am going on this new trail, and you mustn't interfere
until I've followed this thing to the end."

"What do you think of me, I wonder?" he asked.

She eyed him steadily.

"What should I think of you? You're unfortunate, Peter Dawlish--I've
told you that before."

He shook his head with a wry smile.

"You don't know how unfortunate I am," he said, and she laughed in spite
of herself.

'Come back to the car, or we'll find ourselves indulging in an orgy of
mutual self--pity."

It did not occur to Peter that he should ask her why the self--pity
should be mutual, but he never forgot her words.

She dropped him in the centre of London and, going on to Scotland Yard,
interviewed her chief and received permission from him to take a day off.
Her first step was to get into telephonic communication with the chief
detective of Plymouth, who promised to call her up as soon as his
inquiries were completed. Though she was on holiday, there were many
official interruptions. First there came the man who had arrested Mrs.
Inglethorne to tell her that that unrepentant lady had been remanded, and
to expose the red--faced woman's shocking history. Her maiden name had
been Zamosser; she was of Dutch origin, though her parents had lived for
many years in England; and with the exception of a very short interval
she had been either in the hands or under the observation of the police.
She was a receiver, and worse; had been convicted of shoplifting, and,
except for one interval in her early youth when she seemed to have lived
so respectable a life that the police had no trace of her, she had been
in and out of prison since she was a child.

"What about the children?" asked Leslie, anticipating the reply.

The sergeant laughed.

"One of them's hers; the others are what she calls 'adopted.' That is to
say, they have been inconvenient children of whom she has taken charge
for a small weekly sum or for a larger payment cash down. The only one we
have been able to trace is a little boy."

For a moment wild hopes had surged up into Leslie's heart, but they were
to die at his words.

"Oh, you've traced the boy?" she said. She remembered the wizened little
fellow who had looked up at her with big, sleepy eyes, when she had made
her incursion to the kitchen.

"Well, we've found his mother, at any rate. The other children mostly
belong to poor little working--class girls."

"Are there many baby--farmers in England?"

"Hundreds," said the officer. "They're supposed to be under police
supervision, but, of course, they're not. There is no law to prevent
anybody adopting a child, though the actual adoption is not recognized in
law."

 "In England, then, there must be hundreds?" she said, her heart sinking.

"Thousands."

"There is no list of them?"

He shook his head.

"There may be a few hundreds on the books. You would know that better
yourself, Miss Maughan, as you're at the Yard." And then, unconsciously
extinguishing her last lingering hope: "I was once asked to trace a
little baby that had been handed over to a 'farmer', but it is like
looking for a needle in a haystack, trying to find an 'adopted child'
after trace has been lost of it," he said. "A few of them drift into the
workhouse schools; most of them die. It doesn't pay the kind of woman who
makes a living out of that sort of thing to feed them properly. There

should be a State institution where unwanted children could be taken and
cared for and become an asset to the country."

He had been gone half an hour when the Plymouth call came through, and
the news was not especially helpful. Martha Druze had qualified as a
maternity nurse in the years '89--'90, and had left the hospital to take
up a private position as a general nurse. It was believed she had gone
abroad, but there was no actual evidence of this fact except that the
present matron, who remembered her, had received a postal card mailed at
Port Said a month or two after Martha had gone away. There was also a
rumour that she had married very well, to somebody who was variously
described as a carpenter of Cape Town and a rancher in Australia. There
was only one clue which was faintly promising. Martha was known to have
registered herself in the books of a London agency, the name of which
Leslie jotted down.

As soon as the conversation was through, she searched the telephone
directory for the nurses' agency. It was not there; possibly it had been
overwhelmed by competition and had died, as so many other agencies die,
from sheer inanition. To make absolutely sure on this point she called up
one well--known woman agent and asked her a question.

"Ashley's Agency? Oh yes. It is now called the Central Nurses' Bureau--
in fact, we are Ashley's Agency, though we never use that title."

Leslie explained who she was and what she required.

"If you'll come round, we will show you the old books; we still have
them," was the encouraging reply.

Leslie Maughan put on her hat and coat and went out at once. Halfway down
she remembered Mr. Coldwell's gift, and went back to buckle on a most
uncomfortable garter. The premises of the agency were off Regent Street,
no great distance to walk, and she was there in five minutes.

The secretary, who had replied to her telephone message, was already
selecting the books for her inspection, and by great good fortune the
first of these, she had discovered, contained the very information that
the girl had asked for.

"Yes, we have her on our books--Martha Druze. She applied to us before
she left Plymouth Hospital apparently, for that is her original address,
and we placed her in a situation in the early part of 1891."

The secretary had opened the book, and her finger pointed to a line.
Leslie read--she found herself gripping tight to the edge of the table.
Looking at her, the secretary saw that her eyes were blazing and wondered
what there was in this simple record to engender such excitement.

"It was the only job we ever got for her," she began.

Leslie shook her head.

"She would not want another," she said.

CHAPTER XV

LADY RAYTHAM had begun a letter to her husband when the district
messenger arrived with Leslie's note. His lordship, in his aimless way,
had gone on to Bombay, and was suffering from an old trouble of his; he
had written a very long letter describing minutely his many symptoms, and
had expressed (this was unexpected) the desire that she should go out to
him. She read Leslie's note.

"DEAR JANE,

"Won't you come round and see me? I've got the whole day off, and there
is a tremendous lot that I want to talk to you about, not as a poor
apology for a policewoman, but as a very human girl who would love to
smooth over some of the rough road you are treading. Lucretia has orders
to say that I'm out and to admit nobody. I can give you a home--made
lunch, and can promise that you will suffer no ill--effects therefrom.
Or we can lunch regally at or near the Carlton. Please come."

Jane scribbled a note, which was delivered to the waiting messenger,
locked away her half--finished letter in the bureau, and went up into
her room to change. Lucretia had no sooner ushered her into Leslie when:

"Did you see Peter? What happened? I'm so worried about it. I nearly
called you up this morning."

"I shouldn't have known," said Leslie. "At least, I should have known
he'd been arrested."

"Arrested?"

This was obviously news to Jane Raytham, for her face went white. Leslie
explained what had happened.

"How could she? How could she?" demanded Jane Raytham vehemently. "It was
wicked! But how like her! Poor Peter--he lives everlastingly in rough
seas."

And then the note of anger in her voice turned to one of anxiety.

"Did Anita tell him anything?"

"Not what he wanted to know," replied Leslie.

The visitor was quick to understand the meaning of that reply.

"Do you know why he went?"

"He went to find his child."

The beautiful face of Jane Raytham flashed a delicate pink, and paled
again.

"My child," she said, in a low voice. "I suppose you despise me, don't
you?"

Leslie shook her head.

"No; why should I? If I despised every woman who had a baby--"

"I don't mean that. But I allowed them to take it away. I didn't want to,
Leslie; will you believe that? I wanted to keep the child with me--I
fought hard for him. The compromise was a desperately weak one, but at
least I gained that point."

"What was the compromise?"

Lady Raytham smiled faintly.

"If you didn't despise me before you'll despise me now," she said.

She was at the fireplace in her old attitude, arm along the mantel,
forehead resting on the back of her hand, her eyes fixed on the fire.

"They agreed to that. If it was a girl I should keep her; if it was a
boy, he should go away. A mad, wicked idea, so grossly unfair to the
child! But I'm terribly tender towards girls. I can't see a girl suffer
without a shrivelled--up feeling inside. I wonder if you know what my
girlhood was--if it had been a girl I should have kept her with me and
braved everything. But it was a boy--a wonderful boy--they told me of
it afterwards. I wish I'd seen him, known him, if only for a day, but
then I should never have allowed him to go."

She turned her face away and her shoulders shook. Leslie sat at the desk
and drew fantastic, meaningless arabesques upon her blotting--pad; and
when that storm of sobbing had died down: "I suppose it is absurd to ask
you if there is any clue by which the child could be traced? Of course
you've explored every avenue. You've discovered nothing?"

Jane was manipulating her handkerchief, her back towards her, and there
was finality in the shake of her head.

"No--I've already tried. I didn't tell Anita, but for months I've had
detectives searching. I thought he was in a happy home, you know; I never
dreamt that he'd been left--"

She could not go on. It was quite a long time before she mastered her
emotion.

"Druze told me that night--that horrible night she went away. Laughed in
my face when I asked her where the child was. That is why I went after
her. I guessed that she had gone to Anita's, and when I found her dead on
the path I was frantic. I thought she must have some hidden paper that
would tell me. But when I searched there was nothing--nothing!"

Jane Raytham turned her face away from the girl. "I have no justification
--none," she said. "I was just wickedly selfish. Even if he'd been
illegitimate I could not be excused. Illegitimate!" She smiled bitterly.
"Thank God, I've had no children since I married Raytham! He was not keen
about children, or about me for the matter of that. Our married life has
been a sort of--modified celibacy!"

She took down a photograph from the  mantelshelf and looked at it. "This
is Mr. Coldwell, isn't it?" Leslie nodded. "It would be a great feather
in his cap if he--arrested me for bigamy."

"Mr. Coldwell is not frantically keen on feathers of that kind, Jane,"
said the girl loyally.

Jane put down the photograph and dropped into the nearest armchair,
curling her legs up under her.

"I'm a beast! I'm putting the worst construction on everything; taking
the most uncharitable view of everybody."

She smiled pitifully, reached out her hand for her bag that lay on the
table, and snapped open a diamond--encrusted cigarette case.

"I tried drugging once," she said. "A white powder you sniff up your
nose. For some reason it made me deathly sick, and I didn't pursue the
practice. But I envy people who can find relief and forgetfulness."

"Another good way," said Leslie brutally, "is to put your head on a
railway track when a large, fat freight train is due! You'd accomplish
the same result, and give just as much trouble to other people. And
presently, when your boy emerges from the mist, as he will, he would come
to a mother who was hardly worth finding."

Jane was laughing quietly.

"You're a weird girl. How old are you?"

Leslie told her.

"I wish Peter was in love with you. He must find happiness somewhere or
other."

"Do I come into this?" asked Leslie dryly. "Or are Peter and you the only
two people in the world whose feelings count?"

She stopped Jane's penitence with a laughing gesture.

"I'll tell you something, Jane: I'm rather in love with Peter--do you
feel faint?"

"I'm not a little bit faint." But Jane was more than a little bit
curious. "You're not jesting?"

"I decided this morning that I was very much in love with him," said
Leslie calmly, "but I've had a long think about it, and have reached the
conclusion that it is rather my maternal instinct that is operating. I'm
loving the boy in a motherly fashion, in fact. Sooner or later that boy
of yours is going to be found, and then you've got to go to your husband
and tell him the truth."

She was watching Jane's face closely, ready to note and spring upon the
first visible sign of repugnance. But Jane was listening; and listening,
the girl realized, her heart sinking, with approval.

"And then Lord Raytham must divorce you, and Peter and you must start
afresh."

Here was the first note of dissent. Jane shook her head.

"Peter is different," she said. "I realized it when I saw him last night.
He's not the same man. And can you wonder? Leslie, I never loved him.
You'll think that's a horrible thing to say of the father of my child, He
represented--I don't know, curiosity, I suppose--adventure--the grand
hairpin turn of life, where so much is upset and smashed, so many hopes
and ideals die. And he never loved me. He was infatuated and he was fond
of me, and had a wonderful chivalrous feeling that he was rescuing me
from something. That is half his trouble now, that he knows he didn't
love me, and it makes him feel ugly and ashamed. You think the child may
bring us together. I'm becoming quite a thought--reader! But that sort
of thing really doesn't happen, does it? Children really do not determine
very much. Half the women who are divorced have children who love them
and whom they love, but it didn't prevent--things happening. I think
Peter and I might be good friends, and the boy might love us both, even
though we were apart, for children give you back what you give to them--
I could give him such a lot."

With an impatient wave of her head she sat up and walked resolutely to
the window.

"Let us talk of rabbits," she said. "How did you break this?" she asked.

For a new and unpainted sash had been put into the window space that
morning.

"Never mind about that. A visitor put his head through it. Jane, you're
taking rather a hopeless view of life, aren't you

The woman shrugged. "My dear, what can happen? If this were a story and
it wasn't real life, I should go away somewhere, contract a malignant
fever and die to soft, slow music! But I refuse to offer myself up as a
sacrifice in order that my story shall have a smooth and a happy ending.
And if I die, Peter will endow me with all sorts of gentle qualities
which I don't possess, and will pass the rest of his life in the twilight
of melancholy--I know men!"

Leslie was laughing softly. She had too keen a sense of humour not to
appreciate the fact that this entanglement had its funny side. Suddenly
she became serious.

"There are only a few questions I want to ask you, that I've never asked
before. Did you give Druze your emerald necklace?"

Jane nodded. "Yes. This mythical person wanted thirty thousand pounds. I
could only draw twenty without Raytham knowing. The necklace was worth
twelve thousand, and I suggested that Druze should sell it. She jumped at
the chance. I thought she had taken it away a week before she actually
did."

"You can't account for the pendant being found in her hand?" Jane shook
her head. "And you don't know where the rest of the chain  is to be
found?"

"I am absolutely ignorant. I can't conceive how she met her death. It is
only reasonable to suppose that she had a life and friends of whom I knew
nothing. Where she went after she left my house I do not know. I guessed
she was going to Anita's, because she would not leave England without
saying good--bye--she was very much attached to Anita."

"How long after your baby was born were you married to Lord Raytham?"

Jane considered.

"About ten months," she said.

"Did you know Reno personally?"

"Yes," Jane nodded. "That was one of the queer coincidences of it all. My
father had a small farm near Reno, just a shack and a few acres of
ground, and this was accepted as a residential qualification. Of course,
I had to lie desperately and say I was living there all the time, and
really I believed the divorce would go through. I even appeared in court
and gave my evidence, and I thought that the thing was settled, until
Anita saw me outside the court--house and told me that my lawyers had
made a bungle and that the divorce could not be granted without serving
some papers upon Peter. I went straight away with her; her automobile was
waiting, for I was scared of the reporters, who were all the time hunting
marriage romances for their newspapers. Besides, the baby was coming. I
was frightened that people would know."

"And you returned immediately?"

Jane nodded.

"Yes--I went to Cumberland from Liverpool. Anita discovered the place.
It was some time after Christmas--I remember that I was in New York on
Christmas Day."

"There is one final question, Jane, and then I'll stop being a mark of
interrogation and take you out to lunch. That is, if you don't mind being
seen in public with a Scotland Yard female."

"If you wish," said Jane, with the first spark of animation she had
shown, "I will eat my lunch out of a paper bag with you, seated on top of
one of Landseer's lions."

"This is the question," said Leslie, slowly and deliberately. "Marriage
with Lord Raytham was in the air, wasn't it, and you had discussed it
with Anita?"

Jane nodded.

"And did she know of your intention of marrying Raytham whether the
divorce was granted or not? Please think very carefully before you
answer."

"There's no need to think very carefully. I told Anita that I should
marry Raytham whether the divorce was granted or not. I salved my
conscience by expressing doubt as to the validity of the marriage."

Leslie leaned back in her chair with a large and happy smile.

"You're a wicked conspirator, a perfectly horrible mother, and not a
tremendous success in any of your matrimonial adventures!" She slipped
her arm round the woman's waist and kissed her on the cheek. "But you're
rather a darling. We'll lunch at the Pall Mall, which is terribly nice
for women, and we'll occupy the afternoon with a 'flick.' I love the
movies--especially the romantic ones."

She was rather relieved than otherwise when, nearing the end of the
luncheon, Jane remembered, with some contrition, that she had promised to
be at home that afternoon to receive a committee of which she was
president.

"Child welfare," she said laconically. "The angels weep every time I sit
at the head of that board and dilate upon the duty of mothers. Raytham,
in spite of queer little ways, is a dear where these societies are
concerned, and he's fearfully in earnest about them. I drew the line when
he wanted me to take control of a committee which helps fallen women--
that was stretching my sense of humour to a breaking--point."

They parted in the Haymarket, and Leslie went back to her flat, stopping
on her way to wire to Peter. He came when the day was fading, and
Lucretia was drawing the curtains. Two stout suitcases were ready packed
in the hall, and during the afternoon Coldwell had called her up with
strict injunctions to be ready for him when he came.

"I'm not going to allow you to stay in the flat until this little
business is finished," he said.

Here he had a strong supporter in Lucretia Brown.

"Not for a million pounds would I stay in this place after dark, miss,"
she said. "What with burglars and people jumping out of the window and
what not, I wonder I've got any hair left. When I combed it this morning
it came out in handfuls."

"The remedy for that is shingling," suggested Leslie, and Lucretia grew
sardonic.

"When I want to look like a boy, I'll wear trousers, miss," she said.
"Not that I've anything to say against shingling, which suits you very
well, because you've got the kind of head. And as for these bingles, with
your ears sticking out all over the place like the Princess Bellorino, or
whatever her name is--I call that disgusting! The only use for ears is
to hear with, not to go pushing theirselves out into the world, so to
speak. I was hoping her ladyship was coming back this afternoon, miss. A
bit of society does nobody any harm."

"If she'd only known, I'm sure she'd have jumped at the opportunity of
giving us a social lift," said Leslie, and Lucretia sniffed. She was not
very thin--skinned, but she always knew when her young lady was
indulging in what Lucretia described as "sarc."

"I only want to say--" she began.

"There's the bell," interrupted Leslie. "If it is Mr. Dawlish, shoot him
up."

"A low convick!" murmured Lucretia, but she murmured it under her breath.

The convict was neither lowly nor humble. Leslie had never seen him look
more serious, and the old flippancy of his tone was gone. It was a very
determined young man who sat down at the opposite side of her writing--
table.

He had been making inquiries, he said. "It is a hopeless business when
you don't know where to start--hopeless. I thought Jane would give me a
hint, but of course the poor girl is as much in the dark as I. Yes, I am
awfully sorry for her. I'm afraid I was rather a brute--"

"She doesn't think you were," said Leslie lightly.

"Have you seen her?" he asked quickly.

"This morning," she nodded. "In fact, I lunched with her. We talked over
the whole grisly affair from A to Z. Are you very much in love with her?"

He shook his head.

"I'm not in love with her at all. I suppose I ought to be, right down in
the deeps of my heart, but I'm not. And she is not in love with me,
either. I knew that seven years ago. She was not over--reticent when she
came to discuss our marriage before the separation. Did she tell you
anything at all about the boy?"

"Nothing. She really doesn't know."

He agreed. "I was sure she didn't. Bellini knows--no, I won't call her
Princess or Anita or anything feminine or human! She's just a devil, a
wicked devil! How my father hated her! I've an idea he was a bit afraid
of her, too. I remember once he asked me, when we were walking together
at our place in Hertfordshire, if I liked her, and when I told him that
the sight of her made me ill, he put his hand in his pocket and gave me a
golden sovereign. And yet he must have been very fond of her once."

"Fond of her?" Leslie's eyebrows met. "DO you seriously mean that?"

"I do. They say she was awfully attractive--not very pretty, but very
attractive--when she was younger."

Leslie pushed back her chair.

"This has been a most educational day," she said. "Produce your evidence,
Mr. Dawlish, that your father was ever attracted by that monstrous lady."

He tried to turn the conversation, but she kept him to it remorselessly.

"I shouldn't have known, only my mother and the Princess quarrelled. I
was curled up in a chair in the library--I must have been about seven--
reading one of the kind of books that my father used to buy for me--
about pirates and cut--throats and the usual exemplar of youth--when
they came into the library together. My mother was furious with Bellini.
I didn't understand all it signified at the time, but later, when I came
to think it over, it seemed pretty plain. My mother was furious. 'You've
had your innings,' she said. 'He doesn't like you any more, and he
doesn't want you in the house. You won't get him back, anyway.' There was
a lot more said on both sides that I cannot remember. I know that it
ended in my mother crying and going out of the room, and in Anita Bellini
leaving the house. They must have been on bad terms for two years,
probably three. Time has no meaning to a child."

Leslie was chewing the end of a penholder.

"Then your father, in the argot of these days, was a bad lad?" she said.

"I wouldn't say that," he protested. "He was a very simple man, attracted
by clever women; and Bellini was brilliant. I remember that her husband
was alive in those days; a very tall, thin, melancholy Italian who spoke
very bad English. My father and he were not very good friends. I think
Bellini had borrowed money and hadn't repaid it, and dear old Donald
Dawlish was rather a stickler for commercial honesty." And then, with a
half--ashamed faugh: "I don't know why I should be slandering my father
or gossiping when I should have no other thought than of my boy. Did she
tell you whether she named it?"

"It was neither named nor registered," was Leslie's reply. "From that
point of view, the child has no existence, and that is why he is going to
be so very difficult to trace."

The pen quivered between her white teeth; she stared cut of the window.

"I wonder--" she said softly.

"What do you wonder?"

"If the other two pieces in this jigsaw puzzle are going to be so easy to
fit. And I wonder other things, Peter Dawlish. Where is the screw I can
turn on Anita Bellini? Give me that letter you had."

He took it from his pocket and she read it.

"Who sent you this?"

"There was no name attached."

She looked at the envelope and the postmark.

"This was sent by one who wishes to do either Jane or the Princess a
pretty bad turn," she said. "Now, if I could only trace the sender--"

She lifted the letter to her nose and sniffed daintily. "Sherlock Holmes
would be able to tell in an instant if this perfume was Chenel ??No. 6 or
Chypre. I, being an ignoramus, only know that Greta Gurden's bedroom
reeked with it!"

CHAPTER XVI

AT that moment Greta Gurden's bedroom reeked with the pungent scent of
frying sausages that wafted in from the little gas--ring in her "dining
--hall." When Greta was her own provider, she was economical to the point
of meanness. She, who would hesitate languidly between Sole Marnier and
Sole a la bonne femme, who chose the most delicate and expensive of ices,
and who had a pretty knowledge of the virtues of relative vintages, when
she had an escort to foot the bill, could find, in the intimacy of her
flat, the ingredients of complete satisfaction hanging from a hook at the
local butcher's.

She had been allowed to get up that afternoon, and found that she could
drag herself from room to room without pain or inconvenience. Mrs. Hobbs
had gone home, having a husband of her own to serve, and Greta was left
alone, and was glad.

Face--saving is a practice which is not wholly Chinese. When she
prepared her mean little snacks she liked to be by herself, for she was
one of those who desired to be thought well of by the least accountable
of people. She was almost cheerful as she speared the sausages from their
sizzling bed and laid them on a hot plate, brewed the tea from a kettle
placed before the gas stove, and, spreading a cloth across half the
table, prepared to enjoy her evening repast.

She had not heard from Anita since the woman's visit, and she had spent
the greater part of the day regretting the spirit of malice which had
induced her to send an eight--year--old sheet of paper to Peter
Dawlish. Fortunately, Anita would never know; that was the one solace she
had. What would Anita say if she discovered? Greta shuddered to think.

Being malicious, she was a coward; and it was cowardice which brought
about a revulsion of feeling towards the employer she betrayed; in the
processes of reaction, she felt almost tenderly towards the victim of her
spite. Nevertheless, the finding of the letter had given Greta an idea.
There might be other documents equally valuable, remembering that the day
was near at hand when her sole legitimate source of income would perish
in the inevitable liquidation of Mayfair Gossip.

It was all very well for Anita to sneer and rail at the paper, but it had
been a very good friend of hers. There were two prominent announcements
printed week after week in the pages of this scurrilous little organ; the
first of these was called "Stories of Real Life," and it was announced
that for the sender of the best material from which such a story could be
constructed there was a weekly reward of 25. Stress was laid upon one
point--that the material must be authentic, that it must be spicy, and
that it must be remarkable. The second announcement was to the effect
that contributors who were in a position to secure social items of
interest would be well paid.

These two appeals produced a voluminous correspondence, the majority of
which was valueless for their purpose; but sometimes an aggrieved servant
would betray matters which were even outside the cognizance of her
employer. The maid who found a bundle of old love--letters in a secret
drawer of her master's desk was very well rewarded indeed. Those letters
went on to Anita, who found an excellent use for them.

Officially, Greta knew nothing of these matters. Officially she was
sending on these letters because they had a piquant interest for her
employer. She was never asked to do anything that a lady could not do, or
even that Greta could not do. She made a very good use of the smaller and
less important items that reached the office, for Greta was an efficient,
if one--sided, journalist. She had one formula which she followed in
every case:

"DEAR ANITA,

"The enclosed letters are not, I am afraid, of much use to the paper. We
shall be prosecuted for libel if we dare use one--tenth of what is in
them. They may, however, interest you."

The letter never varied; it had become almost a stereotype.

She contributed special articles to Gossip, and because of a fourteen
days' sojourn in the United States had become an authority upon the Four
Hundred, could talk glibly and inaccurately of the leaders of society,
and occasionally would introduce a Long Island colour to her paragraphs.
She could write fairly well, had a mordant wit of her own, and in happier
circumstances might have become a great journalist. Instead of which she
had developed insensibly into a cringing sycophant, dependent upon a wage
that was paid in all the circumstances of charity.

As she ate her three large, indigestible sausages, she decided to tackle
that night the last bundle of letters which needed reading and
classifying. It was therefore not an inappropriate moment for Anita to
call. Mrs. Gurden stood up like a soldier when the woman swung into the
room and pulled the door close behind her.

"Your leg's all right, is it? Good! I want you to come over to Wimbledon
to--night."

"My dear Anita, I couldn't possibly come to--night," broke in Mrs.
Gurden, a picture of sweetness and delight at seeing this unwelcome
visitor. "The doctor says--"

"I don't care what the doctor says," replied Anita brusquely. "I'll see
that you get all the doctors you want. You've got to come over to May
Towers."

Greta murmured something half--heartedly, and made a final fight.

"It may be fatal," she said in a hushed voice. "The doctor--"

Princess Bellini said something very uncomplimentary about doctors in
general, and glanced at the remnants of the humble meal with a sneer
which she did not attempt to conceal.

"Pack all your things, everything you want for a long stay," she said.
"I'll send one of my people up to help you if you like, but it would be
better if your own woman--Snobbs or Hobbs or whatever you call her--
helped you."

"How long do you want me to stay?" asked Greta in consternation. She
counted the most unhappy days and nights of her life those she had spent
as Anita's guest.

"A month; six weeks possibly--I'm not sure," said the woman brusquely.
"I'm going to pay you very well indeed. As for your leg, I've telephoned
to your doctor, and he tells me that you're fit to move, and, in fact,
the wound is healed."

"But the paper--"

"The paper is dead. I've written to the printers telling them so. My
lawyer will liquidate the business, so that's off your mind. You've got
to do something, Greta. Your source of income from that direction has
dried up."

Greta listened in dismay, and offered the weak comment that it "seemed a
pity." And then, with a resolution which was born of her very feebleness,
she said: "I can't go. I simply won't go, Anita, until I've seen the
doctor. You're most inconsiderate. I haven't recovered. It isn't only the
wound, it's the shock of--Druze's death. I simply won't risk my life.
After all, I have to take care of myself. Gurden doesn't care a damn
whether I'm alive or dead."

Anita sat squarely before her, her big hands on her knees, her eyeglass
fixed in her impassive face.

"Gurden?" she rasped. "You almost make this ghost of yours real! You've
got to the end of your argument, Greta, when you call on the precious
name of Gurden. He belongs to the same order as Mrs. 'Arris."

"It's not true, it's not true!" protested the haggard woman tearfully.
"We're married, but we're separated."

Nevertheless, she proceeded to give no further details that would
elucidate that mystery of her life.

"Whether you are or whether you're not, you're to come over to May
Towers," said the Princess definitely. "If you want to see a doctor, you
can send for any one you like."

Greta elected for her own doctor, but he was out and not expected back
until late that night. She ran her fingers down the directory of the
profession, seeking a familiar name, and presently she found one and rang
him up. Anita, renovating her toilet before the looking--glass in the
bedroom, heard Greta speaking in her sugary society voice, and smiled
grimly.

"If you please, doctor. I wondered if you would remember me. It's most
awfully kind of you. no, only a little scratch. The wound has quite
healed, I'm sure, but I should like to see you ever so much."

A click as the receiver was hung up. Anita smoothed the powder on her
face, gave her large, shapeless lips a touch of a red creamy stick, and
strolled back to the dining--room.

"Well, have you found your doctor?"

"Yes, Anita, I have," said the other. "He's a very nice man, and he won't
let me go out if he thinks that it's dangerous to my health. And, really,
I must consider myself, Anita, sometimes. I'm not at all well, and I've
been thinking for a long time of placing myself in a doctor's hands--"

"Whom have you sent for?"

"Dr. Elford Wesley. He used to be old Mr. Dawlish's doctor--"

She heard a growl like the sound of a beast, and stared aghast at Anita.
Her eyes were wide open; she showed her teeth in an ugly grin.

"You brainless fool!" she hissed. "Why did you send--for him?"

CHAPTER XVII

DEMONIACAL, terrifying, she towered above the frightened woman, and Greta
cowered and held up her hand as though to ward off a blow.

"Get on the telephone, quick, and tell him he needn't come. Invent any
excuse you like--hurry!"

In a trembling voice Greta called the number.

"He's gone," she said, and looked up at her mistress.

"All right, hang up, you fool!" Anita was breathing quickly. New lines
showed in her face; she looked like an old woman.

"Send somebody down to the door and tell him he needn't come."

"But, Anita," wailed the other, "I can't do that. I must see him, Nita.
What a stupid thing you are! What difference does it make? If you don't
like him you needn't show yourself. And if I send down a message like
that he'll be awfully suspicious. You remember how the police came just
because my wretched doctor told somebody I had a gunshot wound in the
leg?"

There was reason and intelligence in this, and though the woman was
quivering between fear and fury, she had no course but to consent, and
when, ten minutes later, the doctor's foot sounded on the stairs outside,
Anita Bellini disappeared into the bedroom, but did not go beyond
earshot.

He was an elderly man, rather talkative and fussy, short and stout, with
a cherubic face, and short, white side--whiskers.

"Bless my soul, I remember you now!" he said. He was one of the loud and
jovial race of doctors that is fast dying out. "I remember you very well.
You used to be a friend of the Dawlishes, didn't you? Poor old Donald!
What a good sort! Now, let me look at this leg of yours."

He examined the wound, which was little more than a scar, and, to Greta's
dismay, pronounced her fit to travel.

"You'll have to take care of yourself for a week or two." he said
conventionally, and returned to the topic his examination had
interrupted. "Yes, I was with old Donald two days before he died, from
morning till night, hoping against hope that I could do something for
him. For twenty--four hours I never stirred from his side. Poor old
Donald! He died six hours after I left him, with my dear friend, Sir Paul
Grayley, one of the best doctors that ever lived."

Old Mr. Wesley was blessed with this disposition, that all the people he
knew were the best people that ever lived, and all who were bereft of his
acquaintance came under the generic heading of "poor souls."

"Very bad business about his boy, poor soul!" He shook his hoary head.
"Terribly bad business. I didn't know Peter personally--never met him.
But when I heard of this fearful thing he'd done, I said to myself, 'My
boy, if the news has to be broken to Donald, you're the man to do it.'"

He was very talkative, very delightful, very human, but Greta was annoyed
with him and gave him little encouragement to stay. As for the woman
standing in the darkness of the bedroom, had her wishes materialized, old
Mr. Wesley would have been swept from the face of the earth.

Presently he was gone, and she came out from her listening post.

"Apparently you can move without dying," she said sarcastically.

"Apparently I can, if I want to move," Greta's voice was husky. She was
back in her last trench, conscious of a great shortage of ammunition.
"And I don't want to move, and that's flat! I can't understand why you
hate that dear old man. I admit he's fearfully chatty, but that's no
reason why you should throw a fit at the mention of his name."

"When I want your opinion about my peculiarities I will ask you for
them," bullied Anita, and it was a wrong move, as she realized.

Mrs. Gurden shrugged her shoulders rapidly. "If that's the tone you're
going to adopt," she said, with an heroic assumption of boldness, "the
sooner we part the better, Anita. You've stopped the paper, but I think
I'm entitled to some money instead of notice; and if it comes to that,
I've had no salary for a month. And as to going down to your beastly old
Towers, I simply won't, so there!"

The Princess forced a smile.

"My dear Greta, you're getting theatrical. But I realize you're not quite
yourself. Now, don't be a little fool, come and rest with me for a week
or two. There are one or two big schemes I want to talk over with you,
and afterwards we'll pack up and go to Capri or Monte Carlo or somewhere
a little more cheerful than Wimbledon."

"I won't!"

It required a tremendous amount of courage to utter those two words of
defiance, but it was zero hour to Greta Gurden, and for the moment she
had all the ferocity of a mad sheep.

"I simply won't! If I've got to earn my own living I'll earn it. I can
get a job on Fleet Fashions--I was offered one last week. I'm tired of
your domination and your bullying, and--well, I simply won't go to
Wimbledon, and that's a fact!"

Here was a resistance which Anita Bellini had never anticipated. There
was not the stuff of sweet reasonableness in her. She had made her way in
the world by the force of her character, and her simulations had been
confined to hiding her too frequent fits of anger. It was not in her to
persuade--she must command or do nothing.

"You're going to make me look foolish. I've promised--"

"I don't care what I make you look." Greta's head was quivering with
determination. "It's not my fault. And whom have you promised?" Without
waiting for a reply: "You know how I loathe that house at Wimbledon and
those awfully creepy Japanese men of yours."

"Javanese. They're quite nice people. If you refer to your encyclopaedia
you will discover they are inoffensive, peace--loving, and domestic."

But sarcasm was wasted on Greta.

"That may be or may not be," she said. "All I know is that I'm not coming
with you."

"Stay and be--stay till to--morrow!" snapped the elder woman. "I shan't
waste my time or go down on my hands and knees to you. You owe me a lot,
Greta--"

"You owe me a month's salary," said the spirited Greta, with admirable
courage, "and three months' notice."

Her hands trembling with rage, Anita tore open her bag and flung a packet
of one--pound notes on the table. Without another word she strode out of
the room and shut the door so violently that the whole house shook.

Greta Gurden sat bolt upright, shivering with triumph, yet with a sinking
sense of terror at what the morrow would bring forth. She had charred her
boats, but she had not burnt them. Her shaking hand grabbed the
telephone.

"Put me on to Scotland Yard," she said.

She heard the weary sigh of the operator.

"Is Scotland Yard blessed with a number?" she asked.

Greta hung up the phone and looked round in search of the directory. But
apparently Scotland Yard had no number, nor did there seem to be such a
place on the face of the earth. She was to learn later that the official
designation was New Scotland Yard, but she did not dream of looking under
the N's. And then she remembered one Leslie Maughan, and the M's yielded
a good result. She waited for a while after she had given the number, and
then:

"Yes. I want to speak to you."

"Yes, Mrs. Gurden."

Greta started.

"How did you know?"

She heard a laugh.

"I always remember voices, especially nice voices like yours," said the
mendacious young lady from Scotland Yard.

"I want to see you very much--very badly, I mean--tremendously."

"In fact, you want to see me," said Leslie. "I'll come along."

It required some persuasion to induce Lucretia to wait for the arrival of
Mr. Coldwell.

"Very well, then," said Leslie patiently, "wait in the street. You'll
catch your death of cold, but I don't suppose that will worry you very
much. You might even hobnob with a policeman. I trust you."

"I should jolly well say you did!" said the indignant Lucretia.

She compromised by sitting on the baggage in the passage, the door being
propped open with a weight. She found it a little more draughty than the
street.

Greta's boats seemed a little more burnt than she could have desired when
she surveyed the desolation just before Leslie's arrival. She had little
stamina for quarrelling, and already her mind was a confusion of fear and
penitence when Mrs. Hobbs, who had returned for her evening duties,
showed the girl into the dining--room.

"It's awfully good of you to come." Greta was her conventional self,
grabbed the girl's hand in both of hers, used that old and artless trick
of looking up pleadingly into her visitor's face. "I'm so worried, my
dear. The truth is, I've quarrelled with Anita. Definitely and finally,"
she said, recovering a little of her lost ground. "The paper is dead, as
you've probably heard--you know everything at Scotland Yard. That means
I'm out of a job, though I can get one to--morrow by asking. Anita has
behaved abominably. I should never have dreamt, after all I've been to
her, the thought and care and experience I have devoted to her, as it
were--do take your hat and coat off. Shall I ask the maid to make you a
cup of tea?"

Leslie, secretly amused, shook her head. She guessed that the woman had
changed her mind since she first sent for her. It was hardly likely that
she would trouble to telephone about one of those quarrels which, if her
information was accurate, were not an infrequent occurrence between Greta
Gurden and the Princess.

"Of course, I've nothing to tell you that would harm Anita." Mrs. Gurden
planted one foot firmly on shore, and prepared, figuratively, to splash
the waves of her venom with the other. "But she's so peculiar--and such
a temper! I shouldn't be surprised if she goes off in a fit of apoplexy
one of these days."

"What is her trouble now?"

Greta could tell her this much, she decided, without disloyalty to her
late employer. The very thought that she was "late" filled her with
dismay.

"She wanted me to go to Wimbledon to stay there for a month, and I hate
the place--I simply loathe it! I'm rather temperamental; I suppose all
artists are--I mean, artists and literary people. And May Towers gives
me the horrors. And, of course, she was terribly rude to me, in spite of
the fact that I am far from well and my leg aches excruciatingly. Anita
is the most unreasonable person. You've no idea, Miss Maughan. Of course,
we quarrelled, and I simply told her that I'd have no more to do with
her. And then she made a fearful scene because I asked old Dr. Wesley to
come up and see me and tell me whether I was fit to be moved. She
practically cursed me for calling him. Really, I thought she was going
mad. And he's such a dear old soul--awfully talkative, of course, but a
perfect gentleman, and a kind man. Why, do you know, he was with Mr.
Dawlish for the last twenty--four hours of his life--never left his
side, my dear, hoping he'd regain consciousness--so kind!"

Leslie was sitting at the other side of the table, her hands folded
patiently, waiting for the real story to come. Now she leaned forward,
her eyes upon the woman's face.

"Dr. Wesley? Was he the Dawlishes' doctor?"

"A very charming old man, but awfully fond of Mr. Dawlish. Except for six
hours just before his death, he was with old Mr. Dawlish for a whole day
and a night--never left his side."

Leslie hardly heard the next five minutes' complaint, but when she came
to bring her understanding to bear upon her hostess, Greta was not much
nearer to the reason for her telephone message.

"...if anything comes out I can always say, and Anita must bear me out,
that I never knew this wretched man was a woman. The first thing I saw
was Anita and this man struggling, and I wanted to send for the police.
And then those wretched men came in and tried to drag the pistol out of
Druze's hand--her hand, I mean, Druze's hand. And there was I, lying on
a sofa--fainted, my dear, and with simply not a notion in the world that
I was wounded--it may sound strange to you, but it is true. When I woke
up, Anita was going on like somebody who had lost her head. It was simply
ghastly."

"Did you see Draze again?"

Greta shook her head.

"No--the language she used before the shooting started!" Greta
shuddered. "I simply couldn't repeat half the words she employed. Of
course, Anita sent me out of the room; said she didn't know I was there;
but just as I started to go out my dear--bang!" Mrs. Gurden grew
dramatic and illustrative. "Bang! And then everything went dark. You know
how it does, my dear."

"I can't understand quite," said Leslie. "A few hours after the shooting
I found you at Lady Raytham's."

"She sent me--Anita," Mrs. Gurden broke in. "'Go to Jane, but tell her
nothing,' said Anita. 'Find out all that you can about Druze--how they
parted, if she threatened her.' Those were her words. You know Anita,
she's--what is the word?--imperious! I didn't know whether I was on my
head or my heels--like that Mr. What's--his--name who's written a
story about women. I simply had to. And not an idea in my head that a
beastly bullet had gone into my leg. The doctor said that if I hadn't run
about the wound would have healed right away. It was only when I got home
--my dear, I nearly died." She paused to take breath. "I suppose she'll
come to--morrow and ask me to go back. I'm such a forgiving nature--"

"If there is anything in life that you value, you will stay here, Mrs.
Gurden," said Leslie quietly. "I don't want to frighten you, but I think
it is my duty to warn you that the Princess Bellini's course is nearly
run. As to Druze--"

She had never thought that Druze was murdered; always she had at the back
of her mind the possibility of a struggle in which the shots were
accidentally fired. There was a good and sufficient reason why Anita
Bellini should not shoot the mock butler.

When she reached her flat, the front door was closed. She opened it and
turned on the passage light. Lucretia and the grips were gone, she saw
with satisfaction. In the letter--box was a blue--lettered cablegram,
and she snatched it out and opened it. This was a reply to one she had
sent on her way back from lunch, and she read the message and could have
sung in her joy.

She ran up the stairs, her mind divided between this blessed message and
her interview with Greta Gurden. Greta was in revolt; that much was
clear. But how far would her rage and venom carry her towards a complete
betrayal of her employer? As she passed the hall window she noticed that
the new safety--catch was in place. Really it was ridiculous to leave
the flat at all, she thought. After that one abortive attempt it was not
likely that a second would be made.

She almost regretted now that she had agreed to Mr. Coldwell's plan.
Throwing open the door of her sitting--room, she put out her hand and
turned the light switch. But the room remained in darkness. Had they
replaced the fuses? she wondered, and walked into the room.

There was no sound, no warning. A great hand suddenly gripped her throat,
another covered her mouth. She felt the pressure of a knee in her back,
and struggled desperately but unavailingly.

"You scream--you killed!" hissed a voice in her ear, and, summoning all
her strength, she tried to nod in agreement with the unspoken demand of
her captor.

The door closed softly behind her. There were two men. She felt her
ankles gripped and lifted, and she was carried into the bedroom and laid
on the bed. "You scream--you killed!" said the voice again. The grip
about her throat relaxed, but the evil--smelling--hand was still on her
face.

"I won't scream," she managed to mumble, and the stifling palm was
removed.

"You scream, I cut your t'roat. You not scream, I not cut you t'roat--
not hurt."

"I shan't scream," she said in a low voice. "May I get up, please?"

There was a whispered consultation in a language which held some
gutturals, and then the man who had first spoken said: "You sit on a
chair, keep very quiet, long time, long time."

He gripped her by the arm and assisted her back to the dining--room,
guiding her to a chair, though there was enough light from a street lamp
for her to pick her way.

There were two men--little men; their heads were not much above her
shoulder. Broad, squat, and, as she had reason to know, immensely strong.
She could not see their faces; by accident or arrangement their backs
were to the window. He who was evidently chief of the two said something
in an unknown language, and his companion withdrew to the landing, and
the hall and landing lights went out. Presently he came back, and, to her
surprise, he was joined by a third. Again there was a whispered
consultation, and the third man disappeared, the other two squatting on
the carpet before her, impassive, silent, watching, as she guessed, with
eyes that did not leave her for a second. A quarter of an hour they sat
thus, and then:

"I speak English liddle bit. I hear English well," said the man. "I tell
you trut'. Last night Nagara cut your t'roat. This night he not hurt." He
added a phrase she could not understand.

"What are you going to do with me?" she asked.

"Presently, by--and--by," said the little man, after he had repeated
her words slowly and had grasped their meaning, "you and me walk into
carriage. While you walk you see peoples. If you speak to peoples I cut
you t'roat."

Very definite, but the repetition of the phrase amused her mildly.

"You're rather monotonous, aren't you?" she asked. "And after I get into
the carriage, what happens?"

There was a pause while he took this in.

"By--and--by you see," he said.

The third man came back now, and she gathered that he was in reality the
leading member of the gang, for on his word the two others vanished
through the door and he took their place.

"You won't be hurt unless you give us trouble," he said. To her surprise
he spoke in perfect English. "My patron requires you."

"Who is your patron?"

It gave her a sense of comfort to know that this queer little shape could
understand all she said and could converse intelligently. It made him
less of a strange and menacing animal, and removed some of the terror
from the situation. And it delayed the moment when she would find her
cumbersome garter a vital safeguard.

"I cannot answer your question, miss," he replied. "But you will not be
hurt. Last night you would have been killed--I myself would have killed
you--but that is not the order to--day. If you are sensible and quiet,
nothing will happen."

He stood up and looked out of the window; neither the shades nor the
curtains had been drawn, and he could see to the opposite side of the
road.

"I must tell you what will occur," he said. He had a trick of pedantry
which might have amused her at any other time. "This house is being
watched by the police. After a while they will grow tired and careless,
and then my friend will signal to me that they have walked away. When
that happens we will go."

She could not see him; she could only guess that his "friend" was one of
the two. She had noticed that all three were dressed in correct European
garb, and the incongruity of their overcoats and derby hats added a touch
of the bizarre.

"Will you therefore sit nearer to the window, at your writing place? If
the telephone rings you will not answer."

So they sat, he on one side of the table and she on the other, his eyes
roving to the sidewalk and from the sidewalk to his prisoner. She saw the
limousines stream past on their way to the theatres, and wondered if, on
any stage in London, there would be enacted a drama quite as improbable
as this in which she played a leading part.

After a long interval of silence: "I suppose you realize that, when I do
not arrive at Mr. Coldwell's house, he will either telephone or come back
for me?"

He nodded.

"We have already made provision," he said simply.

"We have sent him a telegram in your name, saying that you have been
called away to--" He hesitated. "I cannot remember the town; it is in
the West and is on the sea."

"Plymouth?" she asked quickly.

"Plymouth," he nodded. "The telegram also told him your hotel. Plymouth
is very far, and by the time he discovers you have not arrived"--a pause
--"by that time you will not be here."

"Where shall I be?" she asked.

"You will be in the harem of Diga Nagara, the great prince who is dead
yet is alive."

Leslie Maughan did not swoon. She stared across the table at the little
man. He was nodding solemnly.

"Diga Nagara, the great prince--who was dead and is alive!"

CHAPTER XVIII

CHILDREN--little Elizabeth and that unseen boy of his--! Peter Dawlish
walked up and down his cramped room, his hands in his pockets, an
unlighted cigarette between his lips. The hopelessness of it all! Where
and how could he begin his search? That baby of his belonged to the world
of unreality, to the mists of dreams. Elizabeth was real. He could see
those wide, frightened eyes of hers, the transparent pallor of her face.
He shut his eyes and there she was again, frail, delicate, pleading for
help he was powerless to give.

He was alone in the house. Through the thin partition walls which
separated one jerry--built cottage from the other he heard the sound of
a man and a wife quarrelling. In the street a boy was whistling flatly a
popular tune. If Mrs. Inglethorne were here he would have the truth
though he had to choke it from her. Who else would know but she?

He had been such a short time in the lodging that he was not even
acquainted with her friends--the slinking little thieves who came to
barter and haggle over the property they had stolen knew no more of her
than that she was a mean and grinding bargainer. She had no cronies to
come and spend the evening with her; by very reason of her peculiar
business, she could not risk the giving or taking of confidences.

The police had been to the house and made a perfunctory search, their
object being to discover other evidence against her. But they had looked
only for articles of value which she might have purchased: lengths of
cloth and silk (she specialized in this trade), and they were not
particularly concerned about Elizabeth. Nobody cared very much about
Elizabeth, except Leslie and he.

This thought occurred to him as he walked to and fro--and thought breeds
thought. Might he not, searching with another object, discover what they
had overlooked--one fragment of a clue that would bring him to the
child? Why should he be concerned? What legal or moral right had he to
detach Mrs. Inglethorne's daughter from her legal guardian? He considered
this matter, only to brush it aside. Presently he carried the lamp
downstairs with the faintly pleasurable hope which comes to all who
engage in secret searches.

The woman's room was accessible. The lock he had broken had not been
repaired. He went in, put the lamp on the mantelpiece and looked round.
Search parties usually leave chaos behind them, but the police in their
investigation had, if anything, tidied the room. There were a number of
dresses, obviously the woman's, stacked on the bed; two oleographs that
once decorated the wall had been lifted down--clean squares on the
wallpaper marked their old position. By the side of the clothes was a
square wooden box, of the kind that soldiers use for the transportation
of their possessions. This had been opened and was unlocked. The lid had
jammed upon a wedge of cloth as it had been closed, and there was a gap
of an inch.

Where would a woman like Mrs. Inglethorne keep papers? Or did she keep
papers at all? He tried to remember the habits of her type, acquired at
second--hand from his fortuitous acquaintances in Dartmoor Prison. Under
her bed? But the police had obviously rolled up the mattress and made
that elementary examination. There was nothing here--nothing. He opened
the big black box, disparagingly. And then he saw, with a quickening
interest, that the inside of the lid was almost covered by newspaper
cuttings which had been pasted on the wood. Here was revealed Mrs.
Inglethorne's "scrapbook," and incidentally her favourite daydream. A
headline caught his eye.

"HEIRESS TRACED BY HER BABY SOCK!"

Another headline ran:

"CHILD'S MOTHER TRACKED BY INITIAL ON INFANT'S GOWN."

He carried the lamp to a little table and read the cuttings carefully.
They all dealt with one subject: the identification of unknown children
that had brought fabulous fortunes to the lucky person who had traced
their descent. Some of the cuttings were very old, yellow with age and
scarcely decipherable. Evidently Mrs. Inglethorne's collection covered a
long period.

He supposed the police had searched the box, which was nearly filled with
little cylinder--shaped bundles tied around with tape. Linen, coarse
calico, cotton--diving into the mass, his fingers touched silk. The
bundles had once been white, but constant fingering and dust had left
them an indescribable hue. He untied a bundle and opened it. It consisted
of a child's cotton nightdress, a little pair of woollen shoes, and a
small knitted shawl. Pinned to the shoes was a scrap of paper on which
was written in an illiterate hand the words: "Mrs. Larse boy, 10 days
old, measles 9 months." Here then was the beginning and end of Mrs.
Larse's boy. "Measles 9 months" was his epitaph.

She was a baby farmer; he had guessed that. He opened another bundle
hopefully. Somewhere here would be a reference to Elizabeth. The second
package had nothing but a coarse calico robe and a penned inscription:
"Young girl named Leavey, 5 days, whooping cough 6 weeks." One by one he
unrolled these little tragedies, and few indeed were they who had not
their death certificates inscribed laconically at the end. Some had two
papers, identically inscribed. He supposed that the repetition was due to
Mrs. Inglethorne's careless and haphazard system of "book--keeping."

He had examined twelve and took out the thirteenth, wondering what
potency there was in that lucky or unlucky number. The nightdress he
unrolled was of the finest linen, the most expensive of all he had
examined. The shawl was of heavy silk, and the microscopic shirt of the
most delicate flannel. For some time he could not find the inscription,
but eventually it was discovered inside the shawl. Only three words, but
they set his heart beating:

"Miss Martha's girl."

The bundle dropped from his nerveless hands. "Miss Martha's--girl!"

 He took the letter out of his pocket. "I have found a home for your
son." He read again the pencilled words "Martha's servant." And Martha's
servant was--Mrs. Inglethorne!

Miss Martha's girl. This woman could not have made a mistake. One by one
he examined the clothes separately, and then, pinned to the inside of the
dress, near the collar, he found a second paper written in the same hand,
and, reading it, he uttered a hoarse cry.

"Miss Martha's girl Elizabeth."

Feverishly he untied the other bundles, but found no further clue. His
knees were trembling as he mounted the stairs, the precious garments
close to his heart. Putting down the lamp on the table, he examined again
these pitiful souvenirs. He must see Leslie at once. Not daring to leave
the clothes behind, he folded them and put them into his pocket. He used
the silk shawl as a neckcloth under his thin overcoat; the night was
bitterly cold but it was not the warmth of the soft fabric which brought
a glow to his heart.

The windows of the flat were in darkness, but he remembered that they had
heavy velvet curtains, and possibly--they were drawn. Ringing the bell,
he waited. There was no answer. He rang again. And then a man appeared
from a near--by doorway and strolled up to him.

"Who do you want?" he asked in a tone of authority. Peter guessed that he
was a detective.

"I want Miss Maughan. My name is Dawlish."

"Oh, Dawlish, yes. Miss Maughan isn't in. She is staying at Inspector
Coldwell's house in Finchley. There is nobody in the flat."

He did not hide his disappointment; he was so full of his discovery that
he had to tell somebody. He had to see her. The detective gave him the
inspector's address, and he walked across the Charing Cross Road,
intending to make his way to the Tube station. He reached the other side
of the road, and then something made him look back at the windows of her
apartments. And in that instant he saw a quick flicker of light, as
though somebody had turned on an electric handlamp for the fraction of a
second and had extinguished it immediately.

Peter stopped. Somebody was in Leslie's room. He walked slowly across the
road. The detective had disappeared; was, in point of fact, walking to
the back of the block to visit his fellow--watcher. As Peter stood,
hesitating, he saw the street door move slightly, and, acting on an
impulse, he pushed it wide open and took one step into the darkness.

"Who's there?" he said, and that was all that he remembered.

Something soft and heavy fell with a thud on his head, crushing his soft
hat as though it were paper. He stumbled on to his knees, and a second
blow laid him prostrate, the blood trickling down his face and staining
the soft silk that had once enwrapped his child.

There were no loiterers in Charing Cross Road that bitter night, when a
chill north--east wind sent people hurrying to the shelter of their
homes. There was no lounger to tell the detective of three people who had
walked hurriedly across the sidewalk into the car which was drawing to
the kerb at the very moment Peter pushed open the door.

CHAPTER XIX

As the car moved off, a man came running across the road, stepped lightly
on to the footboard, and wriggled his way to a place beside the driver.
The car was held up outside the Hippodrome, but only for a few seconds,
and then, turning, it sped wheezily along Coventry Street. They had a
good crossing of Piccadilly Circus, and a few seconds later they had
struck the gloom of lower Piccadilly and had turned into Hyde Park.

Leslie had a glimpse now of the faces of her captors; yellow, with that
Oriental slant of the eye which is common to the Chinese and Japanese.
Here the likeness ended; their faces lacked the intelligence of the
people of the island kingdoms.

Javanese, of course. How stupid she had been not to have realized that
from the first! Anita Bellini had lived in Java for many years. And then
she remembered Peter's words. She understood the chained door because of
the attack that had been made on her flat. Anita's bodyguard had been
engaged elsewhere; she had need of chains to protect her house in their
absence.

Who was Diga Nagara? It sounded familiar. It was one of those colourable
figures in history that even the skimming student retains as a fluttering
rag of memory. Some Javanese god, perhaps.

"Who is Diga Nagara?" she asked suddenly.

She heard the men draw in their breath as though they were shocked.

"The Prince, the Great One," said the man on her left after a while. He
spoke in a low, awe--stricken voice. "He who is not dead, though the
Dutchmen think he is."

"Dutchmen?" Of course, Java was a Dutch possession. She wished now she
had made a study of the Malaysian States, and knew just what was entailed
by an inclusion in the harem of this prince who was dead and yet not
dead.

The car slipped across Hammersmith Bridge, and, after a few minutes, she
could identify the spot where the body of Druze had been found. They were
going to Wimbledon, then--to Anita's grisly house.

The machine came to a stop before the door of May Towers, and she hurried
up the steps. She had not reached the top before the door was opened. No
light showed in the hall, and she heard the door clang behind her and a
chain rattle as it was fastened, and her courage almost deserted her.
Somebody flashed the light of a hand--lamp; she saw the wide, heavily
carpeted stairs.

"Go up," said her conductor, his hand still on her arm, and she obeyed.

The stairs turned and they reached a wide landing. Somebody knocked at a
door, and a voice which she recognized as Anita's said: "Come in."

The man who had knocked pushed the door open wide. She had a glimpse of a
lofty wall, hidden by a black curtain, which was covered with curious
designs in gold thread--work. The room was filled with an unearthly
greenish light; the hand of the gaoler fell from her arm; she walked into
the room alone, and the door closed behind her.

It was a long and ill--proportioned salon. With the exception of a divan
at the far end and a low table near by it was bare of furniture. The
carpet underfoot was either purple or black; in the queer light of two
green lamps that burnt on either side of the settee, it was impossible to
distinguish its colour.

Anita Bellini sat cross--legged on the divan, horribly suggestive of
some repellent and grotesque idol, in her golden frock. Her massive arms
were smothered from wrist to elbow with glittering bracelets. Three ropes
of pearls hung about her strong neck, and every time her hands moved they
sparkled and scintillated brilliantly. A long ebony cigarette--holder
was between her lips; that immovable monocle of hers gleamed greenly.

"Come along, Maughan; sit here." She pointed to the floor, and, black
against black, invisible from where she had paused when she had entered
the room, Leslie saw a heap of cushions.

She sat obediently, looking up into the coarse face. So they sat
surveying one another for a space, and then, flicking the ash from her
cigarette, Anita Bellini spoke.

"You have brains, I suppose?"

"I suppose so," said Leslie coolly.

"Sufficient brains to know that I wouldn't take the risk of bringing you
here--abducting is the word, I think--unless my position were rather
desperate. I'd have killed you last night, but that would have been a
fatal mistake. You are much more useful to me alive."

Leslie smiled faintly.

"Which sounds like a line from a melodrama," she said.

To this Anita made no reply.

''Have you heard of Diga Nagara?" she asked. "I see you have. He was a
great prince of Java, who died seventy years ago. He has become a
legendary figure, and the natives believe he is immortal, that he enjoys,
through his subjects, all the creature comforts of a living man. In his
name they will go to any extreme."

She stopped, took out her monocle with a characteristic gesture, polished
it mechanically on the knee of her dress, and put it back.

"You were to have been killed last night because Diga Nagara designed
your death. If I gave you to be the wife of one of these men, you would
be Diga Nagara's bride, whoever held your hand. Do you appreciate that?"

Leslie nodded. Her eyes did not leave the woman's face.

"The Javanese are a gentle, kindly people," Anita continued slowly; "but
in some ways--they are not nice."

"I understand all this is a threat as to what will happen to me if I do
not do something you wish."

"You're a sensible girl," said Anita Bellini, and leaned forward, her
elbows on her knees. She was very much like a fishwife in that attitude;
there was something inexpressibly common about her, in spite of her
monocle and her Parisian gown, and the luxury of her surroundings. "This
afternoon"--she was still speaking very slowly and distinctly--
"Coldwell applied to the Bow Street magistrate for a warrant--a warrant
for my arrest and a search of this house. Did you know that?"

Leslie was genuinely astonished and shook her head. "I had no idea, and I
can't think that what you say is true," she said. "Mr. Coldwell made no
mention of any such arrest; in fact, I was spending the night at his
house, and I know he had arranged--"

Anita broke into her explanation. "He applied. Whether the warrant was
granted or not, I do not know. That is one point. Another is this: you
visited Greta Gurden tonight, and she told you the one thing in the world
I wished that she should not tell. I know, because I saw you go in and
come out of her flat, and I have seen Greta since," she added grimly. "It
isn't necessary for me to tell you the vital information you discovered."

"It isn't," said Leslie. "But I might have found that out, anyway. In
fact, I should, if I'd had the sense to go straight to Dr. Wesley and ask
him how long before Donald Dawlish's death he was unconscious. I've
always suspected that the alteration of that will was a forgery. I saw a
copy of it, and I have compared it with the signature of Donald Dawlish.
It would not have been very difficult to prove that the new will, which
gave Mrs. Dawlish the whole of her husband's fortune and which
disinherited Peter, was a forgery from beginning to end. The doctor will,
of course, prove that beyond any question. On the day he was supposed to
have made the new will, Mr. Dawlish did not recover consciousness.
Surely, Princess, you don't imagine that you will get away with that! Mr.
Dawlish's lawyers have always been dissatisfied with the will that was
made without consultation, and which was only proved because they could
not induce Peter Dawlish to contest its validity."

Anita Bellini made no answer to this.

"I'm chiefly concerned with myself and my own safety," she said at last.
"You've got to help me, and Martha must look after herself. You've got to
help clear me. I'm going to make you a very good offer--a hundred
thousand pounds."

Leslie shook her head.

"Not all the money in the world will influence me, Princess," she said.
"How could I clear you? You talk as though I were the chief of the
detective bureau and had authority to divert the processes of the law.
The person you must see is Lady Raytham, whom you have blackmailed for
years, and even if she were agreeable, the law requires that you shall
explain the death of Annie Druze."

"It was an accident."

Leslie nodded.

"I know--or, rather; I guessed. But that has got to come into the light,
and it cannot come into the light unless the story of the blackmail is
revealed. I am willing to do this: let me walk out of your door unharmed,
and the little adventure of tonight will be forgotten. I will forget your
smelly Javanese; I will forget what happened last night. Tell me where I
can find"--she paused--"Elizabeth Dawlish."

"There is no such person," said Anita harshly.

"Elizabeth Dawlish," repeated Leslie, "Peter's daughter."

Princess Anita Bellini was not smoking now. She had the holder in her
hand, turning it over and over and examining it critically as though she
were looking for some defect.

"You've got to get me out of this mess, Leslie Maughan."

Leslie rose to her feet.

"I thought you were clever," she said, with a note of contempt in her
voice. "Nothing can get you out--nothing!"

"Is that so?" Anita's voice was soft and silky. "Do you realize, my good
woman, that if I can't get out, who has put me in--you! You've been
prying into the history of the Druzes, have you? Ah ha!" She laughed
harshly. "I know a great deal more than you imagine. And you've been
putting the little pieces together to trap Anita--poor old Anita, eh?"
She showed her big white teeth in a mirthless smile, and suddenly slipped
from the divan and drew near to the girl. "Let us have a marriage feast,"
she said, and clapped her hands twice.

The room was seemingly empty; yet at that signal half a dozen little men,
naked to the waist, appeared as if by magic from behind the long
curtains. Anita, her face swollen with rage, spluttered something in the
Javanese tongue, and the squat shapes came shuffling towards her.

Leslie did not move; she stood erect, her hands by her sides, her pale
face turned to the woman. Even when they seized her, she did not resist,
but allowed herself to be hurried behind the fold of a curtain and
through a door into a stuffy little room into which she was thrust. The
door was closed on her, a lock snapped; from the other side of the door a
mocking voice called her.

"Hail to the bride!"

Then a few words in the strange tongue of Java, and, answering these, the
chatter of the little men's laughter.

Leslie stooped, pulled up her skirt, and unstrapped an appendange from a
garter. It was a small calibre Browning. She slipped back the jacket,
forced in a cartridge and brought the catch to safety. Then she began to
explore.

The appointments of the room were a little tawdry. The divan, which
seemed an indispensable adjunct to every room, was old and worn; a shaded
light hung from the ceiling; there were two brass dishes attached to the
wall. It appeared to be the apartment of a highly favoured upper servant,
and this she confirmed when she turned over the coverings of the divan
and saw what was apparently a suit of native clothing.

There was a second door to the room and this she tried. Then, to her
surprise and delight, she saw that there was a key on the outside. She
turned this, and to her relief it opened, and she found herself in a very
conventional bedroom, the type of apartment she would have expected to
discover in any of the houses on Wimbledon Common. No lights were burning
and it was inadvisable to switch them on. Softly she closed the door of
the room she had left, and, tiptoeing across the floor, felt her way to
the--bedroom door. She turned the handle softly and looked out.

Happily, the two men who stood on the landing had their backs turned to
her. She closed the door again, in an agony of fear lest she should make
a sound. Running quickly across the bedroom, she tried the windows. They
were not only fastened and barred, but, as a further harrier to egress,
the bars were covered with a stout wire screen. Perhaps there was a
bathroom, she thought, and groped along the wall. After a while she felt
the handle of a door and opened it gingerly. She must risk putting on the
light for a second, and this she did.

It was evidently used as a dressing--room, and there was another door
which, she guessed, led to a second bedroom. She turned out the lights;
the door was locked, and again the key was on the outside. For a moment
she suspected a trap and hesitated, but after a moment turned the key and
entered the room, only to draw back instantly. Somebody was there; she
heard the sound of breathing, and a tiny creak as though a body was
turning in bed. And then:

"Who is it, please?" asked a voice, and Leslie nearly dropped.

For the child who spoke from the darkness was Elizabeth!

"Don't make a sound," she whispered, and, taking out the key, closed the
door and locked it on the inside.

Only then did she feel for the light switch. The room was a small one,
and apparently there was no other way out than that by which she had
come. The small window was barred and wired; the window itself was of
opaque glass. She looked round at Elizabeth; she was sitting up in a
small bed, looking with astonishment at this unexpected vision. Then
suddenly she leapt out of bed and came running towards the girl, and
Leslie caught her in her arms.

"Are you going to take me away? I'm so frightened--these little men
frighten me. I told you about them. One came and left the pistol with
mother. Oh, take me away, please, please!"

Leslie gathered the frail form in her arms and kissed her.

"There's nothing to be afraid of," she said, but without any great
conviction. "Tell me quickly, Elizabeth; is there another way out of this
room?"

To her surprise, the child pointed to a plain bureau which stood against
the wall.

"She comes through there sometimes," she whispered. "A terrible woman--
with an eyeglass. She told me that if I made any trouble one of the black
men would kill me." The child shuddered.

Putting her gently away, Leslie went to the bureau and pulled open the
door. The wardrobe was empty and reached from the floor to the height of
her head. The back was undoubtedly a door; there was no disguise about
it. There was neither keyhole nor handle. Using all her strength, she
pushed, and the door swung open--it had been fastened by a very simple
spring catch.

She returned to Elizabeth and wrapped a bedspread round her thin
shoulders.

"You're to be very brave and very quiet," she whispered. "Come with me."

The child hesitated. "She told me I must never go through there," she
began, but Leslie reassured her, and they passed through into an
apartment which was also a bedroom, though apparently out of use. The bed
was not made, and some of the furniture was shrouded in holland covers.

Again Leslie opened the main door, this time to find herself on another
landing. There was nobody in sight. Down below, at the foot of a narrow
flight of stairs, a light burnt dimly.

"You've got a pistol too," whispered the child in wonder, and Leslie
smiled.

"Don't talk," she breathed into Elizabeth's ear, and led the way down the
stairs.

They terminated in a small passage, paved with tiles. As she reached the
foot of the stairs she heard the sound of voices, and, looking round
cautiously, she saw that under the stairs was a door, and it was open. At
the far end of the passage was another, and this obviously led to the
outside of the house, for it was chained and bolted.

As she stood, debating what she should do, the voices grew fainter, and
the patch of light on the wall which marked the open door disappeared. It
was her chance. Grasping the child by the arm, she slipped off her shoes
and hurried noiselessly along the passage in her stockinged feet.

She had reached the door, and with fingers which, in spite of her will,
trembled, moved first one chain and then another. The top and bottom
bolts were drawn; her hand was on the key, when from somewhere above came
an outcry. A bell rang, a door under the stairs was flung open and three
men ran out. The first two did not see her, but made for the stairs. The
third caught sight of her over his shoulder and yelled a warning. In an
instant the three men were flying towards her. Twice the little pistol
banged, and one man slid to the ground with a yell, grasping his knee.
And then they were on her and she was fighting desperately for life.

She heard the scream of the child and called out to her to open the door
and escape. But Elizabeth was too petrified with terror to make any
movement.

They carried Leslie Maughan, trussed and bound, into the purple salon and
laid her at Anita's feet. And then the man who spoke English lifted his
hand.

"Lady," he said, "here is the woman. What shall be done?"

Anita pointed to him with her thick jewelled finger.

"This night you shall have the soul and body of Diga Nagara," she said in
her grating voice. "Diga Nagara--this is your bride!"

CHAPTER XX

IT seemed to Peter Dawlish that he had been unconscious for an eternity
when he turned over on his back with a groan and felt carefully towards
his damaged head. His face was wet and sticky, and when he essayed to
rise to his feet, it seemed that the whole of the building was
oscillating violently. Presently, however, he was up, keeping to the wall
for support, and, grasping the handle of the door, he jerked it open and
was instantly gripped with hands of steel.

"Hullo, who are you?" asked a stern voice.

"I don't know--Dawlish--something happened. I saw a light and came over
--and then the door opened and I don't remember much more."

The detective recognized him.

"The door opened?" he said anxiously. "Was somebody in the flat?"

Peter nodded and winced.

"Give me a drink," he said, and the detective guided him by the arm and
led him upstairs to Leslie's room.

A glass of ice--cold water revived him and he was able to tell a
coherent story of his experience.

"It couldn't have been more than ten minutes ago," said the detective. "I
went round to see my opposite number and I'll swear I wasn't gone for
more than that time."

Suddenly he stooped to the floor and took up something. It was a loose
native slipper that had slipped from the foot of Leslie's captor in the
hurry of departure. The light he had shown when he searched for this was
the light that Peter saw.

"Just wait; I'll call Mr. Coldwell."

Inspector Coldwell was at dinner when the message came.

"Hang on, I'll come down," he said. "I've had a wire from Miss Maughan
that she's going to Plymouth, but that doesn't mean anything."

He was in the flat twenty minutes later. By this time Peter's wound had
been roughly dressed, and he had washed the blood from his face. Save for
the throhof?? the wound, he was little the worse for his experience.

"They coshed you with a rubber club; it is rather a good method," said
Coldwell callously.

He looked round the room with pursed lips and a frown.

"It doesn't follow that because those birds were here, she was here," he
said, and glanced at his watch. "Too early for Miss Maughan to have
arrived at Plymouth. Just wait; I want to make sure."

He drove to the telegraph office from which the message had been sent,
and was fortunate to find the postmaster just leaving his office.

"I want to see the telegram that was--sort from here about five o'clock
to--night addressed to me."

"You want to see the original telegram, I suppose? That won't be
difficult."

It was more difficult than he supposed, and half an hour's precious time
was wasted before the pencilled form was produced. Coldwell had only to
glance at the writing to know that it was not in Leslie's hand. Yet a
woman had written it; that was obvious from the characteristic writing.

He returned to the flat and sent the detective in a cab to Scotland Yard
and Peter employed this interval to tell him of what he had found in Mrs.
Inglethorne's box.

"I pretty well guessed that," said Coldwell. "So did Leslie--Miss
Maughan. 'The son' meant nothing. This unfortunate lady had intended
keeping the child with her if it were a girl, and that was not the wish
of the gang who were bleeding her. They told her she had a son. But I'm
going to make sure about that before we go any farther. Somehow I'm not
so scared about Leslie Maughan as I ought to be perhaps. She's got a sort
of gun."

A quarter of an hour after, his cab drew up before the gloomy doors of
Holloway Prison, and after a strict scrutiny of his credentials he was
admitted, and conducted to one of the main halls of the gaol, where the
remand prisoners were housed. The chief wardress opened the door and went
in. Presently she came out and beckoned him into the cell.

Mrs. Inglethorne was sitting, a scowl on her face, her big raw hands
clasped before her. She knew Coldwell, and lifted her lip in a grin of
rage.

"Don't you come in here!" she said shrilly. "I'm not going to talk to
you. If you want to find that kid, you go and find her! And that'll take
you some time, I'll bet!"

"Listen!" Coldwell had a very direct way with criminals.

"Whether you'll get nine months or a lagging depends on the answer you
give me, Mrs. Inglethorne. There's just a chance that you may get
something worse than a lagging."

She scowled up at him. "What do you mean?"

Very deliberately he sketched a portion of her life; told her where she
had lived, and how long she had stayed in her various places of abode.
She made no comment or correction, looking down at her hands, and only
when he paused did she meet his eyes.

"Is that all?" she asked insolently.

"Not quite all. You have been engaged in baby farming for the past twenty
years. In 1916, in the month of July, you received from one called Arthur
Druze a baby boy of a few days old. Where is that child?"

"You'd better find out," she said.

"It is for you to find out," he said, in that hard, metallic voice which
he adopted on occasions. "You have to prove to me that that child is
alive, or there's another charge against you."

"Eh?" She was startled. The big mouth trembled. "You can't charge me--"

"I'll charge you with murder, and I'll dig up the garden of every house
you've occupied in the past six years to find evidence."

Mrs. Inglethorne's many--chinned jaw dropped; her eyes stared wildly,
and in their depths Coldwell read the very terror of death.

"I've done nothing--like that!" she almost screamed.

"You were Martha's servant, weren't you?"

She nodded dumbly, and then, throwing herself on the couch, she writhed
like a woman demented. And in her dementia she broke the habit of a
lifetime and told the truth.

A police tender was standing outside the door of Leslie's flat when
Coldwell came back, and a dozen men stood about on the sidewalk. He
beckoned Peter to him.

"You had better come along," he said.

"Where are you going?"

"To Wimbledon. Do you feel fit enough? There may not be a scrap, but I
rather imagine that her supreme and exalted Highness will die fighting."

"Is Leslie there?"

Coldwell nodded.

A hundred yards short of May Towers the tender stopped and the little
army of men got down. On the journey Coldwell had made his arrangements.
Four of the detectives were to make their way to the back of the house;
the remainder were to force the entrance. It was Coldwell who rang the
bell. In his right hand he gripped an axe, ready to strike at the chain
the moment the door was opened.

Standing behind him, Peter saw him stoop his head.

"Can you hear anything?" he whispered.

"No, sir."

"Thought I heard a scream."

He waited a few seconds longer, and then:

"Give me the crowbar."

Somebody passed him up the long steel bar, and with a swing he drove the
clawed ends between door and lintel. Again he struck, and this time had
his purchase. Pulling back with all his strength, the door cracked open.
Two blows from the axe broke the chain, and they streamed into the dark
hall and up the stairs.

* * * * *

The squat Javanese stooped and lifted the girl without an effort, and as
he did so the little men who stood around clapped their hands
rhythmically and droned the marriage song of their class. Leslie heard
and set her teeth, as she felt herself raised in the strong hands of this
hideous little man.

She had a glimpse of Anita Bellini--the hate in her eyes made her
shudder in spite of herself.

"Good--bye, little Maughan!" she mocked. "There is death at the end of
this."

And then she stopped, her eyes glaring towards the door.

"Stand fast, everybody! Tell these fellows not to move, Bellini!"

It was Coldwell's voice. Leslie felt herself slipping from the encircling
arms. Then suddenly somebody caught her, and she looked round into the
haggard face of Peter Dawlish.

"No gunplay," said Coldwell gently, "and there will be no trouble. I want
you, Bellini; I suppose you are prepared for that?"

"I am called Princess Bellini," she began.

"Whether you're Princess Bellini or Annie Druze or Alice Druze is a
matter of supreme indifference to me," said Coldwell, as he caught her
wrist. "But you have the distinction of being the first woman I've ever
handcuffed."

He snapped the cold circle about her wrist.

"But then, you see, most of the ladies I've pinched have been gentle
little souls who wouldn't hurt a fly."

She made no reply. That old look had come into her face again which
Leslie had seen before.

Then Anita Bellini did an unexpectedly generous thing. She nodded to the
wondering group of natives shepherded behind three armed detectives.

"These men have done no harm," she said. "They have merely carried out my
instructions in ignorance of the law."

She said something in Javanese to the man who--had held Leslie, and he
grinned and answered in the same language.

"My head boy here"--she nodded to him--"will accept responsibility for
the other natives."

And then, with a sideways jerk of her head and a hard smile: "Well, here
is the end of the Druzes," she said.

"Not quite." Leslie's quiet voice interrupted her. "Martha has still to
be disposed of."

There was anger, but there was fear also in Anita Bellini's grimace.

"Martha? What do you mean--Martha?" she asked sharply. "I have not seen
her for years."

Leslie smiled. "I saw her two days ago, so I have the advantage of you,"
she said.

They waited only long enough for Leslie to gather a change of dress and a
coat for the prisoner, and thereafter Anita Bellini went out of her life
for ever, except for the day when Leslie stood in the witness--box and
testified against the manacled prisoner, who did not look at her but sat
staring straight ahead at the scarlet-robed judge.

Before she collected the clothes she went in search of Elizabeth, and
found her weeping in her bed in the little dressing--room, and persuaded
her to dress. By the time the Princess was out of the house and on her
way to Wimbledon police station, the child was arrayed in her rags.
Leslie stood in the doorway looking at her, and she was very near to
tears.

"Elizabeth, do you remember how you used to pretend you had all sorts of
nice fathers?" The child nodded and smiled. "Well, I'm going to introduce
you to a real one."

"A real father?" asked the girl breathlessly. "My father?"

"And you'll never guess who he is." Suddenly the child was clinging to
her, her arms locked about her neck. Thus Peter found them, weeping
together.

CHAPTER XXI

IT was not often that Mrs. Donald Dawlish made a call at any hour of the
day; the appearance in Berkeley Square of her big Rolls was something of
an event. But at eleven o'clock at night...

"Mrs. Dawlish?" sad Jane in wonder, when the footman came to her with the
news. She had not seen the woman for two years. Indeed, Mrs. Dawlish's
attitude of late had been frankly antagonistic. "Ask her to come up,
please."

The woman strode into the room, patting her mop of untidy white hair into
place. She wore the black which suited her better than any more vivid
shade, and on her bosom blazed a diamond star which was just a little too
large to be altogether ornamental.

"I suppose you're surprised at my coming at this hour?" She dropped her
shawl on the settee, and, walking to the fire, held out her hands to the
blaze.

"I am--a little," said Jane, wondering what was coming next. Nothing
short of a catastrophe could have brought Peter's mother in such
circumstances.

"I've been a good friend of yours, Jane--in the past," she began, and
her look asked for confirmation; but Jane was silent. "There's trouble,
bad trouble, over that will of the old man's," she went on. "I've had a
letter from his lawyer to--night, asking me to give them all sorts of
information that I am not prepared to give. The will was proved six years
ago. They can do nothing now, but they nag and nag, and I'm getting tired
of it all. They may be acting for Peter, but I doubt it. But Peter can
stop this persecution."

It was the first news that Jane Raytham had had of any trouble in
connection with the will, but the request was one which she could not
pass unchallenged.

"I know nothing about the matter," she said. "Peter, of course, must do
as he wishes. I have no influence there."

"You have a big influence," said Mrs. Dawlish emphatically. "Peter has
found out about the child; I suppose you know that?"

Jane nodded.

"The man is crazy to find it, and--"

She met the grey eyes and stopped.

"I am crazy to find it too," said Jane Raytham in a low voice.

"Are you?" Mrs. Dawlish was honestly surprised. "I didn't think you were
that kind--to worry about--things. Well, that's all the better from my
point of view. I can give you the child. You can tell Peter that I'll
give you the child and make him a handsome allowance if he will stop his
lawyers from worrying me."

"You can give me the child? You know where he is?" Jane's voice shook.

"Well--yes, I do. It wasn't a boy, Jane."

Jane Raytham shrank back as if she had been struck.

"Not a boy? A girl? And you promised me--"

"There's no sense in talking about promises, or what happened eight years
ago," said Margaret Dawlish coldly. "I'm talking about the present. Yes,
it was a girl. Druze took her to an old servant of mine--Martha's
servant."

Jane could only stare at her, speechless with amazement.

"You--you're Martha?"

Mrs, Dawlish nodded.

"Martha Druze?"

"Martha Dawlish. I am entitled to that name; not even Peter can take it
from me. I married old Dawlish a fortnight after his wife died in
childbirth. Anita bullied him into it, if you want to know the truth. She
would have married him herself, but Bellini was alive. I was her
favourite sister and she always wanted me to make a good marriage. I
don't know what she had been to my husband and I don't very much care,
but she was an attractive woman in those days, before she let herself go;
at any rate she had enough influence to make him marry me."

Jane passed her hands before her eyes, as though she were trying to sweep
away the mist which still obscured a clear view.

"You're Martha?" she said again. "Of course, I knew you were a nurse.
Then, Peter?"

"No, Peter isn't my son, if that is what you're going to say. I insisted
that he shouldn't be told. I felt it would weaken my position and
authority. Mr. Dawlish was rather an easy--going man and he agreed. If
Peter had had the brains of a gnat he wouldn't have needed telling. He
had only to see the registration of his birth and compare it with my
marriage certificate to know as much as you know now. Jane, will you help
me with him? I don't care how large is the allowance I make him."

Jane shook her head helplessly.

"I don't know what I can do. I can't think very clearly, only--I want
the child--my girl."

The hard face of Mrs. Dawlish creased in a rare smile.

"Is there nobody else who wants her?" she asked significantly. "Has Peter
no rights? You haven't thought of that, I suppose?"

"I have thought of it," said Jane in a low voice. "But I know Peter. And
whether I have her, or he, she will be free to us both. We're going very
swiftly down the slope, and the slope is getting steeper," she shook her
head, "and God knows where we shall land at the bottom. I've been just as
wicked as a woman can be. I'm a bigamist--don't interrupt me, please--
I'm a bigamist, and my husband must know. I don't think it will worry him
as much as it worries me, and in a way he'll be rather glad to get rid of
me. But I can face all that if I have my baby! I'll do what I can," she
went on quickly, recovering the lost balance, "if it doesn't hurt Peter--
I've hurt him enough. He is too good a man to be wounded any farther. I
cannot see him to--night; I will write to him and ask if I may see him
to--morrow, and then--"

The door was opening slowly and a man came in whose head was whitely
bandaged. At first she did not recognize him, and then:

"Why--why, Peter!" she faltered.

He was leading by the hand a little girl in a worn, stained ulster. The
golden head was hatless. Jane Raytham looked down into that beautiful
child face, saw the clear eyes looking at her wonderingly, solemnly, and
put up her hand to her throat, hardly daring to speak. She opened her
lips; no sound came. She made yet another effort.

"Who is this, Peter?"

It was not like her own voice.

"This is Elizabeth," said Peter gently. "Elizabeth"--he stooped and
looked into the child's face--"Elizabeth, this is your mother!"

CHAPTER XXII

"I'M sorry to have brought you down to this very unpretentious little
flat of mine," said Leslie, "but I have discovered in myself some of the
qualities of a showman, and really and truly most of the documents and
proofs I have are here."

And then she laughed, rocking from side to side in her chair.

"What is the joke?" asked Coldwell suspiciously.

"You look so like Christy Minstrels, all sitting round in a circle with
your hands on your knees, and it's two o'clock in the morning, and--oh;
there are a dozen reasons why I should laugh. I'll begin at the
beginning, shall I?

"I suppose everybody knows how I worked up an interest in this case,
through finding a book of poems in a little Cumberland farmhouse, and how
I put two and several together, made them four, guessed them six, and
finally proved their real quantity beyond doubt.

"There was a family living in Devonshire named Druze." Briefly she
retailed all that the clergyman had told her, and all she had learnt from
subsequent inquiries.

"Annie Druze was in reality Anita. Alice was Arthur Druze, and Martha,
the younger of the two, eventually became Mrs. Dawlish. The three girls
were very staunch friends. They had made some sort of compact in their
childhood to stand together through thick and thin, and that is the only
creditable aspect of their subsequent careers. Annie went abroad as a
lady's maid, and scraped an acquaintance in some way with an impecunious
scion of an Italian family and married him. Martha had a training in a
hospital, became a maternity nurse, and was subsequently called in to
nurse Peter's mother with her first child.

"Alice, the middle sister, joined her sister in Java, where the prince
had taken some minor position. I have had a long talk with Martha, and
she tells me that Alice Druze became Arthur Druze as the result of a
masquerade. She went one night to a fancy dress ball dressed as a man,
and nobody guessed her identity. The possibility may have occurred to
Anita, as she had become, that in this guise her sister would be of use
to her, for there is little question that even so long ago Anita was
engaged in blackmail There is proof that she blackmailed a Government
official of Java, and there is the record of a complaint made to the
English police in '89, when she returned to this country, from the wife
of one of her victims. And she did not stop at blackmail. Martha--who,
to save her own skin, has betrayed everybody--says that she had forged
three bills of exchange to her knowledge. It is established that it was
Anita who forged Lord Everreed's signature, and, taking advantage of
Peter being out of the way, got Druze to cash the cheque, the proceeds of
which were divided between the two sisters. Whether she did this out of
sheer wickedness and with Martha's knowledge in order to ruin Peter, or
whether she was in low water, I cannot discover. Martha suggests the
latter reason, and swears that she knew nothing about the forgery until
later. I have my own opinion.

"Anita was distinctly acquainted with Jane before Peter knew her, but she
did not become interested in her until after her marriage and return to
England. The arrest of Peter coincided with Anita learning that Lord
Raytham, a very rich man, was anxious to marry Jane, who in some
mysterious fashion had disappeared. Anita guessed the cause and went in
search of and found her. She learnt of Jane's condition and kept by her,
her object being to persuade her to marry Raytham, so that she might
profitably exploit the new Lady Raytham. She tried to persuade Jane that
her marriage wasn't legal, hoping that the girl in her desperation would
commit bigamy and be under her thumb for the rest of her life. But Jane
made one desperate attempt to free herself from the marriage. She went to
Reno, applied for a divorce, and that divorce was granted."

"Granted?" Jane's voice was shrill, almost a scream. "It was not granted,
Leslie; it was refused--!"

"It was granted. Your decree was made absolute. I have a cablegram from
the clerk of the court to that effect--it arrived last night. Naturally,
Anita did her best to prevent the divorce, because if it were given, she
had practically no hold except the child, which was subsequently taken
away by her sister and handed to Mrs. Inglethorne, who for four years was
in Martha's employment. When she found she couldn't stop the divorce, she
induced Jane to go out of court whilst the judge was giving his decision.
Her car was waiting at the door of the court, and Jane was sitting in it,
waiting for the verdict. It was not until Anita came out of court and
joined her in the car that Jane learnt that the divorce had been refused.
She married Raytham, believing that she was a bigamist, and yet finding
poor sort of comfort in the belief that there had been some sort of
irregularity in her marriage which made it invalid.

"For seven years Jane Raytham has been paying toll to the blackmailer,
supposedly the man who had charge of the child, in reality to Anita
Bellini and her sister.

"Immediately after her return from America, Jane went to Appledore, her
time being very near at hand. It was then that Martha was called in, and
the poor girl learned that white-aproned nurse was the terrible Mrs.
Dawlish whom Peter hated and feared. This was the beginning of Jane's
time of torment which endured until a week ago. Then Druze, as I will
call her, got scared. I think I was the person responsible. My inquiries
about the twenty thousand pounds that had been drawn from Jane's bank,
information which came to Scotland Yard in quite a normal way, frightened
her and she decided to go abroad, getting as much money as she possibly
could before she left.

"Jane gave her her emerald chain, and with this Druze went off to
interview her sister. There was some little quarrel as to the division of
the spoils. Anita, who was the stronger of the two, snatched the chain
from her sister's hands, never expecting that the woman, infuriated with
drink and anger, carried a pistol. In that struggle which followed, Druze
was shot, but in some miraculous fashion still retained her hold of the
square emerald. I can only imagine that Anita was so beside herself with
grief that she did not make a search. In a panic she had the body put on
the car and taken to the lonely spot and left there. But new clues were
coming to light every day. Mrs. Inglethorne reported the presence of
Peter Dawlish in her house and his interest in the child. Imagining that
he suspected who Elizabeth was, and that his coming to Severall Street
was designed, she had the little girl taken to Wimbledon, and
concentrated all her mind upon getting rid of my unworthy self. For in me
she thought she saw her chief enemy, and I think she was right.

"And that," said Leslie simply, "is that!"

Mr. Coldwell got up stiffly and stretched himself. "I'm going home to
bed. It's very unlikely that you will be troubled by the little yellow
boys, and I think I can leave you and your Lucretia here without any
misgivings. I don't know how this is going to look in court, or who will
be brought into the case and who will not, but those things are the
little unpleasantnesses which you will have to live through and live
down."

Jane knew he was addressing her and smiled. "I can live everything down,"
she said, "and live through everything, if somebody will let that little
yellow head sleep on my pillow now and again."

She walked across to Peter and held out her hand. "I don't know whether
I'm glad--about the divorce," she said. "I think I am. And I hope you
are, Peter."

She cast a swift sidelong glance towards Leslie, who was arranging her
papers at the desk, and dropped her voice still lower.

"Do you think somebody else is glad?" she asked.

"I hope so," said Peter, and for the first and last time Jane Raytham
felt a little twinge that had a remote resemblance to jealousy. It was
gone in a second.

"Come and see me to--morrow--I want to arrange things for--our
family."

And when his lips twitched, "That smile was almost paternal," she said.

They were all gone at last except Peter and Leslie, and Lucretia, washing
up noisily in the scullery, her door half open to ensure the proprieties.

"Well?" asked Leslie.

"Very well--bewilderingly well."

"I told you about Mrs. Dawlish and what she intends doing?"

He nodded.

"You can, of course, charge her with being privy to the forgery, but I
think it was Anita's work. It will be so much better if you allow her to
pass the property to you by deed of gift. That makes you a very rich man,
Peter. What are you going to do with it? Buy a house in Park Lane?"

"Would you like a house in Park Lane?" he asked.

"I'd like almost any kind of house, Peter," she said quietly.

Lucretia, looking through the half--opened door, saw the brown head of
her mistress pillowed on Peter's shabby jacket, saw him bend his head and
kiss her.

Lucretia sneered.

"My Gawd!" she said, addressing nobody in particular. "These women!"



THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia

