

Project Gutenberg Australia



Title:      The Pearl of Love
Author:     H.G. Wells
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.:  0601951.txt
Edition:    1
Language:   English
Character set encoding:     Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted:          June 2006
Date most recently updated: June 2006

This eBook was produced by: Malcolm Farmer

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


Title:      The Pearl of Love
Author:     H.G. Wells





The pearl is lovelier than the most brilliant of crystalline stones, the
moralist declares, because it is made through the suffering of a living
creature. About that I can say nothing because I feel none of the
fascination of pearls. Their cloudy lustre moves me not at all. Nor can
I decide for myself upon that agelong dispute whether The Pearl of Love
is the cruellest of stories or only a gracious fable of the immortality
of beauty.

Both the story and the controversy will be familiar to students of
mediaeval Persian prose. The story is a short one, though the commentary
upon it is a respectable part of the literature of that period. They
have treated it as a poetic invention and they have treated it as an
allegory meaning this, that, or the other thing. Theologians have had
their copious way with it, dealing with it particularly as concerning
the restoration of the body after death, and it has been greatly used as
a parable by those who write about aesthetics. And many have held it to
be the statement of a fact, simply and baldly true.

The story is laid in North India, which is the most fruitful soil for
sublime love stories of all the lands in the world. It was in a country
of sunshine and lakes and rich forests and hills and fertile valleys;
and far away the great mountains hung in the sky, peaks, crests, and
ridges of inaccessible and eternal snow. There was a young prince, lord
of all the land; and he found a maiden of indescribable beauty and
delightfulness and he made her his queen and laid his heart at her feet.
Love was theirs, full of joys and sweetness, full of hope, exquisite,
brave and marvellous love, beyond anything you have ever dreamt of love.
It was theirs for a year and a part of a year; and then suddenly,
because of some venomous sting that came to her in a thicket, she died.

She died and for a while the prince was utterly prostrated. He was
silent and motionless with grief. They feared he might kill himself, and
he had neither sons nor brothers to succeed him. For two days and nights
he lay upon his face, fasting, across the foot of the couch which bore
her calm and lovely body. Then he arose and ate, and went about very
quietly like one who has taken a great resolution. He caused her body to
be put in a coffin of lead mixed with silver, and for that he had an
outer coffin made of the most precious and scented woods wrought with
gold, and about that there was to be a sarcophagus of alabaster, inlaid
with precious stones. And while these things were being done he spent
his time for the most part by the pools and in the garden-houses and
pavilions and groves and in those chambers in the palace where they two
had been most together, brooding upon her loveliness. He did not rend
his garments nor defile himself with ashes and sackcloth as the custom
was, for his love was too great for such extravagances. At last he came
forth again among his councillors and before the people, and told them
what he had a mind to do.

He said he could never more touch woman, he could never more think of
them, and so he would find a seemly youth to adopt for his heir and
train him to his task, and that he would do his princely duties as
became him; but that for the rest of it, he would give himself with all
his power and all his strength and all his wealth, all that he could
command, to make a monument worthy of his incomparable, dear, lost
mistress. A building it should be of perfect grace and beauty, more
marvellous than any other building had ever been or could ever be, so
that to the end of time it should be a wonder, and men would treasure it
and speak of it and desire to see it and come from all the lands of the
earth to visit and recall the name and the memory of his queen. And this
building he said was to be called the Pearl of Love.

And this his councillors and people permitted him to do, and so he did.

Year followed year and all the years he devoted himself to building and
adorning the Pearl of Love. A great foundation was hewn out of the
living rock in a place whence one seemed to be looking at the snowy
wilderness of the great mountain across the valley of the world.
Villages and hills there were, a winding river, and very far away three
great cities. Here they put the sarcophagus of alabaster beneath a
pavilion of cunning workmanship; and about it there were set pillars of
strange and lovely stone and wrought and fretted walls, and a great
casket of masonry bearing a dome and pinnacles and cupolas, as exquisite
as a jewel. At first the design of the Pearl of Love was less bold and
subtle than it became later. At first it was smaller and more wrought
and encrusted; there were many pierced screens and delicate clusters of
rosy-hued pillars, and the sarcophagus lay like a child that sleeps
among flowers. The first dome was covered with green tiles, framed and
held together by silver, but this was taken away again because it seemed
close, because it did not soar grandly enough for the broadening
imagination of the prince.

For by this time he was no longer the graceful youth who had loved the
girl queen. He was now a man, grave and intent, wholly set upon the
building of the Pearl of Love. With every year of effort he had learnt
new possibilities in arch and wall and buttress; he had acquired greater
power over the material he had to use and he had learnt of a hundred
stones and hues and effects that he could never have thought of in the
beginning. His sense of colour had grown finer and colder; he cared no
more for the enamelled gold-lined brightness that had pleased him first,
the brightness of an illuminated missal; he sought now for blue
colourings like the sky and for the subtle hues of great distances, for
recondite shadows and sudden broad floods of purple opalescence and for
grandeur and space. He wearied altogether of carvings and pictures and
inlaid ornamentation and all the little careful work of men. "Those were
pretty things," he said of his earlier decorations; and had them put
aside into subordinate buildings where they would not hamper his main
design. Greater and greater grew his artistry. With awe and amazement
people saw the Pearl of Love sweeping up from its first beginnings to a
superhuman breadth and height and magnificence. They did not know
clearly what they had expected, but never had they expected so sublime a
thing as this. "Wonderful are the miracles," they whispered, "that love
can do," and all the women in the world, whatever other loves they had,
loved the prince for the splendour of his devotion.

Through the middle of the building ran a great aisle, a vista, that the
prince came to care for more and more. From the inner entrance of the
building he looked along the length of an immense pillared gallery and
across the central area from which the rose-hued columns had long since
vanished, over the top of the pavilion under which lay the sarcophagus,
through a marvellously designed opening, to the snowy wildernesses of
the great mountain, the lord of all mountains, two hundred miles away.
The pillars and arches and buttresses and galleries soared and floated
on either side, perfect yet unobtrusive, like great archangels waiting
in the shadows about the presence of God. When men saw that austere
beauty for the first time they were exalted, and then they shivered and
their hearts bowed down. Very often would the prince come to stand there
and look at that vista, deeply moved and not yet fully satisfied. The
Pearl of Love had still something for him to do, he felt, before his
task was done. Always he would order some little alteration to be made
or some recent alterations to be put back again. And one day he said
that the sarcophagus would be clearer and simpler without the pavilion;
and after regarding it very steadfastly for a long time, he had the
pavilion dismantled and removed.

The next day he came and said nothing, and the next day and the next.
Then for two days he stayed away altogether. Then he returned, bringing
with him an architect and two master craftsmen and a small retinue.

All looked, standing together silently in a little group, amidst the
serene vastness of their achievement. No trace of toil remained in its
perfection. It was as if the God of nature's beauty had taken over their
offspring to himself.

Only one thing there was to mar the absolute harmony. There was a
certain disproportion about the sarcophagus. It had never been enlarged,
and indeed how could it have been enlarged since the early days. It
challenged the eye; it nicked the streaming lines. In that sarcophagus
was the casket of lead and silver, and in the casket of lead and silver
was the queen, the dear immortal cause of all this beauty. But now that
sarcophagus seemed no more than a little dark oblong that lay
incongruously in the great vista of the Pearl of Love. It was as if
someone had dropped a small valise upon the crystal sea of heaven.

Long the prince mused, but no one knew the thoughts that passed through
his mind.

At last he spoke. He pointed.

"Take that thing away," he said.


THE END




Project Gutenberg Australia


