

Project Gutenberg Australia


Title: Graveyard Rats
Author: Robert E. Howard
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0601681.txt
Edition: 1
Language: English
Character set encoding: Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted: June 2006
Date most recently updated: November 2017

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott and Colin Choat

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


Graveyard Rats
Robert E. Howard



CHAPTER I

The Head from the Grave

Saul Wilkinson awoke suddenly, and lay in the darkness with beads
of cold sweat on his hands and face. He shuddered at the memory of the
dream from which he had awakened.

But horrible dreams were nothing uncommon. Grisly nightmares had
haunted his sleep since early childhood. It was another fear that
clutched his heart with icy fingers--fear of the sound that had roused
him. It had been a furtive step--hands fumbling in the dark.

And now a small scurrying sounded in the room--a rat running back
and forth across the floor.

He groped under his pillow with trembling fingers. The house was
still, but imagination peopled its darkness with shapes of horror. But
it was not all imagination. A faint stir of air told him the door that
gave on the broad hallway was open. He knew he had closed that door
before he went to bed. And he knew it was not one of his brothers who
had come so subtly to his room.

In that fear-tense, hate-haunted household, no man came by night
to his brother's room without first making himself known.

This was especially the case since an old feud had claimed the
eldest brother four days since--John Wilkinson, shot down in the
streets of the little hill-country town by Joel Middleton, who had
escaped into the post oak grown hills, swearing still greater
vengeance against the Wilkinsons.

All this flashed through Saul's mind as he drew the revolver from
under his pillow.

As he slid out of bed, the creak of the springs brought his heart
into his throat, and he crouched there for a moment, holding his
breath and straining his eyes into the darkness.

Richard was sleeping upstairs, and so was Harrison, the city
detective Peter had brought out to hunt down Joel Middleton. Peter's
room was on the ground floor, but in another wing. A yell for help
might awaken all three, but it would also bring a hail of lead at him,
if Joel Middleton were crouching over there in the blackness.

Saul knew this was his fight, and must be fought out alone, in the
darkness he had always feared and hated. And all the time sounded that
light, scampering patter of tiny feet, racing up and down, up and down...

Crouching against the wall, cursing the pounding of his heart,
Saul fought to steady his quivering nerves. He was backed against the
wall which formed the partition between his room and the hall.

The windows were faint grey squares in the blackness, and he could
dimly make out objects of furniture in all except one side of the
room. Joel Middleton must be over there, crouching by the old
fireplace, which was invisible in the darkness.

But why was he waiting? And why was that accursed rat racing up
and down before the fireplace, as if in a frenzy of fear and greed?
Just so Saul had seen rats race up and down the floor of the meat-house,
frantic to get at flesh suspended out of reach.

Noiselessly, Saul moved along the wall toward the door. If a man
was in the room, he would presently be lined between himself and a
window. But as he glided along the wall like a night-shirted ghost, no
ominous bulk grew out of the darkness. He reached the door and closed
it soundlessly, wincing at his nearness to the unrelieved blackness of
the hall outside.

But nothing happened. The only sounds were the wild beating of his
heart, the loud ticking of the old clock on the mantelpiece--the
maddening patter of the unseen rat. Saul clenched his teeth against
the shrieking of his tortured nerves. Even in his growing terror he
found time to wonder frantically why that rat ran up and down before
the fireplace.

The tension became unbearable. The open door proved that
Middleton, or someone--or _something_--had come into that room. Why
would Middleton come save to kill? But why in God's name had he not
struck already? What was he waiting for?

Saul's nerve snapped suddenly. The darkness was strangling him and
those pattering rat-feet were red-hot hammers on his crumbling brain.
He must have light, even though that light brought hot lead ripping
through him.

In stumbling haste he groped to the mantelpiece, fumbling for the
lamp. And he cried out--a choked, horrible croak that could not have
carried beyond his room. For his hand, groping in the dark on the
mantel, had touched the hair on a human scalp!

A furious squeal sounded in the darkness at his feet and a sharp
pain pierced his ankle as the rat attacked him, as if he were an
intruder seeking to rob it of some coveted object.

But Saul was hardly aware of the rodent as he kicked it away and
reeled back, his brain a whirling turmoil. Matches and candles were on
the table, and to it he lurched, his hands sweeping the dark and
finding what he wanted.

He lighted a candle and turned, gun lifted in a shaking hand.
There was no living man in the room except himself. But his distended
eyes focused themselves on the mantelpiece--and the object on it.

He stood frozen, his brain at first refusing to register what his
eyes revealed. Then he croaked inhumanly and the gun crashed on the
hearth as it slipped through his numb fingers.

John Wilkinson was dead, with a bullet through his heart. It had
been three days since Saul had seen his body nailed into the crude
coffin and lowered into the grave in the old Wilkinson family
graveyard. For three days the hard clay soil had baked in the hot sun
above the coffined form of John Wilkinson.

Yet from the mantel John Wilkinson's face leered at him--white and
cold and dead.

It was no nightmare, no dream of madness. There, on the
mantelpiece rested John Wilkinson's severed head.

And before the fireplace, up and down, up and down, scampered a
creature with red eyes, that squeaked and squealed--a great grey rat,
maddened by its failure to reach the flesh its ghoulish hunger craved.

Saul Wilkinson began to laugh--horrible, soul-shaking shrieks that
mingled with the squealing of the grey ghoul. Saul's body rocked to
and fro, and the laughter turned to insane weeping, that gave way in
turn to hideous screams that echoed through the old house and brought
the sleepers out of their sleep.

They were the screams of a madman. The horror of what he had seen
had blasted Saul Wilkinson's reason like a blown-out candle flame.

CHAPTER II

Madman's Hate

It was those screams which roused Steve Harrison, sleeping in an
upstairs chamber. Before he was fully awake he was on his way down the
unlighted stairs, pistol in one hand and flashlight in the other.

Down in the hallway he saw light streaming from under a closed
door, and made for it. But another was before him. Just as Harrison
reached the landing, he saw a figure rushing across the hall, and
flashed his beam on it.

It was Peter Wilkinson, tall and gaunt, with a poker in his hand.
He yelled something incoherent, threw open the door and rushed in.

Harrison heard him exclaim: "Saul! What's the matter? What are you
looking at--" Then a terrible cry: _"My God!"_

The poker clanged on the floor, and then the screams of the maniac
rose to a crescendo of fury.

It was at this instant that Harrison reached the door and took in
the scene with one startled glance. He saw two men in nightshirts
grappling in the candlelight, while from the mantel a cold, dead,
white face looked blindly down on them, and a grey rat ran in mad
circles about their feet.

Into that scene of horror and madness Harrison propelled his
powerful, thick-set body. Peter Wilkinson was in sore straits. He had
dropped his poker and now, with blood streaming from a wound in his
head, he was vainly striving to tear Saul's lean fingers from his
throat.

The glare in Saul's eyes told Harrison the man was mad. Crooking
one massive arm about the maniac's neck, he tore him loose from his
victim with an exertion of sheer strength that not even the abnormal
energy of insanity could resist.

The madman's stringy muscles were like steel wires under the
detective's hands, and Saul twisted about in his grasp, his teeth
snapping, beastlike, for Harrison's bull-throat. The detective shoved
the clawing, frothing fury away from him and smashed a fist to the
madman's jaw. Saul crashed to the floor and lay still, eyes glazed and
limbs quivering.

Peter reeled back against a table, purple-faced and gagging.

"Get cords, quick!" snapped Harrison, heaving the limp figure off
the floor and letting it slump into a great arm-chair. "Tear that
sheet in strips. We've got to tie him up before he comes to. Hell's
fire!"

The rat had made a ravening attack on the senseless man's bare
feet. Harrison kicked it away, but it squeaked furiously and came
charging back with ghoulish persistence. Harrison crushed it under his
foot, cutting short its maddened squeal.

Peter, gasping convulsively, thrust into the detective's hands the
strips he had torn from the sheet, and Harrison bound the limp limbs
with professional efficiency. In the midst of his task he looked up to
see Richard, the youngest brother, standing in the doorway, his face
like chalk.

"Richard!" choked Peter. "Look! My God! John's head!"

"I see!" Richard licked his lips. "But why are you tying up Saul?"

"He's crazy," snapped Harrison. "Get me some whiskey, will you?"

As Richard reached for a bottle on a curtained shelf, booted feet
hit the porch outside, and a voice yelled: "Hey, there! Dick! What's
wrong?"

"That's our neighbor, Jim Allison," muttered Peter.

He stepped to the door opposite the one that opened into the hall
and turned the key in the ancient lock. That door opened upon a side
porch. A tousle-headed man with his pants pulled on over his
nightshirt came blundering in.

"What's the matter?" he demanded. "I heard somebody hollerin', and
run over quick as I could. What you doin' to Saul--good God Almighty!"

He had seen the head on the mantel, and his face went ashen.

"Go get the marshal, Jim!" croaked Peter. "This is Joel
Middleton's work!"

Allison hurried out, stumbling as he peered back over his shoulder
in morbid fascination.

Harrison had managed to spill some liquor between Saul's livid
lips. He handed the bottle to Peter and stepped to the mantel. He
touched the grisly object, shivering slightly as he did so. His eyes
narrowed suddenly.

"You think Middleton dug up your brother's grave and cut off his
head?" he asked.

"Who else?" Peter stared blankly at him.

"Saul's mad. Madmen do strange things. Maybe Saul did this."

"No! No!" exclaimed Peter, shuddering. "Saul hasn't left the house
all day. John's grave was undisturbed this morning, when I stopped by
the old graveyard on my way to the farm. Saul was sane when he went to
bed. It was seeing John's head that drove him mad. Joel Middleton has
been here, to take this horrible revenge!" He sprang up suddenly,
shrilling, "My God, he may still be hiding in the house somewhere!"

"We'll search it," snapped Harrison. "Richard, you stay here with
Saul. You might come with me, Peter."

In the hall outside the detective directed a beam of light on the
heavy front door. The key was turned in the massive lock. He turned
and strode down the hall, asking: "Which door is farthest from any
sleeping chamber?"

"The back kitchen door!" Peter answered, and led the way. A few
moments later they were standing before it. It stood partly open,
framing a crack of starlit sky.

"He must have come and gone this way," muttered Harrison. "You're
sure this door was locked?"

"I locked all outer doors myself," asserted Peter. "Look at those
scratches on the outer side! And there's the key lying on the floor
inside."

"Old-fashioned lock," grunted Harrison. "A man could work the key
out with a wire from the outer side and force the lock easily. And
this is the logical lock to force, because the noise of breaking it
wouldn't likely be heard by anybody in the house."

He stepped out onto the deep back porch. The broad back yard was
without trees or brushes, separated by a barbed-wire fence from a
pasture lot, which ran to a wood-lot thickly grown with post oaks,
part of the woods which hemmed in the village of Lost Knob on all
sides.

Peter stared toward that woodland, a low, black rampart in the
faint starlight, and he shivered.

"He's out there, somewhere!" he whispered. "I never suspected he'd
dare strike at us in our own house. I brought you here to hunt him
down. I never thought we'd need you to protect us!"

Without replying, Harrison stepped down into the yard. Peter
cringed back from the starlight, and remained crouching at the edge of
the porch.

Harrison crossed the narrow pasture and paused at the ancient rail
fence which separated it from the woods. They were black as only post
oak thickets can be.

No rustle of leaves, no scrape of branches betrayed a lurking
presence. If Joel Middleton had been there, he must have already
sought refuge in the rugged hills that surrounded Lost Knob.

Harrison turned back toward the house. He had arrived at Lost Knob
late the preceding evening. It was now somewhat past midnight. But the
grisly news was spreading, even in the dead of night.

The Wilkinson house stood at the western edge of the town, and the
Allison house was the only one within a hundred yards of it. But
Harrison saw lights springing up in distant windows.

Peter stood on the porch, head out-thrust on his long, buzzard-like
neck.

"Find anything?" he called anxiously.

"Tracks wouldn't show on this hard-baked ground," grunted the
detective. "Just what did you see when you ran into Saul's room?"

"Saul standing before the mantelboard, screaming with his mouth
wide open," answered Peter. "When I saw--what he saw, I must have
cried out and dropped the poker. Then Saul leaped on me like a wild
beast."

"Was his door locked?"

"Closed, but not locked. The lock got broken accidentally a few
days ago."

"One more question: has Middleton ever been in this house before?"

"Not to my knowledge," replied Peter grimly. "Our families have
hated each other for twenty-five years. Joel's the last of his name."

Harrison re-entered the house. Allison had returned with the
marshal, McVey, a tall, taciturn man who plainly resented the
detective's presence. Men were gathering on the side porch and in the
yard. They talked in low mutters, except for Jim Allison, who was
vociferous in his indignation.

"This finishes Joel Middleton!" he proclaimed loudly. "Some folks
sided with him when he killed John. I wonder what they think now?
Diggin' up a dead man and cuttin' his head off! That's Injun work! I
reckon folks won't wait for no jury to tell 'em what to do with Joel
Middleton!"

"Better catch him before you start lynchin' him," grunted McVey.
"Peter, I'm takin' Saul to the county seat."

Peter nodded mutely. Saul was recovering consciousness, but the
mad glaze of his eyes was unaltered. Harrison spoke:

"Suppose we go to the Wilkinson graveyard and see what we can
find? We might be able to track Middleton from there."

"They brought you in here to do the job they didn't think I was
good enough to do," snarled McVey. "All right. Go ahead and do
it--alone. I'm takin' Saul to the county seat."

With the aid of his deputies he lifted the bound maniac and strode
out. Neither Peter nor Richard offered to accompany him. A tall,
gangling man stepped from among his fellows and awkwardly addressed
Harrison:

"What the marshal does is his own business, but all of us here are
ready to help all we can, if you want to git a posse together and comb
the country."

"Thanks, no." Harrison was unintentionally abrupt. "You can help
me by all clearing out, right now. I'll work this thing out alone, in
my own way, as the marshal suggested."

The men moved off at once, silent and resentful, and Jim Allison
followed them, after a moment's hesitation. When all had gone,
Harrison closed the door and turned to Peter.

"Will you take me to the graveyard?"

Peter shuddered. "Isn't it a terrible risk? Middleton has shown
he'll stop at nothing."

"Why should he?" Richard laughed savagely. His mouth was bitter,
his eyes alive with harsh mockery, and lines of suffering were carven
deep in his face.

"We never stopped hounding him," said he. "John cheated him out of
his last bit of land--that's why Middleton killed him. For which you
were devoutly thankful!"

"You're talking wild!" exclaimed Peter.

Richard laughed bitterly. "You old hypocrite! We're all beasts of
prey, we Wilkinsons--like this thing!" He kicked the dead rat
viciously. "We all hated each other. You're glad Saul's crazy! You're
glad John's dead. Only me left now, and I have a heart disease. Oh,
stare if you like! I'm no fool. I've seen you poring over Aaron's
lines in 'Titus Andronicus':

"Oft have I digg'd up dead men from their graves, and set them
upright at their dear friends' doors!"

"You're mad yourself!" Peter sprang up, livid.

"Oh, am I?" Richard had lashed himself almost into a frenzy. "What
proof have we that you didn't cut off John's head? You knew Saul was a
neurotic, that a shock like that might drive him mad! And you visited
the graveyard yesterday!"

Peter's contorted face was a mask of fury. Then, with an effort of
iron control, he relaxed and said quietly: "You are over-wrought,
Richard."

"Saul and John hated you," snarled Richard. "I know why. It was
because you wouldn't agree to leasing our farm on Wild River to that
oil company. But for your stubbornness we might all be wealthy."

"You know why I wouldn't lease," snapped Peter. "Drilling there
would ruin the agricultural value of the land--certain profit, not a
risky gamble like oil."

"So you say," sneered Richard. "But suppose that's just a smoke
screen? Suppose you dream of being the sole, surviving heir, and
becoming an oil millionaire all by yourself, with no brothers to
share--"

Harrison broke in: "Are we going to chew the rag all night?"

"No!" Peter turned his back on his brother. "I'll take you to the
graveyard. I'd rather face Joel Middleton in the night than listen to
the ravings of this lunatic any longer."

"I'm not going," snarled Richard. "Out there in the black night
there's too many chances for you to remove the remaining heir. I'll go
and stay the rest of the night with Jim Allison."

He opened the door and vanished in the darkness.

Peter picked up the head and wrapped it in a cloth, shivering
lightly as he did so.

"Did you notice how well preserved the face is?" he muttered. "One
would think that after three days--Come on. I'll take it and put it
back in the grave where it belongs."

"I'll kick this dead rat outdoors," Harrison began, turning--and
then stopped short. "The damned thing's gone!"

Peter Wilkinson paled as his eyes swept the empty floor.

"It was there!" he whispered. "It was dead. You smashed it! It
couldn't come to life and run away."

"We'll, what about it?" Harrison did not mean to waste time on
this minor mystery.

Peter's eyes gleamed wearily in the candlelight.

"It was a graveyard rat!" he whispered. "I never saw one in an
inhabited house, in town, before! The Indians used to tell strange
tales about them! They said they were not beasts at all, but evil,
cannibal demons, into which entered the spirits of wicked, dead men at
whose corpses they gnawed!"

"Hell's fire!" Harrison snorted, blowing out the candle. But his
flesh crawled. After all, a dead rat could not crawl away by itself.

CHAPTER III

The Feathered Shadow

Clouds had rolled across the stars. The air was hot and stifling.
The narrow, rutty road that wound westward into the hills was
atrocious. But Peter Wilkinson piloted his ancient Model T Ford
skillfully, and the village was quickly lost to sight behind them.
They passed no more houses. On each side the dense post oak thickets
crowded close to the barbed-wire fences.

Peter broke the silence suddenly:

"How did that rat come into our house? They overrun the woods
along the creeks, and swarm in every country graveyard in the hills.
But I never saw one in the village before. It must have followed Joel
Middleton when he brought the head--"

A lurch and a monotonous bumping brought a curse from Harrison.
The car came to a stop with a grind of brakes.

"Flat," muttered Peter. "Won't take me long to change tires. You
watch the woods. Joel Middleton might be hiding anywhere."

That seemed good advice. While Peter wrestled with rusty metal and
stubborn rubber, Harrison stood between him and the nearest clump of
trees, with his hand on his revolver. The night wind blew fitfully
through the leaves, and once he thought he caught the gleam of tiny
eyes among the stems.

"That's got it," announced Peter at last, turning to let down the
jack. "We've wasted enough time."

_"Listen!"_ Harrison started, tensed. Off to the west had sounded
a sudden scream of pain or fear. Then there came the impact of racing
feet on the hard ground, the crackling of brush, as if someone fled
blindly through the bushes within a few hundred yards of the road. In
an instant Harrison was over the fence and running toward the sounds.

"Help! Help!" it was the voice of dire terror. "Almighty God!
Help!"

"This way!" yelled Harrison, bursting into an open flat. The
unseen fugitive evidently altered his course in response, for the
heavy footfalls grew louder, and then there rang out a terrible
shriek, and a figure staggered from the bushes on the opposite side of
the glade and fell headlong.

The dim starlight showed a vague writhing shape, with a darker
figure on its back. Harrison caught the glint of steel, heard the
sound of a blow. He threw up his gun and fired at a venture. At the
crack of the shot, the darker figure rolled free, leaped up and
vanished in the bushes. Harrison ran on, a queer chill crawling along
his spine because of what he had seen in the flash of the shot.

He crouched at the edge of the bushes and peered into them. The
shadowy figure had come and gone, leaving no trace except the man who
lay groaning in the glade.

Harrison bent over him, snapping on his flashlight. He was an old
man, a wild, unkempt figure with matted white hair and beard. That
beard was stained with red now, and blood oozed from a deep stab in
his back.

"Who did this?" demanded Harrison, seeing that it was useless to
try to stanch the flow of blood. The old man was dying. "Joel
Middleton?"

"It couldn't have been!" Peter had followed the detective. "That's
old Joash Sullivan, a friend of Joel's. He's half crazy, but I've
suspected that he's been keeping in touch with Joel and giving his
tips--"

"Joel Middleton," muttered the old man. "I'd been to find him, to
tell the news about John's head--"

"Where's Joel hiding?" demanded the detective.

Sullivan choked on a flow of blood, spat and shook his head.

"You'll never learn from me!" He directed his eyes on Peter with
the eerie glare of the dying. "Are you taking your brother's head back
to his grave, Peter Wilkinson? Be careful you don't find your own
grave before this night's done! Evil on all your name! The devil owns
your souls and the graveyard rats'll eat your flesh! The ghost of the
dead walks the night!"

"What do you mean?" demanded Harrison. "Who stabbed you?"

"A dead man!" Sullivan was going fast. "As I come back from
meetin' Joel Middleton I met him. Wolf Hunter, the Tonkawa chief your
grandpap murdered so long ago, Peter Wilkinson! He chased me and
knifed me. I saw him plain, in the starlight--naked in his loin-clout
and feathers and paint, just as I saw him when I was a child, before
your grandpap killed him!

"Wolf Hunter took your brother's head from the grave!" Sullivan's
voice was a ghastly whisper. "He's come back from Hell to fulfill the
curse he laid onto your grandpa when your grandpap shot him in the
back, to get the land his tribe claimed. Beware! His ghost walks the
night! The graveyard rats are his servants. The graveyard rats--"

Blood burst from his white-bearded lips and he sank back, dead.

Harrison rose somberly.

"Let him lie. We'll pick up his body as we go back to town. We're
going on to the graveyard."

"Dare we?" Peter's face was white. "A human I do not fear, not
even Joel Middleton, but a ghost--"

"Don't be a fool!" snorted Harrison. "Didn't you say the old man
was half crazy?"

"But what if Joel Middleton is hiding somewhere near--"

"I'll take care of him!" Harrison had an invincible confidence in
his own fighting ability. What he did not tell Peter, as they returned
to the car, was that he had had a glimpse of the slayer in the flash
of his shot. The memory of that glimpse still had the short hair
prickling at the base of his skull.

That figure had been naked but for a loin-cloth and moccasins and
a headdress of feathers.

"Who was Wolf Hunter?" he demanded as they drove on.

"A Tonkawa chief," muttered Peter. "He befriended my grandfather
and was later murdered by him, just as Joash said. They say his bones
lie in the old graveyard to this day."

Peter lapsed into silence, seemingly a prey of morbid broodings.

Some four miles from town the road wound past a dim clearing. That
was the Wilkinson graveyard. A rusty barbed-wire fence surrounded a
cluster of graves whose white headstones leaned at crazy angles. Weeds
grew thick, straggling over the low mounds.

The post oaks crowded close on all sides, and the road wound
through them, past the sagging gate. Across the tops of the trees,
nearly half a mile to the west, there was visible a shapeless bulk
which Harrison knew was the roof of a house.

"The old Wilkinson farmhouse," Peter answered in reply to his
question. "I was born there, and so were my brothers. Nobody's lived
in it since we moved to town, ten years ago."

Peter's nerves were taut. He glanced fearfully at the black woods
around him, and his hands trembled as he lighted a lantern he took
from the car. He winced as he picked up the round cloth-wrapped object
that lay on the back seat; perhaps he was visualizing the cold, white,
stony face that cloth concealed.

As he climbed over the low gate and led the way between the weed-grown
mounds he muttered: "We're fools. If Joel Middleton's laying out
there in the woods he could pick us both off easy as shooting
rabbits."

Harrison did not reply, and a moment later Peter halted and shone
the light on a mound which was bare of weeds. The surface was tumbled
and disturbed, and Peter exclaimed: "Look! I expected to find an open
grave. Why do you suppose he took the trouble of filling it again?"

"We'll see," grunted Harrison. "Are you game to open that grave?"

"I've seen my brother's head," answered Peter grimly. "I think I'm
man enough to look on his headless body without fainting. There are
tools in the tool-shed in the corner of the fence. I'll get them."

Returning presently with pick and shovel, he set the lighted
lantern on the ground, and the cloth-wrapped head near it. Peter was
pale, and sweat stood on his brow in thick drops. The lantern cast
their shadows, grotesquely distorted, across the weed-grown graves.
The air was oppressive. There was an occasional dull flicker of
lightning along the dusky horizons.

"What's that?" Harrison paused, pick lifted. All about them
sounded rustlings and scurryings among the weeds. Beyond the circle of
lantern light clusters of tiny red beads glittered at him.

"Rats!" Peter hurled a stone and the beads vanished, though the
rustlings grew louder. "They swarm in this graveyard. I believe they'd
devour a living man, if they caught him helpless. Begone, you servants
of Satan!"

Harrison took the shovel and began scooping out mounds of loose
dirt.

"Ought not to be hard work," he grunted. "If he dug it out today
or early tonight, it'll be loose all the way down--"

He stopped short, with his shovel jammed hard against the dirt,
and a prickling in the short hairs at the nape of his neck. In the
tense silence he heard the graveyard rats running through the grass.

"What's the matter?" A new pallor greyed Peter's face.

"I've hit solid ground," said Harrison slowly. "In three days,
this clayey soil bakes hard as a brick. But if Middleton or anybody
else had opened this grave and refilled it today, the soil would be
loose all the way down. It's not. Below the first few inches it's
packed and baked hard! The top has been scratched, but the grave has
never been opened since it was first filled, three days ago!"

Peter staggered with an inhuman cry.

"Then it's true!" he screamed. "Wolf Hunter _has_ come back! He
reached up from Hell and took John's head without opening the grave!
He sent his familiar devil into our house in the form of a rat! A
ghost-rat that could not be killed! Hands off, curse you!"

For Harrison caught at him, growling: "Pull yourself together,
Peter!"

But Peter struck his arm aside and tore free. He turned and ran--not
toward the car parked outside the graveyard, but toward the
opposite fence. He scrambled across the rusty wires with a ripping of
cloth and vanished in the woods, heedless of Harrison's shouts.

"Hell!" Harrison pulled up, and swore fervently. Where but in the
black-hill country could such things happen? Angrily he picked up the
tools and tore into the close-packed clay, baked by a blazing sun into
almost iron hardness.

Sweat rolled from him in streams, and he grunted and swore, but
persevered with all the power of his massive muscles. He meant to
prove or disprove a suspicion growing in his mind--a suspicion that
the body of John Wilkinson had never been placed in that grave.

The lightning flashed oftener and closer, and a low mutter of
thunder began in the west. An occasional gust of wind made the lantern
flicker, and as the mound beside the grave grew higher, and the man
digging there sank lower and lower in the earth, the rustling in the
grass grew louder and the red beads began to glint in the weeds.
Harrison heard the eerie gnashings of tiny teeth all about him, and
swore at the memory of grisly legends, whispered by the Negroes of his
boyhood region about the graveyard rats.

The grave was not deep. No Wilkinson would waste much labor on the
dead. At last the rude coffin lay uncovered before him. With the point
of the pick he pried up one corner of the lid, and held the lantern
close. A startled oath escaped his lips. The coffin was not empty. It
held a huddled, headless figure.

Harrison climbed out of the grave, his mind racing, fitting
together pieces of the puzzle. The stray bits snapped into place,
forming a pattern, dim and yet incomplete, but taking shape. He looked
for the cloth-wrapped head, and got a frightful shock.

_The head was gone!_

For an instant Harrison felt cold sweat clammy on his hands. Then
he heard a clamorous squeaking, the gnashing of tiny fangs.

He caught up the lantern and shone the light about. In its
reflection he saw a white blotch on the grass near a straggling clump
of bushes that had invaded the clearing. It was the cloth in which the
head had been wrapped. Beyond that a black, squirming mound heaved and
tumbled with nauseous life.

With an oath of horror he leaped forward, striking and kicking.
The graveyard rats abandoned the head with rasping squeaks, scattering
before him like darting black shadows. And Harrison shuddered. It was
no face that stared up at him in the lantern light, but a white,
grinning skull, to which clung only shreds of gnawed flesh.

While the detective burrowed into John Wilkinson's grave, the
graveyard rats had torn the flesh from John Wilkinson's head.

Harrison stooped and picked up the hideous thing, now triply
hideous. He wrapped it in the cloth, and as he straightened, something
like fright took hold of him.

He was ringed in on all sides by a solid circle of gleaming red
sparks that shone from the grass. Held back by their fear, the
graveyard rats surrounded him, squealing their hate.

Demons, the Negroes called them, and in that moment Harrison was
ready to agree.

They gave back before him as he turned toward the grave, and he
did not see the dark figure that slunk from the bushes behind him. The
thunder boomed out, drowning even the squeaking of the rats, but he
heard the swift footfall behind him an instant before the blow was
struck.

He whirled, drawing his gun, dropping the head, but just as he
whirled, something like a louder clap of thunder exploded in his head,
with a shower of sparks before his eyes.

As he reeled backward he fired blindly, and cried out as the flash
showed him a horrific, half-naked, painted, feathered figure,
crouching with a tomahawk uplifted--the open grave was behind Harrison
as he fell.

Down into the grave he toppled, and his head struck the edge of
the coffin with a sickening impact. His powerful body went limp; and
like darting shadows, from every side raced the graveyard rats,
hurling themselves into the grave in a frenzy of hunger and blood-lust.

CHAPTER IV

Rats in Hell

It seemed to Harrison's stunned brain that he lay in blackness on
the darkened floors of Hell, a blackness lit by darts of flame from
the eternal fires. The triumphant shrieking of demons was in his ears
as they stabbed him with red-hot skewers.

He saw them, now--dancing monstrosities with pointed noses,
twitching ears, red eyes and gleaming teeth--a sharp pain knifed
through his flesh.

And suddenly the mists cleared. He lay, not on the floor of Hell,
but on a coffin in the bottom of a grave; the fires were lightning
flashes from the black sky; and the demons were rats that swarmed over
him, slashing with razor-sharp teeth.

Harrison yelled and heaved convulsively, and at his movement the
rats gave back in alarm. But they did not leave the grave; they massed
solidly along the walls, their eyes glittering redly.

Harrison knew he could have been senseless only a few seconds.
Otherwise, these grey ghouls would have already stripped the living
flesh from his bones--as they had ripped the dead flesh from the head
of the man on whose coffin he lay.

Already his body was stinging in a score of places, and his
clothing was damp with his own blood.

Cursing, he started to rise--and a chill of panic shot through
him! Falling, his left arm had been jammed into the partly-open
coffin, and the weight of his body on the lid clamped his hand fast.
Harrison fought down a mad wave of terror.

He would not withdraw his hand unless he could lift his body from
the coffin lid--and the imprisonment of his hand held him prostrate
there.

Trapped!

In a murdered man's grave, his hand locked in the coffin of a
headless corpse, with a thousand grey ghoul-rats ready to tear the
flesh from his living frame!

As if sensing his helplessness, the rats swarmed upon him.
Harrison fought for his life, like a man in a nightmare. He kicked, he
yelled, he cursed, he smote them with the heavy six-shooter he still
clutched in his hand.

Their fangs tore at him, ripping cloth and flesh, their acrid
scent nauseated him; they almost covered him with their squirming,
writhing bodies. He beat them back, smashed and crushed them with
blows of his six-shooter barrel.

The living cannibals fell on their dead brothers. In desperation
he twisted half-over and jammed the muzzle of his gun against the
coffin lid.

At the flash of fire and the deafening report, the rats scurried
in all directions.

Again and again, he pulled the trigger until the gun was empty.
The heavy slugs crashed through the lid, splitting off a great sliver
from the edge. Harrison drew his bruised hand from the aperture.

Gagging and shaking, he clambered out of the grave and rose
groggily to his feet. Blood was clotted in his hair from the gash the
ghostly hatchet had made in his scalp, and blood trickled from a score
of tooth-wounds in his flesh. Lightning played constantly, but the
lantern was still shining. But it was not on the ground.

It seemed to be suspended in mid-air--and then he was aware that
it was held in the hand of a man--a tall man in a black slicker, whose
eyes burned dangerously under his broad hat-brim. In his other hand a
black pistol muzzle menaced the detective's midriff.

"You must be that damn' low-country law Pete Wilkinson brung up
here to run me down!" growled this man.

"Then you're Joel Middleton!" grunted Harrison.

"Sure I am!" snarled the outlaw. "Where's Pete, the old devil?"

"He got scared and ran off."

"Crazy, like Saul, maybe," sneered Middleton. "Well, you tell him
I been savin' a slug for his ugly mug a long time. And one for Dick,
too."

"Why did you come here?" demanded Harrison.

"I heard shootin'. I got here just as you was climbin' out of the
grave. What's the matter with you? Who was it that broke your head?"

"I don't know his name," answered Harrison, caressing his aching
head.

"Well, it don't make no difference to me. But I want to tell you
that I didn't cut John's head off. I killed him because he needed it."
The outlaw swore and spat. "But I didn't do that other!"

"I know you didn't," Harrison answered.

"Eh?" The outlaw was obviously startled.

"Do you know which rooms the Wilkinsons sleep in, in their house
in town?"

"Naw," snorted Middleton. "Never was in their house in my life."

"I thought not. Whoever put John's head on Saul's mantel knew. The
back kitchen door was the only one where the lock could have been
forced without waking somebody up. The lock on Saul's door was broken.
You couldn't have known those things. It looked like an inside job
from the start. The lock was forced to make it look like an outside
job.

"Richard spilled some stuff that cinched my belief that it was
Peter. I decided to bring him out to the graveyard and see if his
nerve would stand up under an accusation across his brother's open
coffin. But I hit hard-packed soil and knew the grave hadn't been
opened. It gave me a turn and I blurted out what I'd found. But it's
simple, after all.

"Peter wanted to get rid of his brothers. When you killed John,
that suggested a way to dispose of Saul. John's body stood in its
coffin in the Wilkinsons' parlor until it was placed in the grave the
next day. No death watch was kept. It was easy for Peter to go into
the parlor while his brothers slept, pry up the coffin lid and cut off
John's head. He put it on ice somewhere to preserve it. When I touched
it I found it was nearly frozen.

"No one knew what had happened, because the coffin was not opened
again. John was an atheist, and there was the briefest sort of
ceremony. The coffin was not opened for his friends to take a last
look, as is the usual custom. Then tonight the head was placed in
Saul's room. It drove him raving mad.

"I don't know why Peter waited until tonight, or why he called me
into the case. He must be partly insane himself. I don't think he
meant to kill me when we drove out here tonight. But when he
discovered I knew the grave hadn't been opened tonight, he saw the
game was up. I ought to have been smart enough to keep my mouth shut,
but I was so sure that Peter had opened the grave to get the head,
that when I found it _hadn't_ been opened, I spoke involuntarily,
without stopping to think of the other alternative. Peter pretended a
panic and ran off. Later he sent back his partner to kill me."

"Who's he?" demanded Middleton.

"How should I know? Some fellow who looks like an Indian!"

"That old yarn about a Tonkawa ghost has went to your brain!"
scoffed Middleton.

"I didn't say it was a ghost," said Harrison, nettled. "It was
real enough to kill your friend Joash Sullivan!"

"What?" yelled Middleton. "Joash killed? Who done it?"

"The Tonkawa ghost, whoever he is. The body is lying about a mile
back, beside the road, amongst the thickets, if you don't believe me."

Middleton ripped out a terrible oath.

"By God, I'll kill somebody for that! Stay where you are! I ain't
goin' to shoot no unarmed man, but if you try to run me down I'll kill
you sure as Hell. So keep off my trail. I'm goin', and don't you try
to follow me!"

The next instant Middleton had dashed the lantern to the ground
where it went out with a clatter of breaking glass.

Harrison blinked in the sudden darkness that followed, and the
next lightning flash showed him standing alone in the ancient
graveyard.

The outlaw was gone.

CHAPTER V



The Rats Eat

Cursing, Harrison groped on the ground, lit by the lightning
flashes. He found the broken lantern, and he found something else.

Rain drops splashed against his face as he started toward the
gate. One instant he stumbled in velvet blackness, the next the
tombstones shone white in the dazzling glare. Harrison's head ached
frightfully. Only chance and a tough skull had saved his life. The
would-be killer must have thought the blow was fatal and fled, taking
John Wilkinson's head for what grisly purpose there was no knowing.
But the head was gone.

Harrison winced at the thought of the rain filling the open grave,
but he had neither the strength nor the inclination to shovel the dirt
back in it. To remain in that dark graveyard might well be death. The
slayer might return.

Harrison looked back as he climbed the fence. The rain had
disturbed the rats; the weeds were alive with scampering, flame-eyed
shadows. With a shudder, Harrison made his way to the flivver. He
climbed in, found his flashlight and reloaded his revolver.

The rain grew in volume. Soon the rutty road to Lost Knob would be
a welter of mud. In his condition he did not feel able to the task of
driving back through the storm over that abominable road. But it could
not be long until dawn. The old farmhouse would afford him a refuge
until daylight.

The rain came down in sheets, soaking him, dimming the already
uncertain lights as he drove along the road, splashing noisily through
the mud-puddles. Wind ripped through the post oaks. Once he grunted
and batted his eyes. He could have sworn that a flash of lightning had
fleetingly revealed a painted, naked, feathered figure gliding among
the trees!

The road wound up a thickly wooded eminence, rising close to the
bank of a muddy creek. On the summit the old house squatted. Weeds and
low bushes straggled from the surrounding woods up to the sagging
porch. He parked the car as close to the house as he could get it, and
climbed out, struggling with the wind and rain.

He expected to have to blow the lock off the door with his gun,
but it opened under his fingers. He stumbled into a musty-smelling
room, weirdly lit by the flickering of the lightning through the
cracks of the shutters.

His flashlight revealed a rude bunk built against a side wall, a
heavy hand-hewn table, a heap of rags in a corner. From this pile of
rags black furtive shadows darted in all directions.

Rats! Rats again!

Could he never escape them?

He closed the door and lit the lantern, placing it on the table.
The broken chimney caused the flame to dance and flicker, but not
enough wind found its way into the room to blow it out. Three doors,
leading into the interior of the house, were closed. The floor and
walls were pitted with holes gnawed by the rats.

Tiny red eyes glared at him from the apertures.

Harrison sat down on the bunk, flashlight and pistol on his lap.
He expected to fight for his life before day broke. Peter Wilkinson
was out there in the storm somewhere, with a heart full of murder, and
either allied to him or working separately--in either case an enemy to
the detective--was that mysterious painted figure.

And that figure was Death, whether living masquerader or Indian
ghost. In any event, the shutters would protect him from a shot from
the dark, and to get at him his enemies would have to come into the
lighted room where he would have an even chance--which was all the big
detective had ever asked.

To get his mind off the ghoulish red eyes glaring at him from the
floor, Harrison brought out the object he had found lying near the
broken lantern, where the slayer must have dropped it.

It was a smooth oval of flint, made fast to a handle with rawhide
thongs--the Indian tomahawk of an elder generation. And Harrison's
eyes narrowed suddenly; there was blood on the flint, and some of it
was his own. But on the other point of the oval there was more blood,
dark and crusted, with strands of hair lighter than his, clinging to
the clotted point.

Joash Sullivan's blood? No. The old man had been knifed. But
someone else had died that night. The darkness had hidden another grim
deed....

Black shadows were stealing across the floor. The rats were coming
back--ghoulish shapes, creeping from their holes, converging on the
heap of rags in the far corner--a tattered carpet, Harrison now saw,
rolled in a long compact heap. Why should the rats leap upon that rag?
Why should they race up and down along it, squealing and biting at the
fabric?

There was something hideously suggestive about its contour--a
shape that grew more definite and ghastly as he looked.

The rats scattered, squeaking, as Harrison sprang across the room.
He tore away the carpet--and looked down on the corpse of Peter
Wilkinson.

The back of the head had been crushed. The white face was twisted
in a leer of awful terror.

For an instant Harrison's brain reeled with the ghastly
possibilities his discovery summoned up. Then he took a firm grasp on
himself, fought off the whispering potency of the dark, howling night,
the thrashing wet black woods and the abysmal aura of the ancient
hills, and recognized the only sane solution of the riddle.

Somberly he looked down on the dead man. Peter Wilkinson's fright
had been genuine, after all. In his blind panic he had reverted to the
habits of his boyhood and fled toward his old home--and met death
instead of security.

Harrison started convulsively as a weird sound smote his ears
above the roar of the storm--the wailing horror of an Indian war-whoop.
The killer was upon him!

Harrison sprang to a shuttered window, peered through a crack,
waiting for a flash of lightning. When it came he fired through the
window at a feathered head he saw peering around a tree close to the
car.

In the darkness that followed the flash he crouched, waiting--there
came another white glare--he grunted explosively but did not
fire. The head was still there, and he got a better look at it. The
lightning shone weirdly white upon it.

It was John Wilkinson's fleshless skull, clad in a feathered
headdress and bound in place--and it was the bait of a trap.

Harrison wheeled and sprang toward the lantern on the table. That
grisly ruse had been to draw his attention to the front of the house
while the killer slunk upon him through the rear of the building! The
rats squealed and scattered. Even as Harrison whirled an inner door
began to open. He smashed a heavy slug through the panels, heard a
groan and the sound of a falling body, and then, just as he reached a
hand to extinguish the lantern, the world crashed over his head.

A blinding burst of lightning, a deafening clap of thunder, and
the ancient house staggered from gables to foundations! Blue fire
crackled from the ceiling and ran down the walls and over the floor.
One livid tongue just flicked the detective's shin in passing.

It was like the impact of a sledgehammer. There was an instant of
blindness and numb agony, and Harrison found himself sprawling,
half-stunned on the floor. The lantern lay extinguished beside the
overturned table, but the room was filled with a lurid light.

He realized that a bolt of lightning had struck the house, and
that the upper story was ablaze. He hauled himself to his feet,
looking for his gun. It lay halfway across the room, and as he started
toward it, the bullet-split door swung open. Harrison stopped dead in
his tracks.

Through the door limped a man naked but for a loin-cloth and
moccasins on his feet. A revolver in his hand menaced the detective.
Blood oozing from a wound in his thigh mingled with the paint with
which he had smeared himself.

"So it was you who wanted to be the oil millionaire, Richard!"
said Harrison.

The other laughed savagely. "Aye, and I will be! And no cursed
brothers to share with--brothers I always hated, damn them! Don't
move! You nearly got me when you shot through the door. I'm taking no
chances with you! Before I send you to Hell, I'll tell you everything.

"As soon as you and Peter started for the graveyard, I realized my
mistake in merely scratching the top of the grave--knew you'd hit hard
clay and know the grave hadn't been opened. I knew then I'd have to
kill you, as well as Peter. I took the rat you mashed when neither of
you were looking, so its disappearance would play on Peter's
superstitions.

"I rode to the graveyard through the woods, on a fast horse. The
Indian disguise was one I thought up long ago. What with that rotten
road, and the flat that delayed you, I got to the graveyard before you
and Peter did. On the way, though, I dismounted and stopped to kill
that old fool Joash Sullivan. I was afraid he might see and recognize
me.

"I was watching when you dug into the grave. When Peter got
panicky and ran through the woods I chased him, killed him, and
brought his body here to the old house. Then I went back after you. I
intended bringing your body here, or rather your bones, after the rats
finished you, as I thought they would. Then I heard Joel Middleton
coming and had to run for it--I don't care to meet that gun-fighting
devil anywhere!

"I was going to burn this house with both your bodies in it.
People would think, when they found the bones in the ashes, that
Middleton killed you both and burnt the house! And now you play right
into my hands by coming here! Lightning has struck the house and it's
burning! Oh, the gods fight for me tonight!"

A light of unholy madness played in Richard's eyes, but the pistol
muzzle was steady, as Harrison stood clenching his great fists
helplessly.

"You'll lie here with that fool Peter!" raved Richard. "With a
bullet through your head, until your bones are burnt to such a crisp
that nobody can tell how you died! Joel Middleton will be shot down by
some posse without a chance to talk. Saul will rave out his days in a
madhouse! And I, who will be safely sleeping in my house in town
before sun-up, will live out my allotted years in wealth and honor,
never suspected--never--"

He was sighting along the black barrel, eyes blazing, teeth bared
like the fangs of a wolf between painted lips--his finger was curling
on the trigger.

Harrison crouched tensely, desperately, poising to hurl himself
with bare hands at the killer and try to pit his naked strength
against hot lead spitting from that black muzzle--then--

The door crashed inward behind him and the lurid glare framed a
tall figure in a dripping slicker.

An incoherent yell rang to the roof and the gun in the outlaw's
hand roared. Again, and again, and yet again it crashed, filling the
room with smoke and thunder, and the painted figure jerked to the
impact of the tearing lead.

Through the smoke Harrison saw Richard Wilkinson toppling--but he
too was firing as he fell. Flames burst through the ceiling, and by
their brighter glare Harrison saw a painted figure writhing on the
floor, a taller figure wavering in the doorway. Richard was screaming
in agony.

Middleton threw his empty gun at Harrison's feet.

"Heard the shootin' and come," he croaked. "Reckon that settles
the feud for good!" He toppled, and Harrison caught him in his arms, a
lifeless weight.

Richard's screams rose to an unbearable pitch. The rats were
swarming from their holes. Blood streaming across the floor had
dripped into their holes, maddening them. Now they burst forth in a
ravening horde that heeded not cries, or movement, or the devouring
flames, but only their own fiendish hunger.

In a grey-black wave they swept over the dead man and the dying
man. Peter's white face vanished under that wave. Richard's screaming
grew thick and muffled. He writhed, half covered by grey, tearing
figures who sucked at his gushing blood, tore at his flesh.

Harrison retreated through the door, carrying the dead outlaw.
Joel Middleton, outlaw and killer, yet deserved a better fate than was
befalling his slayer.

To save that ghoul, Harrison would not have lifted a finger, had
it been in his power.

It was not. The graveyard rats had claimed their own. Out in the
yard, Harrison let his burden fall limply. Above the roar of the
flames still rose those awful, smothered cries.

Through the blazing doorway he had a glimpse of a horror, a gory
figure rearing upright, swaying, enveloped by a hundred clinging,
tearing shapes. He glimpsed a face that was not a face at all, but a
blind, bloody skull-mask. Then the awful scene was blotted out as the
flaming roof fell with a thundering, ear-rending crash.

Sparks showered against the sky, the flames rose as the walls fell
in, and Harrison staggered away, dragging the dead man, as a
storm-wrapped dawn came haggardly over the oak-clad ridges.



THE END




Project Gutenberg Australia


