

Project Gutenberg Australia



Title:      The Red Hand
Author:     Arthur Machen
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.:  0601871.txt
Edition:    1
Language:   English
Character set encoding:     Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted:          June 2006
Date most recently updated: June 2006

This eBook was produced by: Malcolm Farmer

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au


Title:      The Red Hand
Author:     Arthur Machen




The Problem of the Fish-Hooks


'There can be no doubt whatever,' said Mr. Phillipps, 'that my theory is
the true one; these flints are prehistoric fish-hooks.'

'I dare say; but you know that in all probability the things were forged
the other day with a door-key.'

'Stuff!' said Phillipps; 'I have some respect, Dyson, for your literary
abilities, but your knowledge of ethnology is insignificant, or rather
non-existent. These fish-hooks satisfy every test; they are perfectly
genuine.'

'Possibly, but as I said just now, you go to work at the wrong end. You
neglect the opportunities that confront you and await you, obvious, at
every corner; you positively shrink from the chance of encountering
primitive man in this whirling and mysterious city, and you pass the
weary hours in your agreeable retirement of Red Lion Square fumbling
with bits of flint, which are, as I said, in all probability, rank
forgeries.'

Phillipps took one of the little objects, and held it up in
exasperation.

'Look at that ridge,' he said. 'Did you ever see such a ridge as that on
a forgery?'

Dyson merely grunted and lit his pipe and the two sat smoking in rich
silence, watching through the open window the children in the square as
they flitted to and fro in the twilight of the lamps, as elusive as bats
flying on the verge of a dark wood.

'Well,' said Phillipps at last, 'it is really a long time since you have
been round. I suppose you have been working at your old task.'

'Yes,' said Dyson, 'always the chase of the phrase. I shall grow old in
the hunt. But it is a great consolation to meditate on the fact that
there are not a dozen people in England who know what style means.'

'I suppose not; for the matter of that, the study of ethnology is far
from popular. And the difficulties! Primitive man stands dim and very
far off across the great bridge of years.'

'By the way,' he went on after a pause, 'what was that stuff you were
talking just now about shrinking from the chance of encountering
primitive man at the corner, or something of the kind? There are
certainly people about here whose ideas are very primitive.'

'I wish, Phillipps, you would not rationalize my remarks. If, I
recollect the phrases correctly, I hinted that you shrank from the
chance of encountering primitive man in this whirling and mysterious
city, and I meant exactly what I said. Who can limit the age of
survival? The troglodyte and the lake-dweller, perhaps representatives
of yet darker races, may very probably be lurking in our midst, rubbing
shoulders with frock-coated and finely draped humanity, ravening like
wolves at heart and boiling with the foul passions of the swamp and the
black cave. Now and then as I walk in Holborn or Fleet Street I see a
face which I pronounce abhorred, and yet I could not give a reason for
the thrill of loathing that stirs within me.'

'My dear Dyson, I refuse to enter myself in your literary "trying-on"
department. I know that survivals do exist, but all things have a limit,
and your speculations are absurd. You must catch me your troglodyte
before I will believe in him.'

'I agree to that with all my heart,' said Dyson, chuckling at the ease
with which he had succeeded in 'drawing' Phillipps. 'Nothing could be
better. It's a fine night for a walk,' he added taking up his hat.

'What nonsense you are talking, Dyson!' said Phillipps. 'However, I have
no objection to taking a walk with you: as you say, it is a pleasant
night.'

'Come along then,' said Dyson, grinning, 'but remember our bargain.'

The two men went out into the square, and threading one of the narrow
passages that serve as exits, struck towards the north-east. As they
passed along a flaring causeway they could hear at intervals between the
clamour of the children and the triumphant <i>Gloria</i> played on a
piano-organ the long deep hum and roll of the traffic in Holborn, a
sound so persistent that it echoed like the turning of everlasting
wheels. Dyson looked to the right and left and conned the way, and
presently they were passing through a more peaceful quarter, touching on
deserted squares and silent streets black as midnight. Phillipps had
lost all count of direction, and as by degrees the region of faded
respectability gave place to the squalid, and dirty stucco offended the
eye of the artistic observer, he merely ventured the remark that he had
never seen a neighbourhood more unpleasant or more commonplace.

'More mysterious, you mean,' said Dyson. 'I warn you, Phillipps, we are
now hot upon the scent.'

They dived yet deeper into the maze of brickwork; some time before they
had crossed a noisy thoroughfare running east and west, and now the
quarter seemed all amorphous, without character; here a decent house
with sufficient garden, here a faded square, and here factories
surrounded by high, blank walls, with blind passages and dark corners;
but all ill-lighted and unfrequented and heavy with silence.

Presently, as they paced down a forlorn street of two-story houses,
Dyson caught sight of a dark and obscure turning.

'I like the look of that,' he said; 'it seems to me promising.' There
was a street lamp at the entrance, and another, a mere glimmer, at the
further end. Beneath the lamp, on the pavement, an artist had evidently
established his academy in the daytime, for the stones were all a blur
of crude colours rubbed into each other, and a few broken fragments of
chalk lay in a little heap beneath the wall.

'You see people do occasionally pass this way,' said Dyson, pointing to
the ruins of the screever's work. 'I confess I should not have thought
it possible. Come, let us explore.'

On one side of this byway of communication was a great timber-yard, with
vague piles of wood looming shapeless above the enclosing wall; and on
the other side of the road a wall still higher seemed to enclose a
garden, for there were shadows like trees, and a faint murmur of
rustling leaves broke the silence. It was a moonless night, and clouds
that had gathered after sunset had blackened, and midway between the
feeble lamps the passage lay all dark and formless, and when one stopped
and listened, and the sharp echo of reverberant footsteps ceased, there
came from far away, as from beyond the hills, a faint roll of the noise
of London. Phillipps was bolstering up his courage to declare that he
had had enough of the excursion, when a loud cry from Dyson broke in
upon his thoughts.

'Stop, stop, for Heaven's sake, or you will tread on it! There! almost
under your feet!' Phillipps looked down, and saw a vague shape, dark,
and framed in surrounding darkness, dropped strangely on the pavement,
and then a white cuff glimmered for a moment as Dyson lit a match, which
went out directly.

'It's a drunken man,' said Phillipps very coolly.

'It's a murdered man,' said Dyson, and he began to call for police with
all his might, and soon from the distance running footsteps echoed and
grew louder, and cries sounded.

A policeman was the first to come up.

'What's the matter?' he said, as he drew to a stand, panting. 'Anything
amiss here?' for he had not seen what was on the pavement.

'Look!' said Dyson, speaking out of the gloom. 'Look there! My friend
and I came down this place three minutes ago, and that is what we
found.'

The man flashed his light on the dark shape and cried out.

'Why, it's murder,' he said; 'there's blood all about him, and a puddle
of it in the gutter there. He's not dead long, either. Ah! there's the
wound! It's in the neck.'

Dyson bent over what was lying there. He saw a prosperous gentleman,
dressed in smooth, well-cut clothes. The neat whiskers were beginning to
grizzle a little; he might have been forty-five an hour before; and a
handsome gold watch had half slipped out of his waistcoat pocket. And
there in the flesh of the neck, between chin and ear, gaped a great
wound, clean cut, but all clotted with drying blood, and the white of
the cheeks shone like a lighted lamp above the red.

Dyson turned, and looked curiously about him; the dead man lay across
the path with his head inclined towards the wall, and the blood from the
wound streamed away across the pavement, and lay a dark puddle, as the
policeman had said, in the gutter. Two more policemen had come up, the
crowd gathered, humming from all quarters, and the officers had as much
as they could do to keep the curious at a distance. The three lanterns
were flashing here and there, searching for more evidence, and in the
gleam of one of them Dyson caught sight of an object in the road, to
which he called the attention of the policeman nearest to him.

'Look, Phillipps,' he said, when the man had secured it and held it up.
'Look, that should be something in your way!'

It was a dark flinty stone, gleaming like obsidian, and shaped to a
broad edge something after the manner of an adze. One end was rough, and
easily grasped in the hand, and the whole thing was hardly five inches
long. The edge was thick with blood.

'What is that, Phillipps?' said Dyson; and Phillipps looked hard at it.

'It's a primitive flint knife,' he said. 'It was made about ten thousand
years ago. One exactly like this was found near Abury, in Wiltshire, and
all the authorities gave it that age.'

The policeman stared astonished at such a development of the case; and
Phillipps himself was all aghast at his own words. But Mr. Dyson did not
notice him. An inspector who had just come up and was listening to the
outlines of the case, was holding a lantern to the dead man's head.
Dyson, for his part, was staring with a white heat of curiosity at
something he saw on the wall, just above where the man was lying; there
were a few rude marks done in red chalk.

'This is a black business,' said the inspector at length: 'does anybody
know who it is?'

A man stepped forward from the crowd. 'I do, governor,' he said, 'he's a
big doctor, his name's Sir Thomas Vivian; I was in the 'orspital abart
six months ago, and he used to come round; he was a very kind man.'

'Lord,' cried the inspector, 'this is a bad job indeed. Why, Sir Thomas
Vivian goes to the Royal Family. And there's a watch worth a hundred
guineas in his pocket, so it isn't robbery.'

Dyson and Phillipps gave their cards to the authority, and moved off,
pushing with difficulty through the crowd that was still gathering,
gathering fast; and the alley that had been lonely and desolate now
swarmed with white staring faces and hummed with the buzz of rumour and
horror, and rang with the commands of the officers of police. The two
men once free from this swarming curiosity stepped out briskly, but for
twenty minutes neither spoke a word.

'Phillipps,' said Dyson, as they came into a small but cheerful street,
clean and brightly lit, 'Phillipps, I owe you an apology. I was wrong to
have spoken as I did to-night. Such infernal jesting,' he went on, with
heat, 'as if there were no wholesome subjects for a joke. I feel as if I
had raised an evil spirit.'

'For Heaven's sake say nothing more,' said Phillipps, choking down
horror with visible effort. 'You told the truth to me in my room; the
troglodyte, as you said, is still lurking about the earth, and in these
very streets around us, slaying for mere lust of blood.'

'I will come up for a moment,' said Dyson, when they reached Red Lion
Square, 'I have something to ask you. I think there should be nothing
hidden between us at all events.'

Phillipps nodded gloomily, and they went up to the room, where
everything hovered indistinct in the uncertain glimmer of the light from
without.

When the candle was lighted and the two men sat facing each other, Dyson
spoke.

'Perhaps,' he began, 'you did not notice me peering at the wall just
above the place where the head lay. The light from the inspector's
lantern was shining full on it, and I saw something that looked queer to
me, and I examined it closely. I found that some one had drawn in red
chalk a rough outline of a hand--a human hand--upon the wall. But it was
the curious position of the fingers that struck me; it was like this';
and he took a pencil and a piece of paper and drew rapidly, and then
handed what he had done to Phillipps. It was a rough sketch of a hand
seen from the back, with the fingers clenched, and the top of the thumb
protruded between the first and second fingers, and pointed downwards,
as if to something below.

'It was just like that,' said Dyson, as he saw Phillipps's face grow
still whiter. 'The thumb pointed down as if to the body; it seemed
almost a live hand in ghastly gesture. And just beneath there was a
small mark with the powder of the chalk lying on it--as if someone had
commenced a stroke and had broken the chalk in his hand. I saw the bit
of chalk lying on the ground. But what do you make of it?'

'It's a horrible old sign,' said Phillipps--'one of the most horrible
signs connected with the theory of the evil eye. It is used still in
Italy, but there can be no doubt that it has been known for ages. It is
one of the survivals; you must look for the origin of it in the black
swamp whence man first came.'

Dyson took up his hat to go.

'I think, jesting apart,' said he, 'that I kept my promise, and that we
were and are hot on the scent, as I said. It seems as if I had really
shown you primitive man, or his handiwork at all events.'




Incident of the Letter


About a month after the extraordinary and mysterious murder of Sir
Thomas Vivian, the well-known and universally respected specialist in
heart disease, Mr. Dyson called again on his friend Mr. Phillipps, whom
he found, not as usual, sunk deep in painful study, but reclining in his
easy-chair in an attitude of relaxation. He welcomed Dyson with
cordiality.

'I am very glad you have come,' he began; 'I was thinking of looking you
up. There is no longer the shadow of a doubt about the matter.'

'You mean the case of Sir Thomas Vivian?'

'Oh, no, not at all. I was referring to the problem of the fish-hooks.
Between ourselves, I was a little too confident when you were here last,
but since then other facts have turned up; and only yesterday I had a
letter from a distinguished F.R.S. which quite settles the affair. I
have been thinking what I should tackle next; and I am inclined to
believe that there is a good deal to be done in the way of so-called
undecipherable inscriptions.'

'Your line of study pleases me,' said Dyson, 'I think it may prove
useful. But in the meantime, there was surely something extremely
mysterious about the case of Sir Thomas Vivian.'

'Hardly, I think. I allowed myself to be frightened that night; but
there can be no doubt that the facts are patient of a comparatively
commonplace explanation.'

'Really! What is your theory then?'

'Well, I imagine that Vivian must have been mixed up at some period of
his life in an adventure of a not very creditable description, and that
he was murdered out of revenge by some Italian whom he had wronged.'

'Why Italian?'

'Because of the hand, the sign of the <i>mano in fica</i>. That gesture is
now only used by Italians. So you see that what appeared the most
obscure feature in the case turns out to be illuminant.'

'Yes, quite so. And the flint knife?'

'That is very simple. The man found the thing in Italy, or possibly
stole it from some museum. Follow the line of least resistance, my dear
fellow, and you will see there is no need to bring up primitive man from
his secular grave beneath the hills.'

'There is some justice in what you say,' said Dyson. 'As I understand
you, then, you think that your Italian, having murdered, Vivian, kindly
chalked up that hand as a guide to Scotland Yard?'

'Why not? Remember a murderer is always a madman. He may plot and
contrive nine-tenths of his scheme with the acuteness and the grasp of a
chess-player or a pure mathematician; but somewhere or other his wits
leave him and he behaves like a fool. Then you must take into account
the insane pride or vanity of the criminal; he likes to leave his mark,
as it were, upon his handiwork.'

'Yes, it is all very ingenious; but have you read the reports of the
inquest?'

'No, not a word. I simply gave my evidence, left the court, and
dismissed the subject from my mind.'

'Quite so. Then if you don't object I should like to give you an account
of the case. I have studied it rather deeply, and I confess it interests
me extremely.'

'Very good. But I warn you I have done with mystery. We are to deal with
facts now.'

'Yes, it is fact that I wish to put before you. And this is fact the
first. When the police moved Sir Thomas Vivian's body they found an open
knife beneath him. It was an ugly-looking thing such as sailors carry,
with a blade that the mere opening rendered rigid, and there the blade
was all ready, bare and gleaming, but without a trace of blood on it,
and the knife was found to be quite new; it had never been used. Now, at
the first glance it looks as if your imaginary Italian were just the man
to have such a tool. But consider a moment. Would he be likely to buy a
new knife expressly to commit murder? And, secondly, if he had such a
knife, why didn't he use it, instead of that very odd flint instrument?

'And I want to put this to you. You think the murderer chalked up the
hand after the murder as a sort of "melodramatic Italian assassin his
mark" touch. Passing over the question as to whether the real criminal
ever does such a thing, I would point out that, on the medical evidence,
Sir Thomas Vivian hadn't been dead for more than an hour; That would
place the stroke at about a quarter to ten, and you know it was
perfectly dark when we went out at 9.30. And that passage was singularly
gloomy and ill-lighted, and the hand was drawn roughly, it is true, but
correctly and without the bungling of strokes and the bad shots that are
inevitable when one tries to draw in the dark or with shut eyes. Just
try to draw such a simple figure as a square without looking at the
paper, and then ask me to conceive that your Italian, with the rope
waiting for his neck, could draw the hand on the wall so firmly and
truly, in the black shadow of that alley. It is absurd. By consequence,
then, the hand was drawn early in the evening, long before any murder
was committed; or else--mark this, Phillipps--it was drawn by some one
to whom darkness and gloom were familiar and habitual; by some one to
whom the common dread of the rope was unknown!

'Again: a curious note was found in Sir Thomas Vivian's pocket. Envelope
and paper were of a common make, and the stamp bore the West Central
postmark. I will come to the nature of the contents later on, but it is
the question of the handwriting that is so remarkable. The address on
the outside was neatly written in a small clear hand, but the letter
itself might have been written by a Persian who had learnt the English
script. It was upright, and the letters were curiously contorted, with
an affectation of dashes and backward curves which really reminded me of
an Oriental manuscript, though it was all perfectly legible. But--and
here comes the poser--on searching the dead man's waistcoat pockets a
small memorandum book was found; it was almost filled with pencil
jottings. These memoranda related chiefly to matters of a private as
distinct from a professional nature; there were appointments to meet
friends, notes of theatrical first-nights, the address of a good hotel
in Tours, and the title of a new novel--nothing in any way intimate. And
the whole of these jottings were written in a hand nearly identical with
the writing of the note found in the dead man's coat pocket! There was
just enough difference between them to enable the expert to swear that
the two were not written by the same person. I will just read you so
much of Lady Vivian's evidence as bears on this point of the writing; I
have the printed slip with me. Here you see she says: "I was married to
my late husband seven years ago; I never saw any letter addressed to him
in a hand at all resembling that on the envelope produced, nor have I
ever seen writing like that in the letter before me. I never saw my late
husband using the memorandum book, but I am sure he did write everything
in it; I am certain of that because we stayed last May at the Hotel du
Faisan, Rue Royale, Tours, the address of which is given in the book; I
remember his getting the novel 'A Sentinel' about six weeks ago. Sir
Thomas Vivian never liked to miss the first-nights at the theatres. His
usual hand was perfectly different from that used in the note-book."

'And now, last of all, we come back to the note itself. Here it is in
facsimile. My possession of it is due to the kindness of Inspector
Cleeve, who is pleased to be amused at my amateur inquisitiveness. Read
it, Phillipps; you tell me you are interested in obscure inscriptions;
here is something for you to decipher.'

Mr. Phillipps, absorbed in spite of himself in the strange circumstances
Dyson had related, took the piece of paper, and scrutinized it closely.
The handwriting was indeed bizarre in the extreme, and, as Dyson had
noted, not unlike the Persian character in its general effect, but it
was perfectly legible.

'Read it aloud,' said Dyson, and Phillipps obeyed.


     '"Hand did not point in vain. The meaning of the stars is no longer
     obscure. Strangely enough, the black heaven vanished, or was stolen
     yesterday, but that does not matter in the least, as I have a
     celestial globe. Our old orbit remains unchanged; you have not
     forgotten the number of my sign, or will you appoint some other
     house? I have been on the other side of the moon, and can bring
     something to show you."'


'And what do you make of that?' said Dyson.

'It seems to me mere gibberish,' said Phillipps; 'you suppose it has a
meaning?'

'Oh, surely; it was posted three days before the murder; it was found in
the murdered man's pocket; it is written in a fantastic hand which the
murdered man himself used for his private memoranda. There must be
purpose under all this, and to my mind there is something ugly enough
hidden under the circumstances of this case of Sir Thomas Vivian.'

'But what theory have you formed?'

'Oh, as to theories, I am still in a very early stage; it is too soon to
state conclusions. But I think I have demolished your Italian. I tell
you, Phillipps, again the whole thing has an ugly look to my eyes. I
cannot do as you do, and fortify myself with cast-iron propositions to
the effect that this or that doesn't happen, and never has happened. You
note that the first word in the letter is "hand". That seems to me,
taken with what we know about the hand on the wall, significant enough,
and what you yourself told me of the history and meaning of the symbol,
its connection with a world-old belief and faiths of dim far-off years,
all this speaks of mischief, for me at all events. No; I stand pretty
well to what I said to you half in joke that night before we went out.
There are sacraments of evil as well as of good about us, and we live
and move to my belief in an unknown world, a place where there are caves
and shadows and dwellers in twilight. It is possible that man may
sometimes return on the track of evolution, and it is my belief that an
awful lore is not yet dead.'

'I cannot follow you in all this,' said Phillipps; 'it seems to interest
you strangely. What do you propose to do?'

'My dear, Phillipps,' replied Dyson, speaking in a lighter tone, 'I am
afraid I shall have to go down a little in the world. I have a prospect
of visits to the pawnbrokers before me, and the publicans must not be
neglected. I must cultivate a taste for four ale; shag tobacco I already
love and esteem with all my heart.'





Search for the Vanished Heaven


For many days after the discussion with Phillipps. Mr. Dyson was
resolute in the line of research he had marked out for himself. A
fervent curiosity and an innate liking for the obscure were great
incentives, but especially in this case of Sir Thomas Vivian's death
(for Dyson began to boggle a little at the word 'murder') there seemed
to him an element that was more than curious. The sign of the red hand
upon the wall, the tool of flint that had given death, the almost
identity between the handwriting of the note and the fantastic script
reserved religiously, as it appeared, by the doctor for trifling
jottings, all these diverse and variegated threads joined to weave in
his mind a strange and shadowy picture, with ghastly shapes dominant and
deadly, and yet ill-defined, like the giant figures wavering in an
ancient tapestry. He thought he had a clue to the meaning of the note,
and in his resolute search for the 'black heaven', which had vanished,
he beat furiously about the alleys and obscure streets of central
London, making himself a familiar figure to the pawnbroker, and a
frequent guest at the more squalid pot-houses.

For a long time he was unsuccessful, and he trembled at the thought that
the 'black heaven' might be hid in the coy retirements of Peckham, or
lurk perchance in distant Willesden, but finally, improbability, in
which he put his trust, came to the rescue. It was a dark and rainy
night, with something in the unquiet and stirring gusts that savoured of
approaching winter, and Dyson, beating up a narrow street not far from
the Gray's Inn Road, took shelter in an extremely dirty 'public', and
called for beer, forgetting for the moment his preoccupations, and only
thinking of the sweep of the wind about the tiles and the hissing of the
rain through the black and troubled air. At the bar there gathered the
usual company: the frowsy women and the men in shiny black, those who
appeared to mumble secretly together, others who wrangled in
interminable argument, and a few shy drinkers who stood apart, each
relishing his dose, and the rank and biting flavour of cheap spirit.
Dyson was wondering at the enjoyment of it all, when suddenly there came
a sharper accent. The folding-doors swayed open, and a middle-aged woman
staggered towards the bar, and clutched the pewter rim as if she stepped
a deck in a roaring gale. Dyson glanced at her attentively as a pleasing
specimen of her class; she was decently dressed in black, and carried a
black bag of somewhat rusty leather, and her intoxication was apparent
and far advanced. As she swayed at the bar, it was evidently all she
could do to stand upright, and the barman, who had iooked at her with
disfavour, shook his head in reply to her thick-voiced demand for a
drink. The woman glared at him, transformed in a moment to a fury, with
bloodshot eyes, and poured forth a torrent of execration, a stream of
blasphemies and early English phraseology.

'Get out of this,' said the man; 'shut up and be off, or I'll send for
the police.'

'Police, you ----' bawled the woman 'I'll ---- well give you something
to fetch the police for!' and with a rapid dive into her bag she pulled
out some object which she hurled furiously at the barman's head.

The man ducked down, and the missile flew over his head and smashed a
bottle to fragments, while the woman with a peal of horrible laughter
rushed to the door, and they could hear her steps pattering fast over
the wet stones.

The barman looked ruefully about him.

'Not much good going after her,' he said, 'and I'm afraid what she's
left won't pay for that bottle of whisky.' He fumbled amongst the
fragments of broken glass, and drew out something dark, a kind of square
stone it seemed, which he held up.

'Valuable cur'osity,' he said, 'any gent like to bid?'

The habitues had scarcely turned from their pots and glasses during
these exciting incidents; they gazed a moment, fishily, when the bottle
smashed, and that was all, and the mumble of the confidential was
resumed and the jangle of the quarrelsome, and the shy and solitary
sucked in their lips and relished again the rank flavour of the spirit.

Dyson looked quickly at what the barman held before him.

'Would you mind letting me see it?' he said; 'it's a queer-looking old
thing, isn't it?'

It was a small black tablet, apparently of stone, about four inches long
by two and a half broad, and as Dyson took it he felt rather than saw
that he touched the secular with his flesh. There was some kind of
carving on the surface, and, most conspicuous, a sign that made Dyson's
heart leap.

'I don't mind taking it,' he said quietly. 'Would two shillings be
enough?'

'Say half a dollar,' said the man, and the bargain was concluded. Dyson
drained his pot of beer, finding it delicious, and lit his pipe, and
went out deliberately soon after. When he reached his apartment he
locked the door, and placed the tablet on his desk, and then fixed
himself in his chair, as resolute as an army in its trenches before a
beleaguered city. The tablet was full under the light of the shaded
candle, and scrutinizing it closely, Dyson saw first the sign of the
hand with the thumb protruding between the fingers; it was cut finely
and firmly on the dully black surface of the stone, and the thumb
pointed downward to what was beneath.

'It is mere ornament,' said Dyson to himself, 'perhaps symbolical
ornament, but surely not an inscription, or the signs of any words ever
spoken.'

The hand pointed at a series of fantastic figures, spirals and whorls of
the finest, most delicate lines, spaced at intervals over the remaining
surface of the tablet. The marks were as intricate and seemed almost as
much without design as the pattern of a thumb impressed upon a pane of
glass.

'Is it some natural marking?' thought Dyson; 'there have been queer
designs, likenesses of beasts and flowers, in stones with which man's
hand had nothing to do'; and he bent over the stone with a magnifier,
only to be convinced that no hazard of nature could have delineated
these varied labyrinths of line. The whorls were of different sizes;
some were less than the twelfth of an inch in diameter, and the largest
was a little smaller than a sixpence, and under the glass the regularity
and accuracy of the cutting were evident, and in the smaller spirals the
lines were graduated at intervals of a hundredth of an inch. The whole
thing had a marvellous and fantastic look, and gazing at the mystic
whorls beneath the hand, Dyson became subdued with an impression of vast
and far-off ages, and of a living being that had touched the stone with
enigmas before the hills were formed, when the hard rocks still boiled
with fervent heat.

'The 'black heaven' is found again,' he said, 'but the meaning of the
stars is likely to be obscure for everlasting so far as I am concerned.'

London stilled without, and a chill breath came into the room as Dyson
sat gazing at the tablet shining duskily under the candle-light; and at
last as he closed the desk over the ancient stone, all his wonder at the
case of Sir Thomas Vivian increased tenfold, and he thought of the
well-dressed prosperous gentleman lying dead mystically beneath the sign
of the hand, and the insupportable conviction seized him that between
the death of this fashionable West End doctor and the weird spirals of
the tablet there were most secret and unimaginable links.

For days he sat before his desk gazing at the tablet, unable to resist
its lodestone fascination, and yet quite helpless, without even the hope
of solving the symbols so secretly inscribed. At last, desperate he
called in Mr. Phillipps in consultation, and told in brief the story of
the finding the stone.

'Dear me!' said Phillipps, 'this is extremely curious; you have had a
find indeed. Why, it looks to me even more ancient than the Hittite
seal. I confess the character, if it is a character, is entirely strange
to me. These whorls are really very quaint.' 'Yes, but I want to know
what they mean. You must remember this tablet is the 'black heaven' of
the letter found in Sir Thomas Vivian's pocket; it bears directly on his
death.'

'Oh, no, that is nonsense! This is, no doubt, an extremely ancient
tablet, which has been stolen from some collection. Yes, the hand makes
an odd coincidence, but only a coincidence after all.'

'My dear Phillipps, you are a living example of the truth of the axiom
that extreme scepticism is mere credulity. But can you decipher the
inscription?'

'I undertake to decipher anything,' said Phillipps. 'I do not believe in
the insoluble. These characters are curious, but I cannot fancy them to
be inscrutable.'

'Then take the thing away with you and make what you can of it. It has
begun to haunt me; I feel as if I had gazed too long into the eyes of
the Sphinx.'

Phillipps departed with the tablet in an inner pocket. He had not much
doubt of success, for he had evolved thirty-seven rules for the solution
of inscriptions. Yet when a week had passed and he called to see Dyson
there was no vestige of triumph on his features. He found his friend in
a state of extreme irritation, pacing up and down in the room like a man
in a passion. He turned with a start as the door opened.

'Well,' said Dyson, 'you have got it? What is it all about?'

'My dear fellow, I am sorry to say I have completely failed. I have
tried every known device in vain. I have even been so officious as to
submit it to a friend at the Museum, but he, though a man of prime
authority on the subject, tells me he is quite at fault. It must be some
wreckage of a vanished race, almost, I think--a fragment of another
world than ours. I am not a superstitious man, Dyson, and you know that
I have no truck with even the noble delusions, but I confess I yearn to
be rid of this small square of blackish stone. Frankly, it has given me
an ill week; it seems to me troglodytic and abhorred.'

Phillipps drew out the tablet and laid it on the desk before Dyson.

'By the way,' he went on, 'I was right at all events in one particular;
it has formed part of some collection. There is a piece of grimy paper
on the back that must have been a label.'

'Yes, I noticed that,' said Dyson, who had fallen into deepest
disappointment; 'no doubt the paper is a label. But as I don't much care
where the tablet originally came from, and only wish to know what the
inscription means, I paid no attention to the paper. The thing is a
hopeless riddle, I suppose, and yet it must surely be of the greatest
importance.'

Phillipps left soon after, and Dyson, still despondent, took the tablet
in his hand and carelessly turned it over. The label had so grimed that
it seemed merely a dull stain, but as Dyson looked at it idly, and yet
attentively, he could see pencil-marks, and he bent over it eagerly,
with his glass to his eye. To his annoyance, he found that part of the
paper had been torn away, and he could only with difficulty make out odd
words and pieces of words. First he read something that looked like
'inroad', and then beneath, 'stony-hearted step----' and a tear cut off
the rest. But in an instant a solution suggested itself, and he chuckled
with huge delight.

'Certainly,' he said out loud, 'this is not only the most charming but
the most convenient quarter in all London; here I am, allowing for the
accidents of side streets, perched on a tower of observation.'

He glanced triumphant out of the window across the street to the gate of
the British Museum. Sheltered by the boundary wall of that agreeable
institution, a 'screever', or artist in chalks, displayed his brilliant
impressions on the pavement, soliciting the approval and the coppers of
the gay and serious.

'This,' said Dyson, 'is more than delightful! An artist is provided to
my hand.'





The Artist of the Pavement


Mr. Phillipps, in spite of all disavowals--in spite of the wall of sense
of whose enclosure and limit he was wont to make his boast--yet felt in
his heart profoundly curious as to the case of Sir Thomas Vivian. Though
he kept a brave face for his friend, his reason could not decently
resist the conclusion that Dyson had enunciated, namely, that the whole
affair had a look both ugly and mysterious. There was the weapon of a
vanished race that had pierced the great arteries; the red hand, the
symbol of a hideous faith, that pointed to the slain man; and then the
tablet which Dyson declared he had expected to find, and had certainly
found, bearing the ancient impress of the hand of malediction, and a
legend written beneath in a character compared with which the most
antique cuneiform was a thing of yesterday. Besides all this, there were
other points that tortured and perplexed. How to account for the bare
knife found unstained beneath the body? And the hint that the red hand
upon the wall must have been drawn by some one whose life was passed in
darkness thrilled him with a suggestion of dim and infinite horror.
Hence he was in truth not a little curious as to what was to come, and
some ten days after he had returned the tablet he again visited the
'mystery-man', as he privately named his friend.

Arrived in the grave and airy chambers in Great Russell Street, he found
the moral atmosphere of the place had been transformed. All Dyson's
irritation had disappeared, his brow was smoothed with complacency, and
he sat at a table by the window gazing out into the street with an
expression of grim enjoyment, a pile of books and papers lying unheeded
before him.

'My dear Phillipps, I am delighted to see you! Pray excuse my moving.
Draw your chair up here to the table, and try this admirable shag
tobacco.'

'Thank you,' said Phillipps, 'judging by the flavour of the smoke, I
should think it is a little strong. But what on earth is all this? What
are you looking at?'

'I am on my watch-tower. I assure you that the time seems short while I
contemplate this agreeable street and the classic grace of the Museum
portico.'

'Your capacity for nonsense is amazing,' replied Phillipps, 'but have
you succeeded in deciphering the tablet? It interests me.'

'I have not paid much attention to the tablet recently,' said Dyson. 'I
believe the spiral character may wait.'

'Really! And how about the Vivian murder?'

'Ah, you do take an interest in that case? Well, after all, we cannot
deny that it was a queer business. But is not "murder" rather a coarse
word? It smacks a little, surely, of the police poster. Perhaps I am a
trifle decadent, but I cannot help believing in the splendid word;
"sacrifice", for example, is surely far finer than "murder".'

'I am all in the dark,' said Phillipps. 'I cannot even imagine by what
track you are moving in this labyrinth.'

'I think that before very long the whole matter will be a good deal
clearer for us both, but I doubt whether you will like hearing the
story.'

Dyson lit his pipe afresh and leant back, not relaxing, however, in his
scrutiny of the street. After a somewhat lengthy pause, he startled
Phillipps by a loud breath of relief as he rose from the chair by the
window and began to pace the floor.

'It's over for the day,' he said, 'and, after all, one gets a little
tired.'

Phillipps looked with inquiry into the street. The evening was
darkening, and the pile of the Museum was beginning to loom indistinct
before the lighting of the lamps, but the pavements were thronged and
busy. The artist in chalks across the way was gathering together his
materials, and blurring all the brilliance of his designs, and a little
lower down there was the clang of shutters being placed in position.
Phillipps could see nothing to justify Mr. Dyson's sudden abandonment of
his attitude of surveillance, and grew a little irritated by all these
thorny enigmas.

'Do you know, Phillipps,' said Dyson, as he strolled at ease up and down
the room, 'I will tell you how I work. I go upon the theory of
improbability. The theory is unknown to you? I will explain. Suppose I
stand on the steps of St. Paul's and look out for a blind man lame of
the left leg to pass me, it is evidently highly improbable that I shall
see such a person by waiting for an hour. If I wait two hours the
improbability is diminished, but is still enormous, and a watch of a
whole day would give little expectation of success. But suppose I take
up the same position day after day, and week after week, don't you
perceive that the improbability is lessening constantly--growing smaller
day after day. Don't you see that two lines which are not parallel are
gradually approaching one another, drawing nearer and nearer to a point
of meeting, till at last they do meet, and improbability has vanished
altogether. That is how I found the black tablet: I acted on the theory
of improbability. It is the only scientific principle I know of which
can enable one to pick out an unknown man from amongst five million.'

'And you expect to find the interpreter of the black tablet by this
method?'

'Certainly.'

'And the murderer of Sir Thomas Vivian also?'

'Yes, I expect to lay my hands on the person concerned in the death of
Sir Thomas Vivian in exactly the same way.'

The rest of the evening after Phillipps had left was devoted by Dyson to
sauntering in the streets, and afterwards, when the night grew late, to
his literary labours, or the chase of the phrase, as he called it. The
next morning the station by the window was again resumed. His meals were
brought to him at the table, and he ate with his eyes on the street.
With briefest intervals, snatched reluctantly from time to time, he
persisted in his survey throughout the day, and only at dusk, when the
shutters were put up and the 'screever' ruthlessly deleted all his
labour of the day, just before the gas-lamps began to star the shadows,
did he feel at liberty to quit his post. Day after day this ceaseless
glance upon the street continued, till the landlady grew puzzled and
aghast at such a profitless pertinacity.

But at last, one evening, when the play of lights and shadows was scarce
beginning, and the clear cloudless air left all distinct and shining,
there came the moment. A man of middle age, bearded and bowed, with a
touch of grey about the ears, was strolling slowly along the northern
pavement of Great Russell Street from the eastern end. He looked up at
the Museum as he went by, and then glanced involuntarily at the art of
the 'screever', and at the artist himself, who sat beside his pictures,
hat in hand. The man with the beard stood still an instant, swaying
slightly to and fro as if in thought, and Dyson saw his fists shut
tight, and his back quivering, and the one side of his face in view
twitched and grew contorted with the indescribable torment of
approaching epilepsy. Dyson drew a soft hat from his pocket, and dashed
the door open, taking the stair with a run.

When he reached the street, the person he had seen so agitated had
turned about, and, regardless of observation, was racing wildly towards
Bloomsbury Square, with his back to his former course. Mr. Dyson went up
to the artist of the pavement and gave him some money, observing
quietly, 'You needn't trouble to draw that thing again.'

Then he, too, turned about, and strolled idly down the street in the
opposite direction to that taken by the fugitive. So the distance
between Dyson and the man with the bowed head grew steadily greater.





Story of the Treasure-house


'There are many reasons why I chose your rooms for the meeting in
preference to my own. Chiefly, perhaps because I thought the man would
be more at his ease on neutral ground.'

'I confess, Dyson,' said Phillipps, 'that I feel both impatient and
uneasy. You know my standpoint: hard matter of fact, materialism if you
like, in its crudest form. But there is something about all this affair
of Vivian that makes me a little restless. And how did you induce the
man to come?'

'He has an exaggerated opinion of my powers. You remember what I said
about the doctrine of improbability? When it does work out, it gives
results which seem very amazing to a person who is not in the secret.
That is eight striking, isn't it? And there goes the bell.'

They heard footsteps on the stair, and presently the door opened, and a
middle-aged man, with a bowed head, bearded, and with a good deal of
grizzling hair about his ears, came into the room. Phillipps glanced at
his features, and recognised the lineaments of terror.

'Come in, Mr. Selby,' said Dyson. 'This is Mr. Phillipps, my intimate
friend and our host for this evening. Will you take anything? Then
perhaps we had better hear your story--a very singular one, I am sure.'

The man spoke in a voice hollow and a little quavering, and a fixed
stare that never left his eyes seemed directed to something awful that
was to remain before him by day and night for the rest of his life.

'You will, I am sure, excuse preliminaries,' he began; 'what I have to
tell is best told quickly. I will say, then, that I was born in a remote
part of the west of England, where the very outlines of the woods and
hills, and the winding of the streams in the valleys, are apt to suggest
the mystical to any one strongly gifted with imagination. When I was
quite a boy there were certain huge and rounded hills, certain depths of
hanging wood, and secret valleys bastioned round on every side that
filled me with fancies beyond the bourne of rational expression, and as
I grew older and began to dip into my father's books, I went by
instinct, like the bee, to all that would nourish fantasy. Thus, from a
course of obsolete and occult reading, and from listening to certain
wild legends in which the older people still secretly believed, I grew
firmly convinced of the existence of treasure, the hoard of a race
extinct for ages, still hidden beneath the hills, and my every thought
was directed to the discovery of the golden heaps that lay, as I fancied
within a few feet of the green turf. To one spot, in especial, I was
drawn as if by enchantment; it was a tumulus, the domed memorial of some
forgotten people, crowning the crest of a vast mountain range; and I
have often lingered there on summer evenings, sitting on the great block
of limestone at the summit, and looking out far over the yellow sea
towards the Devonshire coast. One day as I dug heedlessly with the
ferrule of my stick at the mosses and lichens which grew rank over the
stone, my eye was caught by what seemed a pattern beneath the growth of
green; there was a curving line, and marks that did not look altogether
the work of nature. At first I thought I had bared some rarer fossil,
and I took out my knife and scraped away at the moss till a square foot
was uncovered. Then I saw two signs which startled me; first, a closed
hand, pointing downwards, the thumb protruding between the fingers, and
beneath the hand a whorl or spiral, traced with exquisite accuracy in
the hard surface of the rock. Here I persuaded myself, was an index to
the great secret, but I chilled at the recollection of the fact that
some antiquarians had tunnelled the tumulus through and through, and had
been a good deal surprised at not finding so much as an arrowhead
within. Clearly, then, the signs on the limestone had no local
significance; and I made up my mind that I must search abroad. By sheer
accident I was in a measure successful in my quest. Strolling by a
cottage, I saw some children playing by the roadside; one was holding up
some object in his hand, and the rest were going through one of the many
forms of elaborate pretence which make up a great part of the mystery of
a child's life. Something in the object held by the little boy attracted
me, and I asked him to let me see it. The plaything of these children
consisted of an oblong tablet of black stone; and on it was inscribed
the hand pointing downwards, just as I had seen it on the rock, while
beneath, spaced over the tablet, were a number of whorls and spirals,
cut, as it seemed to me, with the utmost care and nicety. I bought the
toy for a couple of shillings; the woman of the house told me it had
been lying about for years; she thought her husband had found it one day
in the brook which ran in front of the cottage: it was a very hot
summer, and the stream was almost dry, and he saw it amongst the stones.
That day I tracked the brook to a well of water gushing up cold and
clear at the head of a lonely glen in the mountain. That was twenty
years ago, and I only succeeded in deciphering the mysterious
inscription last August. I must not trouble you with irrelevant details
of my life; it is enough for me to say that I was forced, like many
another man, to leave my old home and come to London. Of money I had
very little, and I was glad to find a cheap room in a squalid street off
the Gray's Inn Road. The late Sir Thomas Vivian, then far poorer and
more wretched than myself, had a garret in the same house, and before
many months we became intimate friends, and I had confided to him the
object of my life. I had at first great difficulty in persuading him
that I was not giving my days and my nights to an inquiry altogether
hopeless and chimerical; but when he was convinced he grew keener than
myself, and glowed at the thought of the riches which were to be the
prize of some ingenuity and patience. I liked the man intensely, and
pitied his case; he had a strong desire to enter the medical profession,
but he lacked the means to pay the smallest fees, and indeed he was, not
once or twice, but often reduced to the very verge of starvation. I
freely and solemnly promised, that under whatever chances, he should
share in my heaped fortune when it came, and this promise to one who had
always been poor, and yet thirsted for wealth and pleasure in a manner
unknown to me, was the strongest incentive. He threw himself into the
task with eager interest, and applied a very acute intellect and
unwearied patience to the solution of the characters on the tablet. I,
like other ingenious young men, was curious in the matter of
handwriting, and I had invented or adapted a fantastic script which I
used occasionally, and which took Vivian so strongly that he was at the
pains to imitate it. It was arranged between us that if we were ever
parted, and had occasion to write on the affair that was so close to our
hearts, this queer hand of my invention was to be used, and we also
contrived a semi-cypher for the same purpose. Meanwhile we exhausted
ourselves in efforts to get at the heart of the mystery, and after a
couple of years had gone by I could see that Vivian begall to sicken a
little of the adventure, and one night he told me with some emotion that
he feared both our lives were being passed away in idle and hopeless
endeavour. Not many months afterwards he was so happy as to receive a
considerable legacy from an aged and distant relative whose very
existence had been almost forgotten by him; and with money at the bank,
he became at once a stranger to me. He had passed his preliminary
examination many years before, and forthwith decided to enter at St.
Thomas's Hospital, and he told me that he must look out for a more
convenient lodging. As we said good-bye, I reminded him of the promise I
had given, and solemnly renewed it; but Vivian laughed with something
between pity and contempt in his voice and expression as he thanked me.
I need not dwell on the long struggle and misery of my existence, now
doubly lonely; I never wearied or despaired of final success, and every
day saw me at work, the tablet before me, and only at dusk would I go
out and take my daily walk along Oxford Street, which attracted me, I
think, by the noise and motion and glitter of lamps.

'This walk grew with me to a habit; every night, and in all weathers, I
crossed the Gray's Inn Road and struck westward, sometimes choosing a
northern track, by the Euston Road and Tottenham Court Road, sometimes I
went by Holborn, and I sometimes by way of Great Russell Street. Every
night I walked for an hour to and fro on the northern pavement of Oxford
Street, and the tale of De Quincey and his name for the Street,
'Stony-hearted step mother', often recurred to my memory. Then I would
return to my grimy den and spend hours more in endless analysis of the
riddle before me.

'The answer came to me one night a few weeks; ago; it flashed into my
brain in a moment, and I read the inscription, and saw that after all I
had not wasted my days. 'The place of the treasure-house of them that
dwell below,' were the first words I read, and then followed minute
indications of the spot in my own country where the great works of gold
were to be kept for ever. Such a track was to be followed, such a
pitfall avoided; here the way narrowed almost to a fox's hole, and there
it broadened, and so at last the chamber would be reached. I determined
to lose no time in verifying my discovery--not that I doubted at that
great moment, but I would not risk even the smallest chance of
disappointing my old friend Vivian, now a rich and prosperous man. I
took the train for the West, and one night, with chart in hand, traced
out the passage of the hills, and went so far that I saw the gleam of
gold before me. I would not go on; I resolved that Vivian must be with
me; and I only brought away a strange knife of flint which lay on the
path, as confirmation of what I had to tell. I returned to London, and
was a good deal vexed to find the stone tablet had disappeared from my
rooms. My landlady, an inveterate drunkard, denied all knowledge of the
fact, but I have little doubt she had stolen the thing for the sake of
the glass of whisky it might fetch. However, I knew what was written on
the tablet by heart, and I had also made an exact facsimile of the
characters, so the loss was not severe. Only one thing annoyed me: when
I first came into possession of the stone, I had pasted a piece of paper
on the back and had written down the date and place of finding, and
later on I had scribbled a word or two, a trivial sentiment, the name of
my street, and such-like idle pencillings on the paper; and these
memories of days that had seemed so hopeless were dear to me: I had
thought they would help to remind me in the future of the hours when I
had hoped against despair. However, I wrote at once to Sir Thomas
Vivian, using the handwriting I have mentioned and also the
quasi-cypher. I told him of my success, and after mentioning the loss of
the tablet and the fact that I had a copy of the inscription, I reminded
him once more of my promise, and asked him either to write or call. He
replied that he would see me in a certain obscure passage in Clerkenwell
well known to us both in the old days, and at seven o'clock one evening
I went to meet him. At the corner of this by way, as I was walking to
and fro, I noticed the blurred pictures of some street artist, and I
picked up a piece of chalk he had left behind him, not much thinking
what I was doing. I paced up and down the passage, wondering a good
deal, as you may imagine, as to what manner of man I was to meet after
so many years of parting, and the thoughts of the buried time coming
thick upon me, I walked mechanically without raising my eyes from the
ground. I was startled out of my reverie by an angry voice and a rough
inquiry why I didn't keep to the right side of the pavement, and looking
up I found I had confronted a prosperous and important gentleman, who
eyed my poor appearance with a look of great dislike and contempt. I
knew directly it was my old comrade, and when I recalled myself to him,
he apologized with some show of regret, and began to thank me for my
kindness, doubtfully, as if he hesitated to commit himself, and, as I
could see, with the hint of a suspicion as to my sanity. I would have
engaged him at first in reminiscences of our friendship, but I found Sir
Thomas viewed those days with a good deal of distaste, and replying
politely to my remarks, continually edged in "business matters", as he
called them. I changed my topics, and told him in greater detail what I
have told you. Then I saw his manner suddenly change; as I pulled out
the flint knife to prove my journey "to the other side of the moon", as
we called it in our jargon, there came over him a kind of choking
eagerness, his features were somewhat discomposed, and I thought I
detected a shuddering horror, a clenched resolution, and the effort to
keep quiet succeed one another in a manner that puzzled me. I had
occasion to be a little precise in my particulars, and it being still
light enough, I remembered the red chalk in my pocket, and drew the hand
on the wall. "Here, you see, is the hand", I said, as I explained its
true meaning, "note where the thumb issues from between the first and
second fingers", and I would have gone on, and had applied the chalk to
the wall to continue my diagram, when he struck my hand down much to my
surprise. "No, no," he said, "I do not want all that. And this place is
not retired enough; let us walk on, and do you explain everything to me
minutely." I complied readily enough, and he led me away choosing the
most unfrequented by-ways, while I drove in the plan of the hidden house
word by word. Once or twice as I raised my eyes I caught Vivian looking
strangely about him; he seemed to give a quick glint up and down, and
glance at the houses; and there was a furtive and anxious air about him
that displeased me. "Let us walk on to the north," he said at length,
"we shall come to some pleasant lanes where we can discuss these
matters, quietly; my night's rest is at your service." I declined, on
the pretext that I could not dispense with my visit to Oxford Street,
and went on till he understood every turning and winding and the
minutest detail as well as myself. We had returned on our footsteps, and
stood again in the dark passage, just where I had drawn the red hand on
the wall, for I recognized the vague shape of the trees whose branches
hung above us. "We have come back to our starting-point," I said; "I
almost think I could put my finger on the wall where I drew the hand.
And I am sure you could put your finger on the mystic hand in the hills
as well as I. Remember between stream and stone."

'I was bending down, peering at what I thought must be my drawing, when
I heard a sharp hiss of breath, and started up, and saw Vivian with his
arm uplifted and a bare blade in his hand, and death threatening in his
eyes. In sheer self-defence I caught at the flint weapon in my pocket,
and dashed at him in blind fear of my life, and the next instant he lay
dead upon the stones.

'I think that is all,' Mr. Selby continued after a pause, 'and it only
remains for me to say to you, Mr. Dyson, that I cannot conceive what
means enabled you to run me down.'

'I followed many indications,' said Dyson, 'and I am bound to disclaim
all credit for acuteness, as I have made several gross blunders. Your
celestial cypher did not, I confess, give me much trouble; I saw at once
that terms of astronomy were substituted for common words and phrases.
You had lost something black, or something black had been stolen from
you; a celestial globe is a copy of the heavens, so I knew you meant you
had a copy of what you had lost. Obviously, then, I came to the
conclusion that you had lost a black object with characters or symbols
written or inscribed on it, since the object in question certainly
contained valuable information and all information must be written or
pictured. "Our old orbit remains unchanged"; evidently our old course or
arrangement. "The number of my sign" must mean the number of my house,
the allusion being to the signs of the zodiac. I need not say that "the
other side of the moon" can stand for nothing but some place where no
one else has been; and "some other house" is some other place of
meeting, the "house" being the old term "house of the heavens." Then my
next step was to find the "black heaven" that had been stolen, and by a
process of exhaustion I did so.'

'You have got the tablet?'

'Certainly. And on the back of it, on the slip of paper you have
mentioned, I read 'inroad,' which puzzled me a good deal, till I thought
of Grey's Inn Road; you forgot the second <i>n</i>. "Stony-hearted step----"
immediately suggested the phrase of De Quincey you have alluded to; and
I made the wild but correct shot, that you were a man who lived in or
near the Gray's Inn Road, and had the habit of walking in Oxford Street,
for you remember how the opium-eater dwells on his wearying promenades
along that thoroughfare. On the theory of improbability, which I have
explained to my friend here, I concluded that occasionally, at all
events, you would choose the way by Guildford Street, Russell Square,
and Great Russell Street, and I knew that if I watched long enough I
should see you. But how was I to recognize my man? I noticed the
screever opposite my rooms, and got him to draw every day a large hand,
in the gesture so familiar to us all, upon the wall behind him. I
thought that when the unknown person did pass he would certainly betray
some emotion at the sudden vision of the sign, to him the most terrible
of symbols. You know the rest. Ah, as to catching you an hour later,
that was, I confess, a refinement. From the fact of your having occupied
the same rooms for so many years, in a neighbourhood moreover where
lodgers are migratory to excess, I drew the conclusion that you were a
man of fixed habit, and I was sure that after you had got over your
fright you would return for the walk down Oxford Street. You did, by way
of New Oxford Street, and I was waiting at the corner.'

'Your conclusions are admirable,' said Mr. Selby. 'I may tell you that I
had my stroll down Oxford Street the night Sir Thomas Vivian died. And I
think that is all I have to say.'

'Scarcely,' said Dyson. 'How about the treasure?'

'I had rather we did not speak of that,' said Mr. Selby, with a
whitening of the skin about the temples.

'Oh, nonsense, sir, we are not blackmailers. Besides, you know you are
in our power.'

'Then, as you put it like that, Mr. Dyson, I must tell you I returned to
the place. I went on a little farther than before.'

The man stopped short; his mouth began to twitch, his lips moved apart,
and he drew in quick breaths, sobbing.

'Well, well,' said Dyson, 'I dare say you have done comfortably.'

'Comfortably,' Selby went on, constraining himself with an effort, 'yes,
so comfortably that hell burns hot within me for ever. I only brought
one thing away from that awful house within the hills; it was lying just
beyond the spot where I found the flint knife.'

'Why did you not bring more?'

The whole bodily frame of the wretched man visibly shrank and wasted;
his face grew yellow as tallow, and the sweat dropped from his brows.
The spectacle was both revolting and terrible, and when the voice came
it sounded like the hissing of a snake.

'Because the keepers are still there, and I saw them, and because of
this,' and he pulled out a small piece of curious gold-work and held it
up.

'There,' he said, 'that is the Pain of the Goat.'

Phillipps and Dyson cried out together in horror at the revolting
obscenity of the thing.

'Put it away, man; hide it, for Heaven's sake, hide it!'

'I brought that with me; that is all,' he said. 'You do not wonder that
I did not stay long in a place where those who live are a little higher
than the beasts, and where what you have seen is surpassed a
thousandfold?'

'Take this,' said Dyson, 'I brought it with me in case it might be
useful '; and he drew out the black tablet, and handed it to the
shaking, horrible man.

'And now,' said Dyson, 'will you go out?'


The two friends sat silent a little while, facing one another with
restless eyes and lips that quivered.

'I wish to say that I believe him,' said Phillipps.

'My dear Phillipps,' said Dyson as he threw the windows wide open, 'I do
not know that, after all, my blunders in this queer case were so very
absurd.'


THE END



Project Gutenberg Australia


