

Project Gutenberg Australia


Title: The Fight in the Lion's Thicket
Author: H. G. Wells
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0603051.txt
Edition: 1
Language: English
Character set encoding: Latin-1(ISO-8859-1)--8 bit
Date first posted: July 2006
Date most recently updated: July 2006

This eBook was produced by: Richard Scott

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html


To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au




The Fight in the Lion's Thicket
H.G. Wells

Ugh-Lomi lay still, his back against an alder, and his thigh was a red
mass terrible to see. No civilised man could have lived who had been
so sorely wounded, but Eudena got him thorns to close his wounds, and
squatted beside him day and night, smiting the flies from him with a
fan of reeds by day, and in the night threatening the hyænas who came
too near with the first axe in her hand; and in a little while he
began to heal. It was high summer, and there was no rain. Little food
they had during the first two days his wounds were open. In the low
place where they hid were no roots nor little beasts, and the stream,
with its water-snails and fish, was, in the open a hundred yards away.
She could not go abroad by day for fear of the tribe, her brothers and
sisters, nor by night for fear of the beasts, both on his account and
hers. So they shared the lion with the vultures. But there was a
trickle of water near by, and Eudena brought him plenty in her hands.

Where Ugh-lomi lay was well hidden from the tribe by a thicket of
alders, and all fenced about with bulrushes and tall reeds. The dead
lion he had killed lay near his old lair on a place of trampled reeds
fifty yards away, in sight through the reed-stems, and the vultures
fought each other for the choicest pieces and kept the jackals off
him. Very soon a cloud of flies that looked like bees hung over him,
and Ugh-lomi could hear their humming. And when Ugh-lomi's flesh was
already healing--and it was not many days before that began--only a
few bones of the lion remained scattered and shining white.

For the most part Ugh-lomi sat still during the day, looking before
him at nothing, sometimes he would mutter of the horses and bears and
lions, and sometimes he would beat the ground with the first axe and
say the names of the tribe--he seemed to have no fear of bringing the
tribe--for hours together. But chiefly he slept, dreaming little
because of his loss of blood and the slightness of his food. During
the short summer night both kept awake. All the while the darkness
lasted things moved about them, things they never saw by day. For some
nights the hyænas did not come, and then one moonless night near a
dozen came and fought for what was left of the lion. The night was a
tumult of growling, and Ugh-lomi and Eudena could hear the bones snap
in their teeth. But they knew the hyæna dare not attack any creature
alive and awake, and so they were not greatly afraid.

Of a daytime Eudena would go along the narrow path the old lion had
made in the reeds until she was beyond the bend, and then she would
creep into the thicket and watch the tribe. She would lie close by the
alders where they had bound her to offer her up to the lion, and
thence she could see them on the knoll by the fire, little and clear,
as she had seen them that night. But she told Ugh-lomi little of what
she saw, because she feared to bring them by their names. For so they
believed in those days, that naming called.

She saw the men prepare stabbing-spears and throwing-stones on the
morning after Ugh-lomi had slain the lion, and go out to hunt him,
leaving the women and children on the knoll. Little they knew how near
he was as they tracked off in single file towards the hills, with Siss
the Tracker leading them. And she watched the women and children,
after the men had gone, gathering fern-fronds and twigs for the night
fire, and the boys and girls running and playing together. But the
very old woman made her feel afraid. After a long space towards noon,
when most of the others were down at the stream by the bend, she came
and stood on the hither side of the knoll, a gnarled brown figure, and
gesticulated so that Eudena could scarce believe she was not seen.
Eudena lay like a hare in its form, with shining eyes fixed on the
bent witch away there, and presently she dimly understood it was the
lion the old woman was worshipping--the lion Ugh-lomi had slain.

And the next day the hunters came back weary, carrying a fawn, and
Eudena watched the feast enviously. And then came a strange thing. She
saw--distinctly she heard--the old woman shrieking and gesticulating
and pointing towards her. She was afraid, and crept like a snake out
of sight again. But presently curiosity overcame her and she was back
at her spying-place, and as she peered her heart stopped, for there
were all the men, with their weapons in their hands, walking together
towards her from the knoll.

She dared not move lest her movement should be seen, but she pressed
herself close to the ground. The sun was low and the golden light was
in the faces of the men. She saw they carried a piece of rich red meat
thrust through by an ashen stake. Presently they stopped. "Go on!"
screamed the old woman. Cat's-skin grumbled, and they came on,
searching the thicket with sun-dazzled eyes. "Here!" said Siss. And
they took the ashen stake with the meat upon it and thrust it into the
ground. "Uya!" cried Siss, "behold thy portion. And Ugh-lomi we have
slain. Of a truth we have slain Ugh-lomi. This day we slew Ugh-lomi,
and to-morrow we will bring his body to you." And the others repeated
the words.

They looked at each other and behind them, and partly turned and began
going back. At first they walked half turned to the thicket, then
facing the mound they walked faster, looking over their shoulders,
then faster; soon they ran, it was a race at last, until they were
near the knoll. Then Siss who was hindmost was first to slacken his
pace.

The sunset passed and the twilight came, the fires glowed red against
the hazy blue of the distant chestnut trees, and the voices over the
mound were merry. Eudena lay scarcely stirring, looking from the mound
to the meat and then to the mound. She was hungry, but she was afraid.
At last she crept back to Ugh-lomi.

He looked round at the little rustle of her approach. His face was in
shadow. "Have you got me some food?" he said.

She said she could find nothing, but that she would seek further, and
went back along the lion's path until she could see the mound again,
but she could not bring herself to take the meat; she had the brute's
instinct of a snare. She felt very miserable.

She crept back at last towards Ugh-lomi and heard him stirring and
moaning. She turned back to the mound again; then she saw something in
the darkness near the stake, and peering distinguished a jackal. In a
flash she was brave and angry; she sprang up, cried out, and ran
towards the offering. She stumbled and fell, and heard the growling of
the jackal going off.

When she arose only the ashen stake lay on the ground, the meat was
gone. So she went back, to fast through the night with Ugh-lomi; and
Ugh-lomi was angry with her, because she had no food for him; but she
told him nothing of the things she had seen.

Two days passed and they were near starving, when the tribe slew a
horse. Then came the same ceremony, and a haunch was left on the ashen
stake; but this time Eudena did not hesitate.

By acting and words she made Ugh-lomi understand, but he ate most of
the food before he understood; and then he grew merry with his food.
"I am Uya," he said; "I am the Lion. I am the Great Cave Bear, I who
was only Ugh-lomi. I am Wau the Cunning. It is well that they should
feed me, for presently I will kill them all."

Then Eudena's heart was light, and she laughed with him; and
afterwards she ate what he had left of the horseflesh with gladness.

After that it was he had a dream, and the next day he made Eudena
bring him the lion's teeth and claws--so much of them as she could
find--and hack him a club of alder, and he put the teeth and claws
very cunningly into the wood so that the points were outward. Very
long it took him, and he blunted two of the teeth hammering them in,
and was very angry and threw the thing away; but afterwards he dragged
himself to where he had thrown it and finished it--a club of a new
sort set with teeth. That day there was more meat for them both, an
offering to the lion from the tribe.

It was one day--more than a hand's fingers of days, more than anyone has
skill to count--after Ugh-lomi had made the club, that Eudena while he
was asleep was lying in the thicket watching the squatting-place. There
had been no meat for three days. And the old woman came and worshipped
after her manner. Now while she worshipped, Eudena's little sister Si
and another, the child of the first girl Siss had loved, came over the
knoll and stood regarding her skinny figure, and presently they began to
mock her. Eudena found this entertaining, but suddenly the old woman
turned on them quickly and saw them. For a moment she stood and they
stood motionless, and then with a shriek of rage she rushed towards
them, and all three disappeared over the crest of the knoll.

Presently the children reappeared among the ferns over the shoulder of
the hill. Little Si ran first, for she was an active girl, and the
other child ran squealing with the old woman close upon her. And over
the knoll came Siss with a bone in his hand, and Ba and Cat's-skin
obsequiously behind him, each holding a piece of food, and they
laughed aloud and shouted to see the old woman so angry. And with a
shriek the child was caught and the old woman set to work slapping and
the child screaming, and it was very good after-dinner fun for them.
Little Si ran on a little way and stopped at last between fear and
curiosity.

And suddenly came the mother of the child, with hair streaming,
panting, and with a stone in her hand, and the old woman turned about
like a wild cat. She was the equal of any woman, was the old chief of
the fire-minders, in spite of her years; but before she could do
anything Siss shouted to her and the clamour rose loud. Other shock
heads came into sight. It seemed the whole tribe was at home and
feasting. But the old woman dared not go on wreaking herself on the
child Siss befriended. Nevertheless it was a fine row.

Everyone made noises and called names, even little Si. Abruptly the
old woman let go of the child she had caught and made a swift run at
Si who had no friends; and Si, realising her danger when it was almost
upon her, with a faint cry of terror made off headlong, not heeding
whither she ran, straight to the lair of the lion. She swerved aside
into the reeds presently, not realising whither she went.

But the old woman was a wonderful old woman, as active as she was
spiteful, and she caught Si by the streaming hair within thirty yards
of Eudena. All the tribe now was running down the knoll and shouting,
ready to see the fun.

Then something stirred in Eudena and, thinking all of little Si and
nothing of her fear, she sprang up from her ambush and ran swiftly
forward. The old woman did not see her, for she was busy beating
little Si's face with her hand, beating with all her heart, and
suddenly something hard and heavy struck her cheek. She went reeling,
and saw Eudena with flaming eyes and cheeks between her and little Si.
She shrieked with astonishment and terror, and little Si, not
understanding, set off towards the gaping tribe. They were quite close
now, for the sight of Eudena had driven their fading fear of the lion
out of their heads.

In a moment Eudena had turned from the cowering old woman and
overtaken Si. "Si!" she cried, "Si!" She caught the child up in her
arms as it stopped, pressed the nail-lined face to hers, and turned
about to run towards her lair, the lair of the old lion. The old woman
stood waist high in the reeds, and screamed foul things and
inarticulate rage, but did not dare to intercept her; and at the bend
of the path Eudena looked back and saw all the men of the tribe crying
to one another and Siss coming at a trot along the lion's trail.

She ran straight along the narrow way through the reeds to the shady
place where Ugh-lomi sat with his healing thigh, just awakened by the
shouting and rubbing his eyes. She came to him, a woman, with little
Si in her arms. Her heart throbbed in her throat. "Ugh-lomi!" she
cried, "Ugh-lomi, the tribe comes!"

Ugh-lomi sat staring in stupid astonishment at her and Si.

She pointed with Si in one arm. She sought among her feeble store of
words to explain. She could hear the men calling. Apparently they had
stopped outside. She put down Si and caught up the new club with the
lion's teeth, and put it into Ugh-lomi's hand, and ran three yards and
picked up the first axe.

"Ah!" said Ugh-lomi, waving the new club, and suddenly he perceived
the occasion and, rolling over, began to struggle to his feet.

He stood, but clumsily. He supported himself by one hand against the
tree, and just touched the ground gingerly with the toe of his wounded
leg. In the other hand he gripped the new club. He looked at his healing
thigh; and suddenly the reeds began whispering, and ceased and whispered
again, and coming cautiously along the track among the reeds, bending
down and holding his fire-hardened stabbing-stick of ash in his hand,
appeared Siss. He stopped dead, and his eyes met Ugh-lomi's.

Ugh-lomi forgot he had a wounded leg. He stood firmly on both feet.
Something trickled. He glanced down and saw a little gout of blood had
oozed out along the edge of the healing wound. He rubbed his hand
there to give him the grip of his club, and fixed his eyes again on
Siss. The fighting spirit now swiftly and suddenly overflowed.

"Wau!" he cried, and sprang forward, and Siss, still stooping and
watchful, drove his stabbing-stick up very quickly in an ugly thrust.
It ripped Ugh-lomi's guarding arm and the club came down in a counter
that Siss was never to understand. He fell, as an ox falls to the
pole-axe, at Ugh-lomi's feet.

To Bo it seemed the strangest thing. He had a comforting sense of tall
reeds on either side, and an impregnable rampart, Siss, between him
and any danger. Snail-eater was close behind and there was no danger
there. He was prepared to shove behind and send Siss to death or
victory. That was his place as second man. He saw the butt of the
spear Siss carried leap away from him, and suddenly a dull whack and
the broad back fell away forward, and he looked Ugh-lomi in the face
over his prostrate leader. It felt to Bo as if his heart had fallen
down a well. He had a throwing-stone in one hand and an ashen
stabbing-stick in the other. He did not live to the end of his
momentary hesitation which to use.

Snail-eater was a readier man, and besides Bo did not fall forward as
Siss had done, but gave at his knees and hips, crumpling up with the
toothed club upon his head, smiting him down. The Snail-eater drove
his spear forward swift and straight, and took Ugh-lomi in the muscle
of the shoulder, and then he drove him hard with the smiting-stone in
his other and, shouting out as he did so. The new club swished
ineffectually through the reeds. Eudena saw Ugh-lomi come staggering
back from the narrow path into the open space, tripping over Siss and
with a foot of ashen stake sticking out of him over his arm, and then
the Snail-eater, whose name she had given, had his final injury from
her, as his exultant face came out of the reeds after his spear. For
she swung the first axe swift and high, and hit him fair and square on
the temple; and down he went on Siss at prostrate Ugh-lomi's feet.

But before Ugh-lomi could get to his feet, the two red-haired men were
tumbling out of the reeds, spears and smiting-stones ready, and Snake
hard behind them. One she struck on the neck, but not to fell him, and
he blundered aside and spoilt his brother's blow at Ugh-lomi's head.
In a moment Ugh-lomi dropped his club and had his assailant by the
waist, and had pitched him sideways sprawling. He snatched at his club
again and recovered it. The man Eudena had hit stabbed at her with his
spear as he stumbled from her blow, and involuntarily she gave ground
to avoid him. He hesitated between her and Ugh-lomi, half turned, gave
a vague cry at finding Ugh-lomi so near, and in a moment Ugh-lomi had
him by the throat, and the club had its third victim. As he went down
Ugh-lomi shouted--no words, but an exultant cry.

The other red-haired man was six feet from her with his back to her,
and a darker red streaking his head. He was struggling to his feet.
She had an irrational impulse to stop his rising. She flung the axe at
him, missed, saw his face in profile, and he had swerved beyond little
Si, and was running through the reeds. She had a transitory vision of
Snake standing in the throat of the path, half turned away from her,
and then she saw his back. She saw the club whirling through the air,
and the shock head of Ugh-lomi, with blood in the hair and blood upon
the shoulder, vanishing below the reeds in pursuit. Then she heard
Snake scream like a woman.

She ran past Si to where the handle of the axe stuck out of a clump of
fern, and turning, found herself panting and alone with three
motionless bodies. The air was full of shouts and screams. For a space
she was sick and giddy, and then it came into her head that Ugh-lomi
was being killed along the reed-path, and with an inarticulate cry she
leapt over the body of Bo and hurried after him. Snake's feet lay
across the path, and his head was among the reeds. She followed the
path until it bent round and opened out by the alders, and thence she
saw all that was left of the tribe in the open, scattering like dead
leaves before a gale, and going back over the knoll. Ugh-lomi was hard
upon Cat's-skin.

But Cat's-skin was fleet of foot and got away, and so did young Wau-Hau
when Ugh-lomi turned upon him, and Ugh-lomi pursued Wau-Hau far beyond
the knoll before he desisted. He had the rage of battle on him now, and
the wood thrust through his shoulder stung him like a spear. When she
saw he was in no danger she stopped running and stood panting, watching
the distant active figures run up and vanish one by one over the knoll.
In a little time she was alone again. Everything had happened very
swiftly. The smoke of Brother Fire rose straight and steady from the
squatting-place, just as it had done ten minutes ago, when the old woman
had stood yonder worshipping the lion.

And after a long time, as it seemed, Ugh-lomi re-appeared over the
knoll, and came back to Eudena, triumphant and breathing heavily. She
stood, her hair about her eyes and hot-faced, with the blood-stained
axe in her hand, at the place where the tribe had offered her as a
sacrifice to the lion. "Wau!" cried Ugh-lomi at the sight of her, his
face alight with the fellowship of battle, and he waved his new club,
red now and hairy; and at the sight of his glowing face her tense pose
relaxed somewhat, and she stood weeping and rejoicing.

Ugh-lomi had a queer unaccountable pang at the sight of her tears; but
he only shouted "Wau!" the louder and shook the axe east and west. He
called to her to follow him and turned back, striding, with the club
swinging in his hand, towards the squatting-place, as if he had never
left the tribe; and she stopped weeping and followed as a woman
should.

So Ugh-lomi and Eudena came back to the squatting-place from which
they had fled many days before from the face of Uya; and by the
squatting-place lay a deer half eaten, just as there had been before
Ugh-lomi was man or Eudena woman. So Ugh-lomi sat down to eat, and
Eudena beside him like a man, and the rest of the tribe watched them
from safe hiding-places. And after a time one of the elder girls came
back timorously and carrying little Si in her arms, and Eudena called
to them by name, and offered them food. But the elder girl was afraid
and would not come, though Si struggled to come to Eudena. Afterwards,
when Ugh-lomi had eaten, he sat dozing, and at last he slept, and
slowly the others came out of the hiding-places and drew near. And
when Ugh-lomi woke, save that there were no men to be seen, it seemed
as though he had never left the tribe.

Cat's-skin and the second red-haired man and Wau-Hau, who chipped
flints cunningly, as his father had done before him, fled from the
face of Ugh-lomi, and none knew where they hid. But two days after
they came and squatted among the bracken under the chestnuts a good
way off from the knoll and watched. Ugh-lomi's rage had gone, he moved
to go against them and did not, and at sundown they went away. That
day, too, they found the old woman among the ferns, where Ugh-lomi had
blundered upon her when he had pursued Wau-Hau. She was dead and more
ugly than ever, but whole. The jackals and vultures had tried her and
left her; she was ever a wonderful old woman.

The next day the three men came again and squatted nearer, and Wau-Hau
had two rabbits to hold up, and the red-haired man a wood-pigeon, and
Ugh-Lomi stood before their women and mocked them.

The next day they sat again nearer--without stones or sticks, and with
the same offerings, and Cat's-skin had a trout.

It was rare men caught fish in those days but Cat's-skin would stand
silently in the water for hours and catch them with his hand. And the
fourth day Ugh-lomi suffered these three to come to the squatting-place
in peace, with the food they had with them.

Now, there is a thing strange but true: that all through this fight
Ugh-lomi forgot that he was lame, and was not lame, and after he had
rested behold! he was a lame man; and he remained a lame man to the
end of his days.

So it was Ugh-lomi became Uya and the Lion, and had his will in all
things among the children of Uya.

And of his rule among them and of the changing of the squatting-place
there is a story still to come.



THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia


