
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: Children of the Pool
Author: Arthur Machen
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 0606961.txt
Language:  English
Date first posted: September 2006
Date most recently updated: February 2011

This eBook was produced by: Malcolm Farmer

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: Children of the Pool
Author: Arthur Machen



A couple of summers ago I was staying with old friends in my native
county, on the Welsh border. It was in the heat and drought of a hot and
dry year, and I came into those green, well-watered valleys with a sense
of a great refreshment. Here was relief from the burning of London
streets, from the close and airless nights, when all the myriad walls of
brick and stone and concrete and the pavements that are endless give out
into the heavy darkness the fires that all day long have been drawn from
the sun. And from those roadways that have become like railways, with
their changing lamps, and their yellow globes, and their bars and studs
of steel; from the menace of instant death if your feet stray from the
track: from all this what a rest to walk under the green leaf in quiet,
and hear the stream trickling from the heart of the hill.

My friends were old friends, and they were urgent that I should go my
own way. There was breakfast at nine, but it was equally serviceable and
excellent at ten; and I could be in for something cold for lunch, if I
liked; and if I didn't like I could stay away till dinner at half past
seven; and then there was all the evening for talks about old times and
about the changes, with comfortable drinks, and bed soothed by memories
and tobacco, and by the brook that twisted under dark alders through the
meadow below. And not a red bungalow to be seen for many a mile around!
Sometimes, when the heat even in that green land was more than burning,
and the wind from the mountains in the west ceased, I would stay all day
under shade on the lawn, but more often I went afield and trod
remembered ways, and tried to find new ones, in that happy and
bewildered country. There, paths go wandering into undiscovered valleys,
there from deep and narrow lanes with overshadowing hedges, still
smaller tracks that I suppose are old bridlepaths, creep obscurely,
obviously leading nowhere in particular.

It was on a day of cooler air that I went adventuring abroad on such an
expedition. It was a "day of the veil." There were no clouds in the sky,
but a high mist, grey and luminous, had been drawn all over it. At one
moment, it would seem that the sun must shine through, and the blue
appear; and then the trees in the wood would seem to blossom, and the
meadows lightened; and then again the veil would be drawn. I struck off
by the stony lane that led from the back of the house up over the hill;
I had last gone that way a-many years ago, of a winter afternoon, when
the ruts were frozen into hard ridges, and dark pines on high places
rose above snow, and the sun was red and still above the mountain. I
remembered that the way had given good sport, with twists to right and
left, and unexpected descents, and then risings to places of thorn and
bracken, till it darkened to the hushed stillness of a winter's night,
and I turned homeward reluctant. Now I took another chance with all the
summer day before me, and resolved to come to some end and conclusion of
the matter.

I think I had gone beyond the point at which I had stopped and turned
back as the frozen darkness and the bright stars came on me. I
remembered the dip in the hedge, from which I saw the round tumulus on
high at the end of the mountain wall; and there was the white farm on
the hill-side, and the farmer was still calling to his dog, as he--or
his father--had called before, his voice high and thin in the distance.
After this point, I seemed to be in undiscovered country; the ash trees
grew densely on either side of the way and met above it: I went on and
on into the unknown in the manner of the only good guide-books, which
are the tales of old knights. The road went down, and climbed, and again
descended, all through the deep of the wood. Then, on both sides, the
trees ceased, though the hedges were so high that I could see nothing of
the way of the land about me. And just at the wood's ending, there was
one of those tracks or little paths of which I have spoken, going off
from my lane on the right, and winding out of sight quickly under all
its leafage of hazel and wild rose, maple and hornbeam, with a holly
here and there, and honeysuckle golden, and dark briony shining and
twining everywhere. I could not resist the invitation of a path so
obscure and uncertain, and set out on its track of green and profuse
grass, with the ground beneath still soft to the feet, even in the
drought of that fiery summer. The way wound, as far as I could make out,
on the slope of a hill, neither ascending nor descending, and after a
mile or more of this rich walking, it suddenly ceased, and I found
myself on a bare hill-side, on a rough track that went down to a grey
house. It was now a farm by its looks and surroundings, but there were
signs of old state about it: good sixteenth-century mullioned windows
and a Jacobean porch projecting from the centre, with dim armorial
bearings mouldering above the door.

It struck me that bread and cheese and cider would be grateful, and I
beat upon the door with my stick, and brought a pleasant woman to open
it.

"Do you think," I began, "you could be so good as...."

And then came a shout from somewhere at the end of the stone passage,
and a great voice called:

"Come in, then, come in, you old scoundrel, if your name is Meyrick, as
I'm sure it is."

I was amazed. The pleasant woman grinned and said:

"It seems you are well known here, sir, already. But perhaps you had
heard that Mr. Roberts was staying here."

My old acquaintance, James Roberts, came tumbling out from his den at
the back. He was a man whom I had known a long time, but not very well.
Our affairs in London moved on different lines, and so we did not often
meet. But I was glad to see him in that unexpected place: he was a round
man, always florid and growing redder in the face with his years. He was
a countryman of mine, but I had hardly known him before we both went to
town, since his home had been at the northern end of the county.

He shook me cordially by the hand, and looked as if he would like to
smack me on the back--he was, a little, that kind of man--and repeated
his "Come in, come in!" adding to the pleasant woman:

"And bring you another plate, Mrs. Morgan, and all the rest of it. I
hope you've not forgotten how to eat Caerphilly cheese, Meyrick. I can
tell you, there is none better than Mrs. Morgan's making. And, Mrs.
Morgan, another jug of cider, and <i>seidr dda</i>, mind you."

I never knew whether he had been brought up as a boy to speak Welsh. In
London he had lost all but the faintest trace of accent, but down here
in Gwent the tones of the country had quickly returned to him; and he
smacked as strongly of the land in his speech as the cheerful farmer's
wife herself. I judged his accent was a part of his holiday.

He drew me into the little parlour with its old furniture and its
pleasant old-fashioned ornaments and faintly flowering wallpaper, and
set me in an elbow-chair at the round table, and gave me, as I told him,
exactly what I had meant to ask for; bread and cheese and cider. All
very good; Mrs. Morgan, it was clear, had the art of making a Caerphilly
cheese that was succulent--a sort of white <i>bel paese</i>--far different
from those dry and stony cheeses that often bring dishonour on the
Caerphilly name. And afterwards there was gooseberry jam and cream. And
the tobacco that the country uses: Shag-on-the-Back, from the Welsh
Back, Bristol. And then there was gin.

This last we partook of out of doors, in an old stone summerhouse, in
the garden at the side. A white rose had grown all over the
summer-house, and shaded and glorified it. The water in the big jug had
just been drawn from the well in the limestone rock--and I told Roberts
gratefully that I felt a great deal better than when I had knocked at
the farmhouse door. I told him where I was staying--he knew my host by
name--and he, in turn, informed me that it was his first visit to
Lanypwll, as the farm was called. A neighbour of his at Lee had
recommended Mrs. Morgan's cooking very highly: and, as he said, you
couldn't speak too well of her in that way or any other.

We sipped and smoked through the afternoon in that pleasant retreat
under the white roses, I meditated gratefully on the fact that I should
not dare to enjoy Shag-on-the-Back so freely in London: a potent
tobacco, of full and ripe savour, but not for the hard streets,

"You say the farm is called Lanypwll," I interjected, "that means 'by
the pool,' doesn't it? Where is the pool? I don't see it."

"Come you," said Roberts, "and I will show you."

He took me by a little gate through the garden hedge of laurels, thick
and high, and round to the left of the house, the opposite side to that
by which I had made my approach. And there we climbed a green rounded
bastion of the old ages, and he pointed down to a narrow valley, shut in
by steep wooded hills. There at the bottom was a level, half marshland
and half black water lying in still pools, with green islands of iris
and of all manner of rank and strange growths that love to have their
roots in slime.

"There is your pool for you," said Roberts.

It was the most strange place. I thought, hidden away under the hills as
if it were a secret. The steeps that went down to it were a tangle of
undergrowth, of all manner of boughs mingled with taller trees rising
above the mass, and down at the edge of the marsh some of these had
perished in the swampy water, and stood white and bare and ghastly, with
leprous limbs.

"An ugly looking place," I said to Roberts.

"I quite agree with you. It is an ugly place enough. They tell me at the
farm it's not safe to go near it, or you may get fever and I don't know
what else. And, indeed, if you didn't go down carefully and watch your
steps, you might easily find yourself up to the neck in that black muck
there."

We turned back into the garden and to our summer-house, and soon after,
it was time for me to make my way home.

"How long are you staying with Nichol?" Roberts asked me as we parted. I
told him, and he insisted on my dining with him at the end of the week.

"I will 'send' you," he said. "I will take you by a short cut across the
fields and see that you don't lose your way. Roast duck and green peas,"
he added alluringly, "and something good for the digestion afterwards."

It was a fine evening when I next journeyed to the farm, but indeed we
got tired of saying "fine weathers" throughout that wonderful summer. I
found Roberts cheery and welcoming, but, I thought, hardly in such rosy
spirits as on my former visit. We were having a cocktail of his
composition in the summer-house, as the famous duck gained the last glow
of brown perfection; and I noticed that his speech was not bubbling so
freely from him as before. He fell silent once or twice and looked
thoughtful. He told me he'd ventured down to the pool, the swampy place
at the bottom. "And it looks no better when you see it close at hand.
Black, oily stuff that isn't like water, with a scum upon it, and weeds
like a lot of monsters. I never saw such queer, ugly plants. There's one
rank-looking thing down there covered with dull crimson blossoms, all
bloated out and speckled like a toad."

"You're no botanist," I remarked.

"No, not I. I know buttercups and daisies and not much more. Mrs. Morgan
here was quite frightened when I told her where I'd been. She said she
hoped I mightn't be sorry for it. But I feel as well as ever. I don't
think there are many places left in the country now where you can get
malaria."

We proceeded to the duck and the green peas and rejoiced in their
perfection. There was some very old ale that Mr. Morgan had bought when
an ancient tavern in the neighbourhood had been pulled down; its age and
original excellence had combined to make a drink like a rare wine. The
"something good for the digestion" turned out to be a mellow brandy that
Roberts had brought with him from town. I told him that I had never
known a better hour. He warmed up with the good meat and drink and was
cheery enough; and yet I thought there was a reserve, something obscure
at the back of his mind that was by no means cheerful.

We had a second glass of the mellow brandy, and Roberts, after a
moment's indecision, spoke out. He dropped his holiday game of Welsh
countryman completely.

"You wouldn't think, would you." he began, "that a man would come down
to a place like this to be blackmailed at the end of the journey?"

"Good Lord!" I gasped in amazement, "I should think not indeed. What's
happened?"

He looked very grave. I thought even that be looked frightened.

"Well, I'll tell you. A couple of nights ago, I went for a stroll after
my dinner; a beautiful night, with the moon shining, and a nice, clean
breeze. So I walked up over the hill, and then took the path that leads
down through the wood to the brook. I'd got into the wood, fifty yards
or so, when I heard my name called out: 'Roberts! James Roberts!' in a
shrill, piercing voice, a young girl's voice, and I jumped pretty well
out of my skin, I can tell you. I stopped dead and stared all about me.
Of course I could see nothing at all--bright moonlight and black shadow
and all those trees--anybody could hide. Then it came to me that it was
some girl of the place having a game with her sweetheart: James Roberts
is a common enough name, especially in this part of the country. So I
was just going on, not bothering my head about the local love-affairs,
when that scream came right in my ear: 'Roberts! Roberts! James
Roberts!'--and then half a dozen words that I won't trouble you with;
not yet, at any rate."

I have said that Roberts was by no means an intimate friend of mine. But
I had always known him as a genial, cordial fellow, a thoroughly
good-natured man; and I was sorry and shocked, too, to see him sitting
there wretched and dismayed. He looked as if he had seen a ghost; he
looked much worse than that. He looked as if he had seen terror.

But it was too early to press him closely. I said:

"What did you do then?"

"I turned about, and ran back through the wood, and tumbled over the
stile. I got home here as quick as ever I could, and shut myself up in
this room, dripping with fright and gasping for breath. I was almost
crazy, I believe. I walked up and down. I sat down in the chair and got
up again. I wondered whether I should wake up in my bed and find I'd
been having a nightmare. I cried; at last I'll tell you the truth: I put
my head in my hands, and the tears ran down my cheeks. I was quite
broken."

"But, look here," I said, "isn't this making a great to-do
about very little? I can quite see it must have been a nasty shock. But,
how long did you say you had been staying here; ten days, was it?"

"A fortnight, to-morrow."

"Well; you know country ways as well as I do. You may be sure that
everybody within three or four miles of Lanypwll knows about a gentleman
from London, a Mr. James Roberts, staying at the farm. And there are
always unpleasant young people to be found, wherever you go. I gather
that this girl used very abusive language when she hailed you. She
probably thought it was a good joke. You had taken that walk through the
wood in the evening a couple of times before? No doubt, you had been
noticed going that way, and the girl and her friend or friends planned
to give you a shock. I wouldn't think any more of it, if I were you."

He almost cried out.

"Think any more of it! What will the world think of it?" There was an
anguish of terror in his voice. I thought it was time to come to cues. I
spoke up pretty briskly:

"Now, look here, Roberts, it's no good beating about the bush. Before we
can do anything, we've got to have the whole tale, fair and square. What
I've gathered is this: you go for a walk in a wood near here one
evening, and a girl--you say it was a girl's voice--hails you by your
name, and then screams out a lot of filthy language. Is there anything
more in it than that?"

"There's a lot more than that. I was going to ask you not to let it go
any further; but as far as I can see, there won't be any secret in it
much longer. There's another end to the story, and it goes back a good
many years--to the time when I first came to London as a young man.
That's twenty-five years ago."

He stopped speaking. When he began again, I could feel that he spoke
with unutterable repugnance. Every word was a horror to him.

"You know as well as I do, that there are all sorts of turnings in
London that a young fellow can take; good, bad, and indifferent. There
was a good deal of bad luck about it. I do believe, and I was too young
to know or care much where I was going; but I got into a turning with
the black pit at the end of it."

He beckoned me to lean forward across the table, and whispered for a
minute or two in my ear. In my turn, I heard not without horror. I said
nothing.

"<i>That</i> was what I heard shrieked out in the wood. What do you say?"

"You've done with all that long ago?"

"It was done with very soon after it was begun. It was no more than a
bad dream. And then it all flashed back on me like deadly lightning.
What do you say? What can I do?"

I told him that I had to admit that it was no good to try to put the
business in the wood down to accident, the casual filthy language of a
depraved village girl. As I said, it couldn't be a case of a bow drawn
at a venture.

"There must be somebody behind it. Can you think of anybody?"

"There may be one or two left. I can't say. I haven't heard of any of
them for years. I thought they had all gone; dead, or at the other side
of the world."

"Yes; but people can get back from the other side of the world pretty
quickly in these days. Yokohama is not much farther off than Yarmouth.
But you haven't heard of any of these people lately?"

"As I said, not for years. But the secret's out."

"But, let's consider.
Who is this girl? Where does she live? We must get at her, and try if we
can't frighten the life out of her. And, in the first place, we'll find
out the source of her information. Then we shall know where we are. I
suppose you have discovered who she is?"

"I've not a notion of who she is or where she lives."

"I daresay you wouldn't care to ask the Morgans any questions. But to go
back to the beginning: you spoke of blackmail. Did this damned girl ask
you for money to shut her mouth?"

"No; I shouldn't have called it blackmail. She didn't say anything about
money."

"Well; that sounds more helpful. Let's see; to-night is Saturday. You
took this unfortunate walk of yours a couple of nights ago; on Thursday
night. And you haven't heard anything more since. I should keep away
from that wood, and try to find out who the young lady is. That's the
first thing to be done, clearly."

I was trying to cheer him up a little; but he only stared at me with his
horror-stricken eyes.

"It didn't finish with the wood," he groaned. "My bedroom is next door
to this room where we are. When I had pulled myself together a bit that
night, I had a stiff glass, about double my allowance, and went off to
bed and to sleep. I woke up with a noise of tapping at the window, just
by the head of the bed. Tap, tap, tap, it went. I thought it might be a
bough beating on the glass. And then I heard that voice calling me:
'James Roberts: open, open!'

"I tell you, my flesh crawled on my bones. I would have cried out, but I
couldn't make a sound. The moon had gone down, and there's a great old
pear tree close to the window, and it was quite dark. I sat up in my
bed, shaking for fear. It was dead still, and I began to think that the
fright I had got in the wood had given me a nightmare. Then the voice
called again, and louder:

"'James Roberts! Open. Quick.'

"And I had to open. I leaned half out of bed, and got at the latch, and
opened the window a little. I didn't dare to look out. But it was too
dark to see anything in the shadow of the tree. And then she began to
talk to me. She told me all about it from the beginning. She knew all
the names. She knew where my business was in London, and where I lived,
and who my friends were. She said that they should all know. And she
said: 'And you yourself shall tell them, and you shall not be able to
keep back a single word!'"

The wretched man fell back in his chair, shuddering and gasping for
breath. He beat his hands up and down, with a gesture of hopeless fear
and misery; and his lips grinned with dread.

I won't say that I began to see light. But I saw a hint of certain
possibilities of light or--let us say--of a lessening of the darkness. I
said a soothing word or two, and let him get a little more quiet. The
telling of this extraordinary and very dreadful experience had set his
nerves all dancing; and yet, having made a clean breast of it all, I
could see that he felt some relief. His hands lay quiet on the table,
and his lips ceased their horrible grimacing. He looked at me with a
faint expectancy, I thought; as if he had begun to cherish a dim hope
that I might have some sort of help for him. He could not see himself
the possibility of rescue; still, one never knew what resources and
freedoms the other man might bring.

That, at least, was what his poor, miserable face seemed to me to
express; and I hoped I was right, and let him simmer a little, and
gather to himself such twigs and straws of hope as he could. Then, I
began again:

"This was on the Thursday night. And last night? Another visit?"

"The same as before. Almost word for word."

"And it was all true, what she said? The girl was not lying?"

"Every word of it was true. There were some things that I had forgotten
myself; but when she spoke of them, I remembered at once. There was the
number of a house in a certain street, for example. If you had asked me
for that number a week ago I should have told you, quite honestly, that
I knew nothing about it. But when I heard it, I knew it in the instant:
I could see that number in the light of a street lamp. The sky was dark
and cloudy, and a bitter wind was blowing, and driving the leaves on the
pavement--that November night."

"When the fire was lit?"

"That night. When they appeared."

"And you haven't seen this girl? You couldn't describe her?"

"I was afraid to look; I told you. I waited when she stopped speaking. I
sat there for half an hour or an hour. Then I lit my candle and shut the
window-latch. It was three o'clock and growing light."

I was thinking it over. I noted, that Roberts confessed that every word
spoken by his visitant was true. She had sprung no surprises on him;
there had been no suggestion of fresh details, names, or circumstances.
That struck me as having a certain--possible--significance; and the
knowledge of Roberts's present circumstances, his City address, and his
home address, and the names of his friends: that was interesting, too.

There was a glimpse of a possible hypothesis. I could not be sure; but I
told Roberts that I thought something might be done. To begin with, I
said, I was going to keep him company for the night. Nichol would guess
that I had shirked the walk home after nightfall; that would be quite
all right. And in the morning he was to pay Mrs. Morgan for the two
extra weeks he had arranged to stay, with something by way of
compensation. "And it should be something handsome," I added with
emotion, thinking of the duck and the old ale. "And then," I finished,
"I shall pack you off to the other side of the island."

Of that old ale I made him drink a liberal dose by way of
sleeping-draught. He hardly needed a hypnotic; the terror that he had
endured and the stress of telling it had worn him out. I saw him fall
into bed and fall asleep in a moment, and I curled up, comfortably
enough, in a roomy armchair. There was no trouble in the night, and when
I writhed myself awake, I saw Roberts sleeping peacefully. I let him
alone, and wandered about the house and the shining morning garden, till
I came upon Mrs. Morgan, busy in the kitchen.

I broke the trouble to her. I told her that I was afraid that the place
was not agreeing at all with Mr. Roberts. "Indeed," I said, "he was
taken so ill last night that I was afraid to leave him. His nerves seem
to be in a very bad way."

"Indeed, then, I don't wonder at all," replied Mrs. Morgan, with a very
grave face. But I wondered a good deal at this remark of hers, not
having a notion as to what she meant.

I went on to explain what I had arranged for our patient, as I called
him: east-coast breezes, and crowds of people, the noisier the better,
and, indeed, that was the cure that I had in mind. I said that I was
sure Mr. Roberts would do the proper thing.

"That will be all right, sir, I am sure: don't you trouble yourself
about that. But the sooner you get him away after I have given you both
your breakfasts, the better I shall be pleased. I am frightened to death
for him, I can tell you."

And she went off to her work, murmuring something that sounded like
"Plant y pwll, plant y pwll."

I gave Roberts no time for reflection. I woke him up, bustled him out of
bed, hurried him through his breakfast, saw him pack his suitcase, make
his farewells to the Morgans, and had him sitting in the shade on
Nichol's lawn well before the family were back from church. I gave
Nichol a vague outline of the circumstances--nervous breakdown and so
forth--introduced them to one another, and left them talking about the
Black Mountains, Roberts's land of origin. The next day I saw him off at
the station, on his way to Great Yarmouth, via London. I told him with
an air of authority that he would have no more trouble, "from any
quarter," I emphasized. And he was to write to me at my town address in
a week's time.

"And, by the way," I said, Just before the train slid along the
platform, "here's a bit of Welsh for you. What does 'plant y pwll' mean?
Something of the pool?"

"'Plant y pwll,'" he explained, "means 'children of the pool.'"

When my holiday was ended, and I had got back to town. I began my
investigations into the case of James Roberts and his nocturnal
visitant. When he began his story I was extremely distressed--I made no
doubt as to the bare truth of it, and was shocked to think of a very
kindly man threatened with overwhelming disgrace and disaster. There
seemed nothing impossible in the tale stated at large, and in the first
outline. It is not altogether unheard of for very decent men to have had
a black patch in their lives, which they have done their best to live
down and atone for and forget. Often enough, the explanation of such
misadventure is not hard to seek. You have a young fellow, very decently
but very simply brought up among simple country people, suddenly pitched
into the labyrinth of London, into a maze in which there are many
turnings, as the unfortunate Roberts put it, which lead to disaster, or
to something blacker than disaster. The more experienced man, the man of
keen instincts and perceptions, knows the aspect of these tempting
passages and avoids them; some have the wit to turn back in time; a few
are caught in the trap at the end. And in some cases, though there may
be apparent escape, and peace and security for many years, the teeth of
the snare are about the man's leg all the while, and close at last on
highly reputable chairmen and churchwardens and pillars of all sorts of
seemly institutions. And then gaol, or at best, hissing and extinction.

So, on the first face of it, I was by no means prepared to pooh-pooh
Robert's tale. But when he came to detail, and I had time to think it
over, that entirely illogical faculty, which sometimes takes charge of
our thoughts and judgments, told me that there was some huge flaw in all
this, that somehow or other, things had not happened so. This mental
process, I may say, is strictly indefinable and unjustifiable by any
laws of thought that I have ever heard of. It won't do to take our stand
with Bishop Butler, and declare with him that probability is the guide
of life; deducing from this premise the conclusion that the improbable
doesn't happen. Any man who cares to glance over his experience of the
world and of things in general is aware that the most wildly improbable
events are constantly happening. For example, I take up to-day's paper,
sure that I shall find something to my purpose, and in a minute I come
across the headline: "Damaging a Model Elephant." A father, evidently a
man of substance, accuses his son of this strange offence. Last summer,
the father told the court, his son constructed in their front garden a
large model of an elephant, the material being bought by witness. The
skeleton of the elephant was made of tubing, and it was covered with
soil and fibre, and held together with wire netting. Flowers were
planted on it, and it cost £3 5s.

A photograph of the elephant was produced in court, and the clerk
remarked: "It is a fearsome-looking thing."

And then the catastrophe. The son got to know a married woman much older
than himself, and his parents frowned, and there were quarrels. And so,
one night, the young man came to his father's house, jumped over the
garden wall and tried to push the elephant over. Failing, he proceeded
to disembowel the elephant with a pair of wire clippers.

There! Nothing can be much more improbable than that tale, but it all
happened so, as the <i>Daily Telegraph</i> assures me, and I believe every
word of it. And I have no doubt that if I care to look I shall find
something as improbable, or even more improbable, in the newspaper
columns three or perhaps four times a week. What about the old man,
unknown, unidentified, found in the Thames: in one pocket, a stone
Buddha; in the other, a leather wallet, with the inscription: "The hen
that sits on the china egg is best off?"

The improbable happens and is constantly happening; but, using that
faculty which I am unable to define, I rejected Roberts's girl of the
wood and the window. I did not suspect him for a moment of leg-pulling
of an offensive and vicious kind. His misery and terror were too clearly
manifest for that, and I was certain that he was suffering from a very
serious and dreadful shock--and yet I didn't believe in the truth of the
story he had told me. I felt convinced that there was no girl in the
case; either in the wood or at the window. And when Roberts told me,
with increased horror, that every word she spoke was true, that she had
even reminded him of matters that he had himself forgotten, I was
greatly encouraged in my growing surmise. For, it seemed to me at least
probable that if the case had been such as he supposed it, there would
have been new and damning circumstances in the story, utterly unknown to
him and unsuspected by him. But, as it was, everything that he was told
he accepted; as a man in a dream accepts without hesitation the wildest
fantasies as matters and incidents of his daily experience. Decidedly,
there was no girl there.

On the Sunday that he spent with me at the Wern, Nichol's place, I took
advantage of his calmer condition--the night's rest had done him
good--to get some facts and dates out of him, and when I returned to
town, I put these to the test. It was not altogether an easy
investigation since, on the surface, at least, the matters to be
investigated were eminently trivial; the early days of a young man from
the country up in London in a business house; and twenty-five years ago.
Even really exciting murder trials and changes of ministries become
blurred and uncertain in outline, if not forgotten, in twenty-five
years, or in twelve years for that matter: and compared with such
events, the affair of James Roberts seemed perilously like nothing at
all.

However, I had made the best use I could of the information that Roberts
had given me; and I was fortified for the task by a letter I received
from him. He told me that there had been no recurrence of the trouble
(as he expressed it), that he felt quite well, and was enjoying himself
immensely at Yarmouth. He said that the shows and entertainments on the
sands were doing him "no end of good. There's a retired executioner who
does his old business in a tent, with the drop and everything. And
there's a bloke who calls himself Archbishop of London, who fasts in a
glass case, with his mitre and all his togs on." Certainly, my patient
was either recovered, or in a very fair way to recovery: I could set
about my researches in a calm spirit of scientific curiosity, without
the nervous tension of the surgeon called upon at short notice to
perform a life-or-death operation.

As a matter of fact it was all more simple than I thought it would be.
True, the results were nothing, or almost nothing, but that was exactly
what I had expected and hoped. With the slight sketch of his early
career in London, furnished me by Roberts, the horrors omitted by my
request; with a name or two and a date or two, I got along very well.
And what did it come to? Simply this: here was a lad--he was just
seventeen--who had been brought up amongst lonely hills and educated at
a small grammar school, furnished through a London uncle with a very
small stool in a City office. By arrangement, settled after a long and
elaborate correspondence, he was to board with some distant cousins, who
lived in the Cricklewood-Kilburn-Brondesbury region, and with them he
settled down, comfortably enough, as it seemed, though Cousin Ellen
objected to his learning to smoke in his bedroom, and begged him to
desist. The household consisted of Cousin Ellen, her husband, Henry
Watts, and the two daughters, Helen and Justine. Justine was about
Robert's own age; Helen three or four years older. Mr. Watts had married
rather late in life, and had retired from his office a year or so
before. He interested himself chiefly in tuberous-rooted begonias, and
in the season went out a few miles to his cricket club and watched the
game on Saturday afternoons. Every morning there was breakfast at eight,
every evening there was high tea at seven, and in the meantime young
Roberts did his best in the City, and liked his job well enough. He was
shy with the two girls at first, but Justine was lively, and couldn't
help having a voice like a peacock, and Helen was adorable. And so
things went on very pleasantly for a year or perhaps eighteen months; on
this basis, that Justine was a great joke, and that Helen was adorable.
The trouble was that Justine didn't think she was a great joke.

For, it must be said that Roberts's stay with his cousins ended in
disaster. I rather gather that the young man and the quiet Helen were
guilty of--shall, we say--amiable indiscretions, though without serious
consequences. But it appeared that Cousin Justine, a girl with black
eyes and black hair, made discoveries which she resented savagely,
denouncing the offenders at the top of that piercing voice of hers, in
the waste hours of the Brondesbury night, to the immense rage, horror,
and consternation of the whole house. In fact, there was the devil to
pay, and Mr. Watts then and there turned young Roberts out of the house.
And there is no doubt that he should have been thoroughly ashamed of
himself. But young men....

Nothing very much happened. Old Watts had cried in his rage that he
would let Roberts's chief in the City hear the whole story; but, on
reflection, he held his tongue. Roberts roamed about London for the rest
of the night, refreshing himself occasionally at coffee-stalls. When the
shops opened, he had a wash and brush-up, and was prompt and bright at
his office. At midday, in the underground smoking-room of the tea-shop,
he conferred with a fellow clerk over their dominoes, and arranged to
share rooms with him out Norwood way. From that point onwards, the
career of James Roberts had been eminently quiet, uneventful,
successful.

Now, everybody, I suppose, is aware that in recent years the silly
business of divination by dreams has ceased to be a joke and has become
a very serious science. It is called "Psycho-analysis"; and is
compounded, I would say, by mingling one grain of sense with a hundred
of pure nonsense. From the simplest and most obvious dreams, the
psycho-analyst deduces the most incongruous and extravagant results. A
black savage tells him that he has dreamed of being chased by lions, or,
maybe, by crocodiles: and the psycho man knows at once that the black is
suffering from the &OElig;dipus complex. That is, he is madly in love
with his own mother, and is, therefore, afraid of the vengeance of his
father. Everybody knows, of course, that "lion" and "crocodile" are
symbols of "father." And I understand that there are educated people who
believe this stuff.

It is all nonsense, to be sure; and so much the greater nonsense
inasmuch as the true interpretation of many dreams--not by any means of
all dreams--moves, it may be said, in the opposite direction to the
method of psycho-analysis. The psycho-analyst infers the monstrous and
abnormal from a trifle; it is often safe to reverse the process. If a
man dreams that he has committed a sin before which the sun hid his
face, it is often safe to conjecture that, in sheer forgetfulness, he
wore a red tie, or brown boots with evening dress. A slight dispute with
the vicar may deliver him in sleep into the clutches of the Spanish
Inquisition, and the torment of a fiery death. Failure to catch the post
with a rather important letter will sometimes bring a great realm to
ruin in the world of dreams. And here, I have no doubt, we have the
explanation of part of the explanation of the Roberts affair. Without
question, he had been a bad boy; there was something more than a trifle
at the heart of his trouble. But his original offence, grave as we may
think it, had in his hidden consciousness, swollen and exaggerated
itself into a monstrous mythology of evil. Some time ago, a learned and
curious investigator demonstrated how Coleridge had taken a bald
sentence from an old chronicler, and had made it the nucleus of <i>The
Ancient Mariner</i>. With a vast gesture of the spirit, he had
unconsciously gathered from all the four seas of his vast reading all
manner of creatures into his net: till the bare hint of the old book
glowed into one of the great masterpieces of the world's poetry. Roberts
had nothing in him of the poetic faculty, nothing of the shaping power
of the imagination, no trace of the gift of expression, by which the
artist delivers his soul of its burden. In him, as in many men, there
was a great gulf fixed between the hidden and the open consciousness; so
that which could not come out into the light grew and swelled secretly,
hugely, horribly in the darkness. If Roberts had been a poet or a
painter or a musician; we might have had a masterpiece. As he was
neither: we had a monster. And I do not at all believe that his years
had consciously been vexed by a deep sense of guilt. I gathered in the
course of my researches that not long after the flight from Brondesbury,
Roberts was made aware of unfortunate incidents in the Watts saga--if we
may use this honoured term--which convinced him that there were
extenuating circumstances in his offence, and excuses for his
wrongdoing. The actual fact had, no doubt, been forgotten or remembered
very slightly, rarely, casually, without any sense of grave moment or
culpability attached to it; while, all the while, a pageantry of horror
was being secretly formed in the hidden places of the man's soul. And at
last, after the years of growth and swelling in the darkness; the
monster leapt into the light, and with such violence that to the victim
it seemed an actual and objective entity.

And, in a sense, it had risen from the black waters of the pool. I was
reading a few days ago, in a review of a grave book on psychology, the
following very striking sentences:

The things which we distinguish as qualities or values are inherent in
the real environment to make the configuration that they do make with
our sensory response to them. There is such a thing as a "sad"
landscape, even when we who look at it are feeling jovial; and if we
think it is "sad" only because we attribute to it something derived from
our own past associations with sadness, Professor Koffka gives us good
reason to regard the view as superficial. That is not imputing human
attributes to what are described as "demand characters" in the
environment, but giving proper recognition to the other end of a nexus,
of which only one end is organised in our own mind.

Psychology is, I am sure, a difficult and subtle science, which, perhaps
naturally, must be expressed in subtle and difficult language. But so
far as I can gather the sense of the passage which I have quoted, it
comes to, this: that a landscape, a certain configuration of wood,
water, height and depth, light and dark, flower and rock, is, in fact,
an objective reality, a thing; just as opium and wine are things, not
clotted fancies, mere creatures of our make-believe, to which we give a
kind of spurious reality and efficacy. The dreams of De Quincey were a
synthesis of De Quincey, <i>plus</i> opium; the riotous gaiety of Charles
Surface and his friends was the product and result of the wine they had
drunk, <i>plus</i> their personalities. So, the profound Professor
Koffka--his book is called <i>Principles of Gestalt Psychology</i>--insists
that the "sadness" which we attribute to a particular landscape is
really and efficiently in the landscape and not merely in ourselves; and
consequently that the landscape can affect us and produce results in us,
in precisely the same manner as drugs and meat and drink affect us in
their several ways. Poe, who knew many secrets, knew this, and taught
that landscape gardening was as truly a fine art as poetry or painting;
since it availed to communicate the mysteries to the human spirit.

And perhaps, Mrs. Morgan of Lanypwll Farm put all this much better in
the speech of symbolism, when she murmured about the children of the
pool. For if there is a landscape of sadness, there is certainly also a
landscape of a horror of darkness and evil; and that black and oily
depth, overshadowed with twisted woods, with its growth of foul weeds
and, its dead trees and leprous boughs was assuredly potent in terror.
To Roberts it was a strong drug, a drag of evocation; the black deep
without calling to the black deep within, and summoning the inhabitant
thereof to come forth. I made no attempt to extract the legend of that
dark place from Mrs. Morgan; and I do not suppose that she would have
been communicative if I had questioned her. But it has struck me as
possible and even probable that Roberts was by no means the first to
experience the power of the pool. Old stories often turn out to be true.


THE END


Project Gutenberg Australia
