

Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: Mr Gurney and Mr Slade (1944)
Author: Warwick Deeping
* A Project Gutenberg Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 1000291.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: July 2010
Date most recently updated: July 2010

This eBook was produced by: Don Lainson

Project Gutenberg Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: Mr Gurney and Mr Slade (1944)
Author: Warwick Deeping




MR. GURNEY AND MR. SLADE



I


James Slade was tired, and legitimately so, for London was sweating
in the embrace of a heat wave, and Mr. Slade had been doing
business with his wholesalers, so, at Fenchurch Street Station he
entered a first-class compartment and, placing his hat in the rack,
snuggled down into a corner seat and waited for some official
person to arrive, to whom he could tender the additional tribute.
Mr. Slade was--for the moment--alone in the carriage, and both
windows were down, but this London station seemed airless.  Mr.
Slade sat and thought of a chair in the garden, and sea-breezes,
and a glass of Eliza's home-made lemonade.  Moreover, as one of
Southfleet's most singular and successful citizens, he could claim,
even with humility, the prestige of first-class travel.  And in
August the Southfleet trains became packed like cattle-trucks, with
London's East End pouring forth for its yearly sousing in the sea.

Mr. Slade might be feeling the heat and wishing that he could shed
his coat and sit in his shirt-sleeves, but his interest in humanity
was unfailing.  He sat and watched the crowd teeming along the
platform.  Third- and second-classes were filling up, and three
passengers had stepped over Mr. Slade's feet into the compartment.
Perspiring mothers with families to insert fussed up and down.  The
cockney voice was clamant.  Mr. Slade felt like putting his head
out of the window to utter soothing words to these agitated
parents.  "Keep cool, ladies--It makes me feel hotter--seeing you
in such a state of heat.  The train won't leave without you."

Maybe Mr. Slade remembered that summer day, so many years ago, when
he had travelled to Southfleet with a small and shabby bag and a
past that was equally shabby.  That had been a third-class
occasion.  Oh, very much so, with poor Clara in charge of the
situation.  What a meek, shabby old sheep she must have thought
him.  A fourth traveller, moist and stout, in frock-coat and top-
hat, stepped over Mr. Slade's feet, and banged the door with solid
finality.  Let none of the unprivileged attempt to enter here.  The
gentleman sat down with an emphatic grunt, removed his hat and
mopped his forehead.  Mr. Slade looked at him, and the gentleman
looked back at Mr. Slade.  His glance was a glare.  Even a stare
was tactless on so sweltering a day.

Faces peered in and passed.  A worried guard with flag and whistle
was fussing up and down, trying to find accommodation for
superabundant children.  The over-heated gentleman glared at any
face that showed itself.  "Don't you try to crowd in here!"
Doubtless his simmering soul had strong views upon the limitation
of proletarian families.  Mr. Slade disliked him, and dislike made
him feel puckish.  For twopence-halfpenny he would lean out and
invite some bothered mother to enter with her brood.  At a pinch
the compartment could accommodate three more occupants.

It was then that Mr. Slade became interested in a particular and
singular figure.  It was that of a little man with a large head,
the body of a boy, and frail legs which trotted him up and down
with a kind of ambling innocence.  The little man was lugging a
shabby black Gladstone bag; it bumped against his legs, and was
obviously too heavy for his strength.  He was dressed in clerical
clothes, and his soft hat had seen much wear.  Three times did the
little clergyman pass Mr. Slade's window, searching for some
compartment in which he could take refuge.  He was hot and a little
bothered but he smiled, and to James Slade that smile was singular
and evidential.  So was that battered bag, which looked as though
it had experienced many stresses and struggles.  Mr. Slade was
moved by a memory.  His bag had been like that bag, only smaller.
Mr. Slade got up and leaned out of the window.  The guard had his
whistle in his mouth, and the last doors were closing.  The little
man was drifting down again towards Mr. Slade, smiling in a
whimsical sort of way at the packed compartments, and Mr. Slade
waved to him.

"A seat here, sir."

Mr. Slade's eyes met those of the parson.  They were large and
luminous eyes, very large, and with an Irish blueness.

"Room in here, sir."

The man and the bag came to rest opposite Mr. Slade's window.

"Thank you.  But--first-class, I'm afraid."

"Well, never mind.  Get in, sir, there goes the whistle."

Mr. Slade opened the door, and the little clergyman, after a
moment's hesitation, performed the dishonest act of entering a
first-class compartment with a third-class ticket.

The over-heated gentleman glared at him.  He had unbuttoned his
waistcoat, and put his feet up on the seat that the little third-
class curate was proposing to occupy.  And, as for the white-headed
old fusspot who had instigated the invasion, he too looked like a
"third", and probably was so.

"Excuse me," said the clergyman.

There was some delay in the removal of the big, black, highly-
polished boots, and Mr. Slade, who knew all about boots and their
owners, became combative.

"Do you possess a handkerchief, sir?"

"I beg your pardon!"

"I suggest that you might dust the cushion."

Someone in a corner chuckled, and the over-heated gentleman glared.

"I suggest you mind your own business."

Mr. Slade smiled at him sweetly.  "I do--It is quite a good
business."

Meanwhile, the little clergyman was struggling to get his bag into
the luggage-rack.  It appeared to be rather too heavy for him, and
Mr. Slade jumped up, and assisted in the struggle.  Then, they sat
down and smiled at each other as the train rolled out of the
station.  The clergyman took off his hat and nursed it.  The over-
heated gentleman sat and simmered.

There was silence, a satisfied and relaxed silence.  The truculent
person might exude moisture and a suggestion of over-heated
dignity, but he was in a minority.  That chuckle had been
significant.  Mr. Slade sat and gazed at the clergyman's black bag.
A label was pendant from it, and Mr. Slade was trying to decipher
the name.  For, Mr. Slade had been challenged by a coincidence and
its inspiration.  Surely this little man might be the new curate
whom the Rev. Egbert Jones had engaged for duty at St. Jude's
Church.  Mr. Egbert Jones had succeeded to the living after the
retirement of Mr. Thomas Chatterway, a change that Mr. Slade had
had cause to regret.  Mr. Challis, the departing curate, had been
presented with a country living, and was escaping with relief from
the jejune autocracy of his vicar.  Mr. Jones was so supremely
Egbert, and so was Mrs. Jones, his very earnest and energetic wife.

Mr. Slade had his window down, and suddenly the fat gentleman
demanded that it should be raised.

"I'd like that window up."

Mr. Slade said sweetly that he preferred it down.

"I'm not going to sit in a draught."

Mr. Truculence leaned over, pulled the strap and raised the window.
Mr. Slade, with smiling deliberation, unhitched the strap and let
the window down again.

"Excuse me.  My right, I think."

Mr. Slade was giving the gentleman stare for stare when the voice
intervened.  It said:  "Please change places with me, sir.  I don't
mind the window."  The little cleric was smiling into that turgid
and angry countenance, and when he smiled in that way his face
became the face of beauty, an inward beauty that lit up eyes and
lips, brow and skin.  Mr. Slade was conscious of sudden wonder, the
wonder of a wise old child.  Was he being sentimental, or had they
a saint in this first-class compartment?  Veritably, the little
parson was turning the other cheek.  And how would Mr. Truculence
react to the occasion.  Mr. Truculence's angry eyes which had been
standing out on stalks, seemed to go back into his head.  His
wrathful belly became deflated.  Almost he found a smile as the
light of that other smile played upon him.

"Thanks.  That's all right.  I'll stay here--Don't want you to--"

Mr. Slade became again the Christian gentleman.  He spoke politely
to his neighbour:

"How would you like the window, sir?  Half-way up?"

"Yes, if you don't mind.  I had to hurry, and I'm hot."

Mr. Slade raised the window.  "How's that, sir?"

"Just right, thanks."

"Draughts can be dangerous--when you are--"

"Yes, I have to be careful about my chest."

Good manners had returned to the carriage, and there was peace, a
peace--so Mr. Slade reflected--that had been the product of a human
and forgiving smile.


Mr. Slade was continuing in his attempt to read the label on the
bag.  The little parson had drawn a small, leather-bound book from
his breast pocket and was reading it.  The book looked like a
testament, but it was not.  The clergyman was deep in The Vicar of
Wakefield.  Mr. Slade squinted at the label.  What was the new
man's name?  He had heard it, without giving it its proper value.
Didn't it begin with a G?--Yes, Gurney.  The name up above looked
like Gurney.

The journey to Southfleet occupied some sixty minutes, a Southfleet
that was splurging into new bricks and mortar, and losing--in Mr.
Slade's estimation--its naïveté and its innocence.  Southfleet was
ceasing to be pleasantly Victorian, and its flavour was that of the
New Age.  There were more first-class carriages on the Southfleet
trains, but less first-class people in them.  Mr. Truculence was
representative of the new Southfleet aristocracy, and business was
business.  Mr. Slade might allow that beastliness was not inherent
in business, unless the greedy beast that is in every man remains
unchastened, for, in his meditations upon humanity, Mr. Slade had
come to know that man is no angel.  Progress, progress, progress!
Mock-saints shouting slogans!  Envy and greed posing on platforms,
and pretending to be what they were not.  Might not progress take
place in the wrong direction, and that poor ass--humanity--pursue
its tail instead of its head?  Mr. Slade sat and reflected, and was
moved to consider and to contrast the little curate and the
business man.  If they had a Christ in the carriage, and that
Christ was to smile his smile in Southfleet, what would humanity
make of it?  Here, indeed, was some problem!

The journey continued and ended in first-class silence and proper
attention to the Press.  When the train came to its destination,
the little curate remained seated until these prosperous gentlemen
had made their exit.  Mr. Slade also remained seated.  They smiled
at each other.

"Excuse the impertinence, sir, but may I ask if your name is
Gurney?"

"Yes, sir, it is."

"Then--you are--"

"The new curate at St. Jude's."

"Splendid," said Mr. Slade.  "I'm a sidesman there.  My name is
Slade."

They still sat and smiled at each other.

"Well, sir, supposing we get out!"

Mr. Gurney rose to lift his bag from the rack.

"After you, sir."

Mr. Slade got out and stood to help Mr. Gurney out with his bag.

"Anywhere to go to?"

"No. 7, Cashiobury Terrace.  Is it far, sir?"

"I'm taking a cab.  I'll drop you there."

"Very kind of you, Mr. Slade."

"No, sir, a pleasure."

Mr. Gurney was looking up and down the platform and feeling in a
pocket.

"A porter, Mr. Gurney?"

"No.  I must pay the extra on my ticket."

"I don't think I should worry."

"But--really--I must.  I should be robbing the railway company."

Mr. Slade's eyes were crinkled up with humour.

"Well, I'm a sinner--also.  Only second-class.  Let me stand treat,
Mr. Gurney, as a kind of welcome to Southfleet?"

"Too kind of you, sir."

"Nonsense.  I'll settle with the ticket-collector.  Can you manage
that bag?"

"Oh, easily."

Mr. Slade had not proposed to take a cab.  The decision had been an
inspiration imposed upon him by the Rev. Mr. Gurney and his bag.
The ticket-collector was a friend of Mr. Slade, for there were few
people in the old Southfleet who were not friends of his.  Mr.
Slade handed out the cash for both parties and made a joke of it.

"Now, Mr. Giggins, don't say you haven't met two honest men to-
day."

"I'd pass you any day and every day, Mr. Slade."

Mr. Slade gave Mr. Gurney a playful look.  "Well, I'm not a
Barabbas, sir, you see, according to Mr. Giggins."

There was one cab left for hire and Mr. Slade chartered it, and
again the driver was one of his familiars.

"Stop at No. 7, Cashiobury Terrace, Potts."

"No. 7 it is, Mr. Slade.  Hope you're feeling well, sir?"

"Very well.  Almost saintly."

So, Mr. Slade and Mr. Gurney drove together down Southfleet High
Street, and along Victoria Road towards Cliff Parade and the sea.
Cashiobury Square's No. 7 was occupied by the Misses Plimsoll,
Euphemia and Caroline, who let lodgings to the elect.  The Misses
Plimsoll had done for a long line of curates, and, like their
famous namesake, it could be said of them that they knew where to
draw the line.  The cab stopped outside No. 7, and Mr. Gurney and
his bag got out.  He stretched out a delicate and sensitive hand to
Mr. Slade and thanked him.

"Thank you, sir, for all your kindness."

"Don't mention it, Mr. Gurney.  I rather think you and I are going
to be friends."



II


"Mon Repos" had become "Sea View", and Mr. Slade, confronting all
scandal, had gone to live there with his daughter, and now walked
daily to his shop in the High Street.  Mr. Slade's Pot of Basil had
not concealed a human head, nor had the plant endured, but had
withered and been thrown upon the rubbish heap, for those who had
mattered in Southfleet had refused to recognize any odour of decay.
Mr. Chatterway had retained Mr. Slade as a sidesman; Mr.
Golightly's Sunday suppers had continued; the old sinner could
sometimes be seen taking tea with Mrs. Richmond upon her balcony.
And "Slade's" was "Slade's", a super-shop, an institution, yet
somehow retaining a Lowther Arcade flavour, and offering to
Southfleet books, stationery, leather goods, and fancy work as well
as toys.  The saying was, "You can get it at Slade's".  Phoebe was
a partner, and a very capable one at that.  Eliza, growing white of
head, still cooked for Mr. Slade and his daughter, and was tart
with the tradesmen as the autocrat of the kitchen should be.
Master George was at Merchant Taylors' School, and boarding with a
master.  A euonymus hedge had been replanted, for, though Sea View
was Sea View, James Slade liked to sit in his chair and go to sleep
after Sunday dinner, with a handkerchief over his head, and his
privacy respected.

Mr. Slade paid off the cabbie and opened the green iron gate of Sea
View.  Home!  Yes, it was good to have a home to return to in the
November of your years, and to know that one was not spoken of as
"He".  There was no third person about James Slade.  He was father,
grandpa, the master, and the lips of women did not tighten when he
came into the house.  There was his chair under the green roof of
the veranda, complete with cushions, table and books.  Cushions!
Comfortable things cushions when they were provided by love and not
by fear.

Mr. Slade toddled across the lawn towards the inevitable chair.
The french window stood open.  For the moment it was empty, and
then it framed a figure.

His daughter.  She stood there, the mature young matron, strangely
serene and to James Slade still strangely mysterious.  Why this
mystery, why this serenity?  Rose Hallard had had many bitter
things to bear, and yet they had not soured her as they had soured
her mother.  How incalculable were the complexities of the human
soul!  Was it that Rose was just supremely healthy, and had a son
who was not like his father?  Surely, there was more to it than
that.  Sows and cows, human and otherwise, could be healthy, but
the soul of a sow did not transcend the trough, and his daughter
was the child of her father.

Mr. Slade and his daughter smiled at each other.  Had her father
had his tea?  Yes, a cup and a slice of cake at Fenchurch Street
Station.  Mrs. Hallard had seen her father arrive in a cab, which
was unusual, and caused her to look at him consideringly.

"Ah, that needs explaining it, doesn't it?"

He could suggest a wink, somehow without closing an eye.

"But I'll sit down.  It must be eighty in the shade.  Bring out a
chair, my dear."

He sat down, and his daughter regarded him much as a woman regards
a lovable infant.

"Now, what have you been doing?"

"'You naughty old man!'"

"Yes, sometimes--you are very naughty."

"Thank you, my dear.  That is a sign of grace.  I think I'd like a
glass--"

"Eliza's iced lemonade?"

"No, a mild whisky, but you can include the ice."

His daughter bent down and kissed the top of his head.

"Pet, you shall have your whisky."

She brought him his drink, and it was a good one, nor did it cause
her to remember that other man whose drinks had been of a stiffer
order.  She fetched a chair, and sat down beside him.

"Now, why the cab?"

Mr. Slade chuckled.  "No need to send for Dr. Richmond.  My heart's
as it should be.  Do you know the difference between man and
woman?"

"Is that a riddle?"

"Human nature is a riddle, my dear, a fact that the fervid
gentlemen who wear red ties never remember.  A woman likes to be
asked questions; a man hates it."

"Guilty conscience?"

"Not always.  It is the nature of the beast.  Well, I'll answer
your question.  I took a cab for the benefit of the new curate."

Rose Hallard could not confess to any interest in curates, nor was
she interested in any man as a creature of romance.  She had
suffered such a surfeit of the male, and was so absorbed in her
son, that even the strange loyalty of Dr. Charles Richmond had
failed to move her.  Moreover, her father was always picking up
lame dogs, or stray cats, or woeful children, and bringing them in
to be cosseted and comforted, and the new curate might be included
in that category.  And if he was to serve under the Rev. Egbert
Jones and the Vicaress, he deserved to be pitied.  Master George,
who had shown promise as a mimic, had appeared before them one
evening in his white nightshirt, with a scarf draped over his
shoulders, and holding a book, had given them a rendering of the
Rev. Egbert Jones.

"And now--to Gud the Father--Gud the Son, and Gud the Hooly
Ghu-ust--"

His grandfather had smothered a chuckle, and reproved him.

"There are some things you must not mock at, my child."

"But Grandpa--"

"Mr. Jones is doing his best."

So, Mrs. Hallard just sat and asked the necessary question, and
threw the ball to her father.  "Is he--old?"

"Thirtyish, my dear, but somehow--not quite grown up."

"I forget the name."

"The Rev. John Gurney."

"Oh--yes.  And will he suit--Mrs. Egbert?"

Mr. Slade sipped his whisky, and gave his daughter a puckish look.

"Who's being naughty--now?  I must confess, my dear, that Gurney
causes me to wonder."

"Just--how?"

Mr. Slade had decided that he would smoke a pipe, and while he
filled it his daughter sat and watched his firm old fingers: no
tremor there--as yet.  Her father's touch had grown so sure in its
humanity.  Well, and what had he discovered in John Gurney that was
singular?

"You know the kind of questions children ask."

"Have I asked that kind of question?"

"No, my dear.  I mean those questions that can be so embarrassing
to the cynical and the selfish.  Occasionally one meets a grown-up
child--who can ask--"

"Awkward questions?"

"Exactly."

"And your Gurney--"

Mr. Slade lit his pipe, and when it was burning nicely, he became
philosophical.

"Life's a funny business.  You may think you have got it pat, and
the whole house in order, and then half a sackful of soot drops
down the chimney.  No, my dear, Gurney is not soot.  I may be
wrong, but I do have a feeling about things."

"And about new curates."

"Tut-tut.  This may be a very serious--development.  I shall be
very interested to listen to Gurney's first sermon."

"You mean--he may say things."

"He might, my dear.  He's got it in his eyes.  The guileless
passion for truth.  Most disconcerting, you know."

"Not to you, father."

"I don't know about that.  I'm often a very naughty old man.  But
imagine the Lord Jesus Christ appearing in the pulpit of St. Jude's
and talking like Christ, in contrast to the careful and pew-
persuading Egbert."

"Awkward things."

"For some of us.  No names, no scandal, my dear.  But Southfleet is
growing rather full of mere money changers.  Gurney might not be
popular."

"With--everybody?"

"No, not quite--everybody.  Business men are not all just business,
and justice may come before business."

"And what will you do, father, if Gurney makes people
uncomfortable?  Get up and walk out?"

"Think so?"

"Of course not."

"I think I shall just sit and chuckle."


John Gurney had been given high-tea, which meant an egg to it, but
the egg itself was not high.  It might be a little hard-boiled, if
produced by the most respectable of hens in a house that was
ordered by the same most respectable breed of women.

Said Miss Caroline to Miss Euphemia:  "Well, what do you think of
him?"

Miss Euphemia's verdict was that Gurney was a perfect little
gentleman, rather shy.  There had been days when the Misses
Plimsoll had been coy with their curates, but such dreams and
simperings had fallen like shrivelled fruit, and both ladies were
prim and a little severe, and more interested--so they assumed--in
the doctrine than in the man.  Miss Euphemia's description of the
Rev. John Gurney was--in its superficial aspect--apposite.  Shy he
was with certain people, sensitive and self-effacing, but this very
self-effacement could become a veritable suit of shining armour.
He had the supreme courage of his guilelessness and of his credo.
But was it courage--when he was not conscious of it?

He had questioned Miss Euphemia about his new friend.  "Do you know
a Mr. Slade?"

Of course Miss Euphemia knew Mr. Slade, but she could not accept
any social connection.  The Misses Plimsoll might let rooms to the
elect, but they considered themselves to be gentlewomen.

"Slade?  Oh, yes, he keeps a shop in the High Street."

"A very kind old man."

Miss Euphemia stood erect, but her lips were prim.  The Misses
Plimsoll might swallow all the commandments, including the seventh,
but their nostrils became pinched over Mr Slade's past.

"Yes, quite a character.  It used to be a toy shop."

"Has it ceased to be--?"

"No.  Slade's still sell toys, and other things.  I'm afraid we do
not deal there."

When he had finished his tea Gurney stood at the window and looked
across Cashiobury Square to the sea.  He had a curiously long head,
one of those heads that seem to be drawn upwards and forwards by
visionary things.  His black hair fitted it like a skull-cup.  His
face had a peculiar and perpetual radiance, as though his inward
self was always smiling.  His profile would have delighted the
numismatic artist who wished to decorate a coin, clear-cut, serene,
and somehow joyous.  Even the sulkiest and most stupid of children
seemed to come to life when Gurney looked at them.

There were still a few children playing out there on the grass.
Gurney put on his hat and left the decorative dreariness of the
Plimsoll domestic art.  The Misses Plimsoll had remained in the
antimacassar, Pampas grass era.  They draped things as they draped
their persons and their souls.

Cashiobury Square could not be described as a place of beauty.  It
suggested a Union Jack laid out in grass and gravel, with a border
of euonymus hedge and iron railings mounted upon a low brick wall.
The Victorian passion for property seemed to express itself in
railings, nor was their iron-work that of the Georgian and the
smith.  It was a cast-iron age even in its new, dogmatic,
scientific cockiness.  Gurney entered by one of the iron gates, and
straightway was confronted with rebellious youth, a truculent small
boy who was defying his nurse, and was refusing to go home and to
bed.

"Now, come along, Master Harold, come along and be good."

Master Harold had no intention of being good, and his nurse was a
delicate and gentle young woman who easily could be bullied.
Master Harold would grow up into the sort of man who enjoyed
bullying women.  He had a large, white, stubborn face, and
expressionless blue eyes.

"I want you to be good."

"I don't want to be good."

"Come along, do."

"I'm not going to bed.  You're a silly fool."

The little nurse laid hold of Master Harold's left arm, and he
promptly punched her in the bosom.  The blow hurt her, and she
winced.  And then a surprising thing happened to Master Harold.
Someone smacked his head, and taking him by the collar, turned him
round.  The boy was astonished.  He looked up into a face that
smiled down at him, and smack and smile were both most strangely
persuasive.

"Yes, Harold, you are going to bed."

The boy stared.  "Why should I?"

"Because God says so--and because I'm asking you to.  You won't be
unkind to me, will you, Harold?"

A sudden smile spread over the boy's sullen little face.  "I'll go--
if you'll come too."

Gurney took his hand.  "Yes, I'll come, but not to bed."

"Thank you, sir," said the nurse.


When Gurney had shed Harold at the gate of "Balmoral", he raised
his hat to the nurse, and turned to follow his own inclinations.
Both duty and courtesy demanded that he should call at the vicarage
and report his arrival to the Rev. Egbert Jones, but Gurney felt
moved to explore his new cure before interviewing that formalist,
his vicar.  So, Gurney wandered down Cliff Parade to Caroline
Terrace and the gardens.  Gurney paused by the posts and chains
outside No. 19.  The prospect pleased him, these sedate and sun-
steeped houses, the little gardens, the green shrubbery, the sea.
No. 19 had become the Richmond house, for the Hallards, husband and
wife, lay in St. Jude's churchyard.  Gurney could see the church at
the end of the vista, its squat white timber spire catching the
sunlight, its porch dwarfed in perspective by the great holly
hedges which flanked the approach.  Gurney wandered along Caroline
Terrace to Pier Hill, to find himself part of a cockney crowd that
was flowing homewards towards the station.  It was a characteristic
crowd, and suddenly Gurney's bowels yearned in him, for he knew his
cockney from A to Z, and his curacies had included parishes in
Stepney and Whitechapel.  He had been sorry to leave those
parishes, but fate and a secret, and his superiors had forced an
exodus.  Yes, Gurney, like Mr. Slade, had come to Southfleet with a
secret.  He stood and smiled upon the passing crowd.  It was a warm
and cheerful and common crowd.  It sang, it played upon
concertinas, it carried bags of shrimps and jars full of cockles.
It tugged children along by the hand, or bore them on shoulders.
It laughed, and joked, and was healthily vulgar, and indulged in
back-chat, and was big with beer.  You could smell the crowd, and
to Gurney there was something moving and familiar in this human
smell.

"'Ello, what price the Sky Pilot!"

"Blimey, don't 'e look a treat!"

Gurney smiled upon these irreverent souls.  Had not they and their
like been good friends of his?  Had he not married them, and
baptized their children, and condoned black eyes and Saturday night
celebrations?  He could not be put out of countenance by their
badinage.  Stand up to the common man and smile at him as though
you loved him, and he is yours.  Came another voice:  "Blimey, if
it ain't Mr. Gurney!"

A little, swarthy coster broke step and left the procession.  His
eyes were bright.

"Gawd, what a surprise!"

"Hallo, Alf."

"What, takin' an 'oliday, sir?"

They shook hands vigorously.

"No, this is my new home.  How's Ethel, and the missus?"

"Fine, sir.  Wish you was comin' back with us, sir."

"So do I, Alf, in a way."

"Well--in a sense--this 'ere place is 'ome from 'ome.  Got a train
to catch, sir.  My missus and the kids are on a'ead somewhere with
old Bert Bailey.  Remember Bert, sir?"

"Of course I do.  I hope he hasn't punched any more policemen?"

"Not 'alf.  Well, good-bye, sir, and the best o' luck."

"Good-bye, Alf, and God bless you."

For that London crowd had made Gurney realize that he was feeling
lonely.  Here was this new township, with all its strange people to
whom he was nothing but a strange new curate.  He felt rather like
a small boy turned loose in a new and unfriendly school, nor were
his responsibilities those of a small boy.  He knew what he knew.
He was to be a public figure, a little fellow who had to get up in
a pulpit and preach--to what?  Not to sinners such as Alf and Bert,
but to a respectable and perhaps critical congregation, successful
people who might regard him with hostile eyes were he to utter the
words that his credo made inevitable.  You could crucify yourself
upon the cross of truth.  Did he not know!  And suddenly he wished
to be alone, and, threading through the crowd, he made his way to
the iron gates and the holly hedges of St. Jude's.  The sun was
shining on the west window, and almost it smiled at him like the
eyes of Bert, that vulgar, sinful, warm-hearted child.  Gurney
tried the porch door, and found it unlocked.  He entered.  He heard
someone playing upon the organ, softly and with cunning fingers.
It was the organist's son, young Bellamy, lame and separative, who
had found music comforting to his soul.  Gurney tip-toed in and sat
down in a very humble seat to listen.  He did not know that this
had been James Slade's seat in the days when he had cleaned boots
and carried up coals.

Young Bellamy was playing Handel.  Gurney could just see his fair
head swaying slightly to the rhythm like corn in a wind.  The funny
old church's throat seemed to swell.  The music rolled along the
roof and into the gallery, and Gurney got on his knees and fixed
his eyes upon the pulpit.  Some day soon he would be up there, and
looking down upon strange and perhaps unfriendly faces!  Would he
flinch from the message that was in him?  Would he turn, and walk
delicately like Agag, and bow down to the top hats and the bonnets?
No, by the Lord God Almighty he would not.  The music, swelling
suddenly, seemed to carry his spirit up on glorious and insurgent
wings.  His face lit up.  He blessed the fair-haired maker of
music.

Gurney explored the Old Town before paying his formal visit to the
Rev. Egbert Jones.  The Old Town was somehow Alf, and Bill and
Bert.  Here were old fashioned lodging-houses and tea-gardens,
roistering pubs, watermen in blue jerseys, a black jetty which
suggested that Southfleet's famous pier had dropped a pup, rival
pleasure-yachts the Skylark and the Conqueror referred to by some
as "Sixpenny Sickers".  The tide was in, and Gurney was not
presented with a picture of a mile of mud, but mud that was washed
twice daily by the insurgent sea.  Here, too, was that East End
crowd, still flowing stationwards, and enjoying life as the common
folk can enjoy it.  Children might be a little tired and peevish,
and too full of shrimps and cockles, but it had been a great day,
oh--yes, a great day.  The crowd had washed its feet in Jordan.

Gurney strolled as far as the old black jetty.  He could feel
himself part of this crowd, and warmed by it.  Here was human
nature in the rough, unvexed by snobbery, and unseduced by
Pharisees and Sadducees.  Good brown soil--this, not some little
prig of a front garden prim with pelargoniums.  The old Ship Inn
thrust out its white bow windows as though it too was full of beer
and bonhomie.  Its flagstaff flew the Union Jack.  Gurney felt
cheered and comforted, and reinforced for his interview with the
Rev. Egbert Jones.  Southfleet was not all Cliff Parade and
Cashiobury Square.  It could sing and dance and be happily vulgar,
and not expect you to live in a pulpit and utter prim phrases that
would not be offensive to pious pockets.


Gurney rang the vicarage bell.  It was one of those grey houses,
stucco, with a slate roof, and its windows, somehow, were correct
and cold.  The doorstep was immaculate, the brass door-fittings
perfectly polished.  It was a house that expected you to wear
gloves and a very clean collar, and to wipe your feet on the mat
before you entered.

A middle-aged maid in cap and apron answered the bell.  Mr. Egbert
Jones was at home, and in the study preparing his Sunday sermon.
Gurney had met his new vicar on a previous occasion, and been
catechized and inspected, and accepted.  Mr. Jones had described
him to Mrs. Jones as "a rather shy little person, but--I think--
quite suitable."

Mr. Egbert Jones rose from behind his desk, and stretched out a
large pink hand to his curate.  Mr. Jones himself was large and
pink and sententious.  He had manners.  He was very much the
gentleman, going bald, but expert in making the most of such hair
as he possessed.  His handshake was flabby, his voice refined to
the level of affectation.  The Rev. Egbert Jones had prospects, and
his rather protuberant blue eyes were fixed upon a canonry.  It was
rumoured, too, that he would be appointed Rural Dean.  He was
carefully impressive, concealing behind a fine façade a certain
flabbiness and a culture that was compromise.  Mr. Jones was
careful not to offend his congregation.  He was, in every sense, a
comfortable man, vain, self-satisfied, well soaped and scented, but
prone to jealousy.

"Ah--Gurney, glad to see you.  I hope you find the accommodation I
recommended--suitable."

Mr. Jones could never quite get away from the lectern.  Even at a
garden party he behaved as though he were baptizing infants.  He
was a fine figure of a man, and he towered over Gurney as a master
dwarfs a small boy, and that too was his inward attitude to his new
curate.  Here was a harmless little fellow who would trot about
Southfleet, dutifully performing parochial acts that were boring to
the Rev. Egbert.

Gurney was quite sure that he would find his lodgings comfortable.
The Misses Plimsoll appeared to be--

"Admirable women, Gurney, and gentlewomen--if a little decayed.
Sit down, Gurney, sit down."

He resumed his own seat, and John Gurney took the edge of a hard
chair and nursed his hat.  That hard chair was not there by chance.
Mr. Jones kept it there to chasten the posteriors of parishioners
who could be too confessional.

"Perhaps you would like--a'hem--a little counsel from me, Gurney.
This--is a somewhat--peculi-ar parish.  It is, if I may say so, a
test of a man's tact."

Gurney sat very still, with his eyes on that large, bland face, and
Mr. Jones continued.  He boomed.  He was of the opinion that he had
a very beautiful voice.

"Tact, Gurney.  One must not offend childish minds.  Humanity can
be so very childish.  And this place, if I may say so, is like
hymns--ancient and modern."

Gurney smiled.  "The new and the old, sir."

"Quite so.  One has to cherish the old, and cultivate the new.  New
wine and old, Gurney.  I have always held it to be my duty to
persuade--without offending."

Gurney's smile had died away.  He was wondering whether the Rev.
Egbert Jones attempted persuasion upon Southfleet's old town, and
upon the persons of such children as Bert, Alf, and Bill.  Your
cockney could be a very irreverent creature, and quite capable of
dealing with any braying ass.  Also, Gurney was feeling troubled,
and discovering in his vicar a problem that loomed and boomed like
some large light-ship warning adventurous sailors off the shoals.
Tact?  Would it be part of his profession to exercise tact in his
subordination to Mr. Jones?  The prospect did not please him.

"I presume that you prepare your sermons, Gurney?"

"Prepare, sir?"

"Yes, write them.  I rather mistrust the extempore.  One may say--"

"What the spirit urges."

"Oh, quite so, but sometimes--too much emotion can be unwise.  Do
you prepare--?"

"I do, sir, at times."

"I presume you have copies that you could submit to me?"

Gurney's smile was sudden and a little strange.  "I have, sir.  Do
I understand that you would like a sample sermon upon which you can
act as censor?"

Mr. Jones put his fingers together.  "I hope I am no censorious
soul, Gurney, but--I--have had experience.  I--know--my
congregation.  Perhaps, it may be of assistance to you to hear me
preach--"

"I have no doubt that it will."

"Excellent.  There is no need for haste.  When you have savoured
the flavour of our township you will be able to adapt--yourself."

Gurney was fidgeting with his hat.  He wanted to say:  "The flavour
of Sunday dinner, roast beef and Yorkshire pudding, and no forward
and truthful phrases that might cause indigestion."  He fiddled
with his hat, and glanced at Mr. Jones's manuscript.

"I am very grateful, sir, for your advice.  And--now--I realize
that I must not trespass upon your time.  Your sermon--I think."

Mr. Jones beamed upon him.  "Thank you, Gurney.  I do take my
sermons very seriously.  Supposing you call upon me to-morrow about
ten.  We can go into some of our parochial duties--Sunday School,
our obligations to the poor and the sick and the aged.  And I must
introduce you to my wardens."

Gurney rose, and Mr. Jones, without rising, graciously shook hands
across his desk.



III


It is probable that the Agags of this world find it difficult to
understand those exceptional creatures who are without guile.  Not
that the Rev. John Gurney was completely guileless in his knowledge
of human nature.  Some ten years of association with the Berts and
Bills of this world, and their wives, had steeped him in benign
tolerance.  The genus Homo Sapiens was very much out of Eden, but
in this imperfect world Gurney had discovered in himself and others
a virtue that transcends the frailties of the flesh.  He was no
metaphysician.  Like Saul of Tarsus he had been smitten by the hand
of God, and endowed with that consciousness of a mysterious
presence which cannot be known save by the very wise and the very
simple.  Gurney's smile could be the sign and symptom of his inward
illumination.  Maybe, he was not guileless by nature, but had been
exalted to that state of serenity and compassion by the faith that
was in him.  He could do and say shockingly simple things, just
because his vision showed them to him so vividly.

But, Gurney, kneeling beside his bed, had other things to haunt
him, the secret that he concealed, the failures that had pursued
him.  Did he not realize that a man can be too frank and fervid?
Assuredly he had been made to realize it.  Truth could prove a
potent purge, and in the process truth and its propagator may pass
out into the pit.  Gurney struggled with himself.  He could cry;
"God give me patience.  Have I not to learn that poor, lame
humanity must be taught to walk before it can run?"

So, came the Sabbath and his superior's very superior sermon.
Gurney had conducted part of the morning service, and now he sat in
his seat with a hand to his forehead, and under it he looked and
listened.  All those strange faces, row upon row of them, demure,
complacent, bored, quite expressionless.  Well, after all, you
could not expect Mr. Jones's words to stir his congregation to
enthusiasm.  He was sententious and soporific, droning like some
big bumble-bee on this hot summer day.  It was a dull and a
comfortable address, like most of the people who listened to it.
And why should it not be dull and comfortable, for was not all well
with the Southfleet world, and a nicely barbered God looking down
complacently upon all these respectable servants?  Change and
decay?  Oh, nonsense!  This was a very prosperous and self-
satisfied world, so why disturb it?

The oration lasted twenty minutes, and it left Gurney feeling tired
and a little irritated.

"And now--to Gud the Father, Gud--the Son--"

The congregation rose with a rustle of relief.  Mr. Jones was
kneeling in the pulpit, a piece of pious exhibitionism which he
practised and thought impressive.  Gurney announced the closing
hymn.  The organ pealed--"Onward, Christian Soldiers."  Gurney sang
it with the choir, and his feeling was one of discontent.  "Onward,
Christian Soldiers, on to Sunday dinner!"  He looked at all those
static faces.  How should such a service end?  "Good appetite, good
digestion, good sleeping.  Amen."

The Rev. Egbert Jones came down the pulpit steps, and the choir and
clergymen filed in procession to the vestry.  Gurney disrobed
himself in some haste.  It was probable that Mr. Jones might ask
him how he had liked the sermon, and he was in no mood for
prevarications.  It was an embarrassing occasion, saved by the
appearance of the vicar's warden, Mr. Horatio Manning.  Mr. Manning
had some point to discuss with the vicar, and Gurney, seizing the
chance to exercise tact, slipped away.

Said Mr. Manning:  "What do you think of him?"

Mr. Jones was hanging up his surplice.  "Rather a shy little
person, but I think he will suit us."

"Seems harmless.  Now--about that estimate for repairs to the choir
roof."

The church had emptied itself and Gurney, passing Mr. Kemp, the
verger, smiled at him, and went forth into the sunlight.  It would
seem that no member of the congregation was interested in the new
curate, or had waited to welcome him on his first appearance.  But
that was not quite so.  Gurney found two people waiting outside the
porch, Mrs. Richmond and Mr. Slade.

Mr. Slade was bare-headed, and holding his black bowler in one
hand.  Somehow he had never taken to silk.  Gurney was also
hatless, and carrying his headgear pressed against his chest.  He
and Mr. Slade looked into each other's eyes and smiled.

"Oh, Mr. Gurney, this is Mrs. Richmond, our dear doctor's wife."

Gurney gave Mrs. Richmond a little, boyish bow, and looked and
continued to look.  What a lovely face was this, so serene, so
happy, so kind!  How was it that he had not discovered it, floating
like a live flower amid all those other faces?  His gaze was like
that of a child who has been present at an unhappy party, and has
at last discovered someone who is no stranger.

In truth he appeared almost as a child to Lucy Richmond, a child
upon whom you could smile and to whom you need say nothing, and the
muteness would not matter.  Mr. Slade was looking from one to the
other, and discovering in their silent scrutiny a mutual
understanding.  Mr. Slade put on his hat, and wondered whether he
ought to leave them.  But he had an invitation for Gurney.

"I hope you will be happy here, Mr. Gurney."

How simple the words sounded, and yet Mr. Slade believed that no
one could utter words as did the dear doctor's lady, or the
doctor's dear lady.  Whenever she spoke it was, to Mr. Slade, like
a bird singing.

Gurney's reply was like an echo.  "I hope to be happy here, Mrs.
Richmond."

And that was all they could find to say to each other, but it was
utterly sufficient.  Besides, as Mr. Slade saw it, what more was
there to be said.  It was Mrs. Richmond who turned and walked
between the great holly hedges with an air that was not one of
dismissal.  These men were to walk with her, and had she been a
court lady with a train Mr. Slade would gladly have toddled behind
her, carrying that train.  They crossed the Pier Hill, passing
through and between the groups of holiday figures.  The cockney
Sabbath paddled in the sea, and Saints and Kings might wash the
feet of beggars.

Said Mrs. Richmond:  "How good it must be to escape from the East
End."

Gurney pondered that saying, and replied to it:  "It is sometimes
good to be in the East End."

Mrs. Richmond glanced at him.  "You know it?"

"I did."

"And--perhaps--?"

"I found it full of grown-up children."

Mr. Slade was walking with his hands under the tail of his Sunday
coat.  He waggled them.  "Some of us never grow up, hey what!
Rather--refreshing."

"Very," said Lucy Richmond.

She paused in the porch of No. 19, as though posing, but quite
unconsciously so, for her picture, while the two men raised their
hats to her.

"A doctor's house, Gurney, is never quite sure of its timetable,
but Sunday supper is our safest meal.  Will you join us next
Sunday?"

"With pleasure, and thank you."

Mr. Slade and the Rev. John Gurney passed on towards the Cliff
Parade and their Sunday dinner.

"I am taking you back with me, Gurney.  My daughter expects you."

Gurney looked embarrassed.  "How very kind of you--but my good
ladies--'"

"Afraid of hurting their roast beef?"

"Well, if you like to put it that way, sir."

"Supposing we call and leave word.  There will be more for the
Misses Plimsoll, and they can draw the line higher."

Gurney glanced at Mr. Slade as though he understood such waggery
and enjoyed it.  This old gentleman was a pearl whom any cockney
would have been proud to pin on a coster's jacket.

"Under welcome pressure--I submit, Mr. Slade."

"You do.  Good.  I have a better cook than your good ladies, and I
draw the line higher, as high as a glass of sherry.  But perhaps
you are Blue Ribbon."

"Not quite, sir.  I have been stood a drink in a Stepney pub."

"How sensible and human.  Tell me, Mr. Gurney, what did you think
of the sermon?"

Gurney looked startled.  So sudden and direct a challenge made him
catch his inward breath.

"A very--comfortable--sermon."

"Treacle tart, sir."

For some strange reason known only to himself, Gurney winced.
Golden treacle--and a tart!  How the simple association of ideas
could get you!

"Well, sir, it was quite--good in its way."

"Quite," said Mr. Slade tartly.

"I gather that Mr. Jones does not wish to--"

"Stir up--we beseech thee, but gently and with a silver spoon.  How
would the East End have listened to our Rev. Egbert?"

"I'm afraid it--wouldn't, sir."

"No.  Throw eggs, and addled ones.  Here we are at No. 7.  Shall I
go up and break the news?"

"Do you suggest that I am a moral coward, Mr. Slade?"

James Slade chuckled.  "No, I don't."

He was thinking that the Rev. John Gurney might be good for
Southfleet, but would Southfleet accept such goodness?


The face of Mrs. Hallard was yet another face that Gurney had
failed to see in church.  She had left before her father, to warn
Eliza that there might be three for Sunday dinner.  She had gone to
church in black, but she was in white when her father and Gurney
appeared at the Sea View gate.  The little white house with its
green veranda and jalousies might have ceased to be Mon Repos, but
it was more so than in the old days.  Mr. Slade and his daughter
were rich in the world's goods, and Mr. Slade had purchased an acre
of land that lay at the back of the cliff houses.  He had been
offered a large sum for it by a speculative builder, and had
refused the offer, for Mr. Slade had become a gardener.

Sherry on the Sabbath, and in public!  Well, why not?  Had not
Christ created wine at Cana?  They sat, the three of them, in the
veranda, challenging the strictures of the censorious.  It was very
good old dark sherry, and Gurney enjoyed it, and did not hide his
glass under his hat.

Moreover, his hostess's hair was the colour of tawny wine.  Another
lovely person, but for some reason Gurney appeared shy of looking
too closely at Mr. Slade's daughter.  Her hair was like some other
person's hair, and yet how different.  How innocent he had been--!
But now his innocence was of a different order.  Gurney was playing
with a kind of jig-saw puzzle, which was Southfleet, and preparing
to put the picture together, as it was or should be.

They talked, or rather Mr. Slade talked about Southfleet and its
history, and how, before the railway came, the town was served by
packet-boats and coaches.  The steam-boat and a mile of mud had
produced the pier.  Man's ingenuity in the pursuit of profit!  And
now the petrol engine was on the road and proposing to turn the
world upside down.

"Here's a sample, I think."

For one of those primitive high cars, rather like a phaeton without
a horse, rolled into view, and stopped beyond the euonymus hedge.
A young man in a bowler hat raised that hat to the sherry party,
descended, and appeared at the gate.  Mr. Slade got up.

"Hullo, Mr. Charles."

"May I join you, sir, for five minutes?"

"Come along.  I want you to meet Mr. Gurney."

Dr. Charles Richmond and Gurney looked at each other, shook hands
and smiled, and there was mutual liking in the smile.

"A glass of sherry, Charles?"

"What a scandal, sir."

"Will your diagnosis be the worse for it?"

"But my reputation, sir!"

"Ask Gurney.  He has dared publicity."

Charles looked at the little curate.  "What do you say, Mr.
Gurney?"

"The better the day, the better the deed."

"Very broad-minded of you."

"Broad-cloth, not sack-cloth," said Mr. Slade.

They sat down, and Gurney noticed that Dr. Charles so placed
himself that he could look at Mr. Slade's daughter; also, that he
looked at her in a particular way.  Gurney did not blame him.  It
was good to look at particular people in a particular way,
especially so when you were in love with them.

"How's the car behaving, Charles?"

"Oh, rather like a woman.  Getting old and temperamental."

"Tut-tut!  Why not call it experimental?"

"You are right, sir.  I apologize."

He held up his glass and looked at Rose Hallard.  "Apology
accepted?"

Her glance was on his tie but not upon his face.  "I think so."

"Amen," said Mr. Gurney, and Mr. Slade chuckled.


Mr. Slade continued to enjoy a nap after Sunday dinner, and not
only so on the Sabbath, and Gurney had been given to understand
that he should deliver an inaugural address to the Sunday-school
teachers and their classes, with Mrs. Egbert Jones presiding.  Now,
what kind of woman was Mrs. Egbert Jones?  If she had any
resemblance to Mrs. Richmond or Mrs. Hallard he might not fear the
head of Medusa.

Mr. Slade, who was growing happily somnolent, strolled with Gurney
to the gate, liking him the better for not overstaying his welcome.

"Might I ask you a question, or rather--two questions, sir?"

"Certainly, if they are not too profound.  I find that digestion
and philosophy--"

"No.  They are somewhat personal.  Would you tell me whether the
vicaress has any--"

"Stings," said Mr. Slade.

Gurney looked coy.  "I did not--exactly--intend--"

"Mrs. Egbert Jones is--episcopal."

"Oh, dear!"

"Remember the lawn sleeves, and the lady's dignity."

"I will."

"And the other question?"

"I wonder--whether you would read my next Sunday's sermon.
Apparently--I am to be on trial."

Mr. Slade stood with his hands on the gate.

"You mean--censor it?"

"Yes, in a sense, sir.  I would value your opinion.  I am afraid I
am rather a candid person."

Mr. Slade looked out to sea.  "Whitechapel not Kensington.
Personally, Gurney, I am prejudiced in favour of frankness.
Balaam's ass was a good beast."

Gurney laughed.  "Thank you, sir."

"I do not class you with the quadruped.  Yes, send me the sermon."

"And you will be frank with me?"

"I will."



IV


The building was abominably new.

No Gothic mysteries here, no Fra Angelico glamour, and Gurney, who
had some colour in his soul and a leaning towards the old, rich
ritual, stood for a moment and gazed at the edifice.  St. Jude's
Parish Room and School.

Shades of St. Egbert, what a hard-boiled building!  Corrugated
iron, and nasty red paint, and mean little windows, and that horrid
little belfry snub-nosed on the roof!  The building had a history,
but of that Gurney was ignorant.  It had been erected in Victoria
Road as a Coffee Tavern, horrible anomaly, but the East End visitor
to Southfleet had not been interested in Coffee Taverns.  King
Bung, that jovial fellow, who held court in the Old Town, had lured
the crowd from virtue, and the proprietor of the Coffee Tavern had
gone bankrupt.  The Rev. Egbert Jones and his wardens had done a
smart piece of business, purchased the building at a very reduced
figure, had it removed and re-erected on a piece of waste land
behind the church.  That horrid little belfry had been an
afterthought.  The Coffee Pot had needed no bell.

"Oh, my immortal soul!" thought Gurney.  "Why must beauty be turned
into the beast?"

Yes, the building was so like the Rev. Egbert, and within it Mrs.
Egbert and a sample of Southfleet ladies and a collection of
children were waiting for him.  He was on show, and supposed to be
a bachelor.  Almost, Gurney funked the issue.  That bathotic
building seemed to wear pince-nez.  It smirked at him.  It was so
good.

"Well, here goes," said Gurney most irreverently, and took the
plunge into cold water.

He was aware of Mrs. Egbert standing up.  She occupied a sort of
dais, a very plain and precise lady, sandy hair drawn back from a
forehead like a bent knee.  She had very pale eyes and sandy
lashes, and the suggestion of a multiplicity of teeth.

Everybody stood up.  They gazed, some of the ladies with hopeful
interest.  Here was a new man, and a bachelor.  Surely one might
divine in him romantic possibilities?

Gurney felt embarrassed.  The hall was like a galvanized tank in
which eyes goggled at him.  It was lined with matchboard stained a
meagre brown, and plastered with pious pictures.  He found an
official smile.

"Oh, please sit down.  I am very glad to meet you all."

There was a scraping of shoe-leather and a rustling of skirts.
Mrs. Egbert Jones was still standing, pince-nez and teeth aglimmer.
Gurney took his cue.  It behoved him to pay his respects to the
High Priestess.  He moved up the gangway between the various
classes.  The teachers and the elder girls appraised him, with
inward comments.

"Not much to look at."

"His head's too big for his legs."

"What a funny little fellow!"

"Not a patch on Mr. Masters."

"He's got quite a nice smile."

Gurney arrived at the dais, and saluted Mrs. Jones.

"Please step up," said she, graciously.

Gurney stepped up and faced the room.  Mrs. Jones, with hands
folded, made a little speech.  She had much pleasure in introducing
the new curate.  She was sure that he would find everybody kind,
attentive, and helpful.  Gurney stood like a small boy, a prize
boy.  Would the lady moisten a finger and smooth down some tuft of
hair on his head?

"And now, ladies and children, I am going to leave Mr. Gurney with
you, to give you a little address."

How magnanimous of her!  Gurney behaved like a little gentleman.
He handed Mrs. Jones down from the dais.  Well, that would be a
relief.  He remounted the dais, and waited until the lady had made
her exit.  He looked round the hall, smiled, and gave a little
clearing of the throat.

"Oh, hell and blimey!" was what he wanted to say.

What he did say, was:  "Supposing we call it a holiday and I tell
you a story."

There was a murmur of appreciation from the children.

So, Gurney found a chair, and sat down, nursing his hat, and with
an air of easy intimacy, told them a story.  It was not out of the
Bible.  It concerned a certain Jack and a Beanstalk and a Giant,
with various imaginary embellishments, and no moral.  In fact, it
had an almost pagan flavour.  The younger children enjoyed it.
Maybe, the ladies thought Gurney lacking in seriousness and a sense
of responsibility.

Several of them discussed it afterwards.  Gurney had gone round the
classes, smiling and shaking hands.  He had been a success with the
children, and a bevy of them had followed him homewards.

Said one serious-minded lady to another:  "Rather an eccentric
person.  And somewhat lacking in reverence."

"He doesn't look quite grown up."

"Well, I dare say dear Mr. Jones will take him in hand.  Quite a
nice smile."

"Yes, quite.  I hear he came from the East End."

"That may explain it."


Mr. Slade sat in the garden and read Gurney's sermon.  It was an
old sermon, written in the days of his young fervour, when the man
in him had been moved to fearless eloquence, and neither Mammon nor
Human Nature had seemed inseparable.  Also, it had been written in
the days before a certain human experience had come into his life
and chastened some of his daring.  Gurney had his heel of Achilles,
his thorn in the flesh, nor was he likely to forget it.

Mr. Slade raised inward eyebrows.  He might have exclaimed with
Bert or Bill:  "Gawd strike me pink."  Because Gurney's sermon was
more than pink; parts of it were lurid scarlet.  Had ever such an
address been delivered from the pulpit of St Jude's?  "No, sir--oh--
no, sir!"  Mr. Slade both chuckled and looked grave.  Did Gurney
really contemplate delivering that address to the Rev. Egbert's
congregation?  Gosh, if so, what a breaking of eggs there would be!
What indignation, what horror!

His daughter joined him; she had been writing to Master George.
She found her father sitting with closed eyes, a smile on his face,
and the manuscript on his knees.

Was he asleep?  She sat down softly, and without opening his eyes,
Mr. Slade addressed her.  "In confidence, my dear, would you like
to read--a sermon?"

"A sermon?"

"Yes, by Gurney.  He asked me to--criticize it.  I'm rather
flabbergasted.'

"Is it--so--dull?"

Mr. Slade shot out his feet and sat up.  "Dull!  It's like a box of
fireworks all going off at once, or two Tom-cats fighting in a
hamper."

"Good gracious!  He looks such a quiet little man."

"Read it, my dear, and give me your opinion.  Not a word to
anybody."

He passed her the manuscript, rose, and went forth to see if the
plums on his early plum-tree were ripening.

Mr. Slade was absent for a quarter of an hour.  He had discovered
some broken glass at the bottom of a wall, which was significant,
for Mr. Slade, that good old man, was not quite Gurney.  He had
found it necessary to have his wall topped with broken glass in
order to preserve his fruit from plundering louts and small boys,
for, not only did they thieve the fruit, but they broke the trees.
So, someone had been exercising spite, whacking at the glass
chevaux de frise with his stick.  No one had been over the wall,
and Mr. Slade rubbed his chin and philosophized.  Boys would be
boys, and men would be men, and to justify the greeds and envies of
human nature prophets would propound a new political system.  It
was in the process of propagation, and Mr. Slade, who called
himself a Liberal, was interested in it.  He could confess to being
a man of property, and in his case it was a clean product, and he
may have been prejudiced, but he failed to see why he should be
despoiled of it for the benefit of the greedy and the thriftless.

Service, not profit!  The redistribution of wealth!  What humbug!
In a completely angelic world such an ideal state might be
possible, but it was not an angelic world.  Did any working-man, so
called, put service before wages?  Was not the main appetite
material?  What were these gentlemen agitating for, haloes or more
cash?  Damned humbug!  Man could be an ingenious, mealy-mouthed
hypocrite.

"Redistribution of wealth!  Poof!" thought Mr. Slade.  "Let them
talk about the redistribution of brains, and then--I will listen."

He returned to his daughter, to find her gazing at the distant sea,
with Gurney's sermon lying in her lap.

"Well, my dear, what is the verdict?"

She said, dreamily:  "I think it is a wonderful sermon."

Mr. Slade sat down.

"Far too wonderful for Southfleet.  And far too wonderful for any
human family."

She came out of dreams to look at him with some surprise.

"You--think so?"

"I'm afraid I do, my dear."

"But, isn't it sincere?"

"Terribly sincere.  Gurney may be one of those saintly persons who
assume too much, and believe that other people are as sensitive and
ungreedy as he is."

"But if he feels like that, isn't he right to--be honest?"

"Of course he has that right.  But the question is, Rose, how much
good will he do, how much harm?"

"Harm?  Could it do harm?"

"It could do a great deal of harm to Gurney."

"You mean, he would make enemies?"

"Of course.  And doubtful friends."

"How--doubtful friends?"

Mr. Slade glanced affectionately at his daughter.

"My dear, it isn't a disinterested world, and never will be.
It's patchwork, and some of the patches are pretty shabby.
Unfortunately, when a man begins to preach pure altruism, quite a
number of people read into his words that which he never intended.
Yes, unfortunately, the highest motives may stimulate the worst
desires, persuade human nature to put on a surplice and translate
robbery into what they call redistribution.  So, you think I'm an
old cynic?"

"Oh, no."

"Man is not a bad sort of creature, but he has his limitations.
Give him a text and he may turn it into a tyranny.  We are so
clever at legalizing that which the carnal man in us lusts for.
Man is a jealous beast, and given their way most men would like to
be little Jehovahs."

"Are you--one?"

"Bits of me are.  I try to chasten those bits.  Just one question.
I suppose you think George a very ordinary sort of boy?"

"Ordinary?"

"Yes.  Just capable of becoming a dustman or a bricklayer's
labourer."

"Of course I don't.  George is--"

Mr. Slade chuckled.  "Well, there you are!  Just--human nature.
Maternity.  Does any Mrs. Smith think that little Smith is no
better than the little Jones next door?"

"I suppose not.  One is prejudiced."

"Ah, prejudice!  Well, why not?  Why skim off the cream and call it
no better than skilly?"


Mr. Slade wrote a note to Gurney, and left it at No. 7 Cashiobury
Terrace on his way to business.

"I have read your sermon with great interest.  May I discuss it
with you?  You will find me at home after six."

Gurney responded to the invitation.  Even during those first days,
he had been hearing things about Mr. Slade and Mr. Slade's history.
It really was a most extraordinary story, and yet Southfleet
appeared to have accepted Mr. Slade and his past and to have made
quite a worthy of him.  Well, Mr. Slade should know something about
life and human nature and the martyrdom of man, and if the
preaching of such a sermon could put the preacher in the pillory,
Mr. Slade might tell him so.

Mr. Slade did tell him so.  He was frank and fatherly, and
unexpected, in that actually he had read Karl Marx and Engels, and
the Fabian tracts, and he did not prate about what he did not know.
Gurney sat and listened.  He had not read Karl Marx; his God was
Christ upon the Cross.  And was it not a priest's duty to preach
Christ crucified?

Mr. Slade was gentle with him.  "Yes, to the few.  But to the many,
not so freely.  Remember the cunning of the serpent, Gurney."

"What, exactly, do you mean, sir."

"Man should be known by his works--more than by his words.  Begin
by playing with children and they will have faith in you.  I would
begin by playing with the children, grown up and otherwise."

Gurney sat and smiled.  "As you did, sir?"

"Who has been gossiping?"

"It was very kindly gossip."

"I'm glad.  Words, Gurney, can sting.  They resound like smacks,
and would you begin by smacking children?"

"I see your point."

"Of course you do.  Persuade children to love and trust you, and
you can smack them--justly and with impunity.  The trouble with a
man like Karl Marx is that he damns a whole class to prove his
theory.  No class can be damned in that way."

"I agree.  Our modern world--"

"Grew.  And why?  Why did it shape itself as it has done?  Marx
evades the issue.  Surplus value, exploitation.  What about--
surplus brains?"

"Not brains alone, sir."

"No, character too.  Men aren't ninepins to be knocked over
haphazard.  And there is a Chinese saying."

"Yes, sir."

"Softlee walkee catchee monkey."

Gurney laughed.  "And--Southfleet--is my monkey?"

"It would be.  I know several other souls in this town who have
caught their monkey."

"You, sir, for one."

"Make no song about me, Gurney.  If you care to preach that sermon
five years hence instead of next Sunday--"

"I'll take your advice, sir."

"Then you are a very exceptional man, Gurney, and I take off my hat
to you."



V


Dr. Charles Richmond had spoken of the Rev. John Gurney to Dr.
Corrie Richmond as "A funny little fellow", and Dr. Charles was to
think him still funnier before the summer was out, for he had seen
Gurney, trousers rolled up, paddling in the sea with a collection
of cockney children.  Dr. Charles Richmond, being the young
physician, was very much upon his dignity, much more so than was
his father, and a little self-conscious about his youthful
appearance.  He had suggested growing a beard, but his mother had
negatived it.

"Curious little bloke--that."

Charles shed some of his fine feathers when he was off duty, and
relapsed into the vernacular.

"Who, dear?"

"The little parson.  Saw him paddling and sailing boats."

"Well, why not, Charles?"

"Not very dignified."

His father was secretly amused.  "Maybe, Charles, the most
dignified people are those who can forget about--dignity."

Charles looked carefully across the table at his father.  "Pulling
legs, pater?"

"I will, if you feel like putting one out to be pulled."

"Nothing doing."

But, as it happened, Dr. Charles was a little previous in his
opinions, and was sufficiently frank to modify them.  Physicians
should not be prejudiced, especially in the making of diagnoses.
Charles returned from the Old Town one September evening, looking
hot and thoughtful.  He had been called out upon an emergency case,
to discover that a certain person had been there before him.

"Well, Charles, any excitement?"

"I should say so.  Tommie Pond on the war-path."

"Drink, again?"

"Fighting drunk, and knocking his wife about.  That was before I
arrived.  Hit her with a saucepan, and then got into a scrap with
Fred Childs.  Somehow, I have changed my mind about the little
curate chap."

"What had he to do with it?"

"Quite a lot.  Apparently he walked in and stopped the fight, and
when I got there Tom was as tame as--"

Charles sought for the simile and it eluded him.  The pork chop
that he was eating appeared to be somewhat tough, and for some
seconds he dealt meditatively with a mouthful.

"Was Mrs. Pond badly hurt?" asked his mother.

"Oh, a scalp wound.  Had to sew it up.  And Tom sat in a corner,
snivelling.  The padre had reduced him to tears."

"Probably alcoholic," said his father.

"Oh, probably," said the son.  "Don't these people ever learn self-
control?"

"Self-control is a late arrival in the social scheme.  There are
three points about the average working-man that you ought to know,
Charles."

"What are they?"

"Firstly, that the uneducated man knows everything.  Secondly, that
he sulks if you suggest that his knowledge is not universal.
Thirdly, that his goodwill or badwill towards you is purely
emotional, and that it may cost you no more than a shilling."

"Oh, Corrie!" said his wife.

"I'm afraid it is true--in the main, Lucy.  One has to cultivate a
benign tolerance, and not to expect too much."

But there were other incidents in the career of Gurney that caused
Southfleet to wonder.

He wore shabby clothes.

The state of his wardrobe caused the Misses Plimsoll to pull wry
faces.

His socks!  And the tails of his shirts!  He appeared to possess
only two shirts, one in the wash, one on.  Moreover, these
deplorable garments were not fit to be sent to a self-respecting
laundry.  As a gentleman's shirts they were a disgrace.

How could you doctor such tatters?

And his shoes needed soling.

After all, Gurney received a hundred and twenty pounds a year, and
the cost of his board and lodging amounted to only twenty-five
shillings a week.  What became of the surplus?  Yes, Euphemia,
answer me that!

The Misses Plimsoll discussed the problem.  Really, Mr. Gurney must
be spoken to about his linen.  It was quite indecent for such
shirts to leave No. 7, Cashiobury Terrace for Southfleet's Sanitary
Laundry.

"You had better speak to him, Caroline."

"Why me?"

"You see more of him than I do, and you are older than I am."

"Just seventeen months," said Miss Caroline, tartly.

Miss Caroline did dare to speak to Gurney about the state of his
wardrobe.  She elevated it to the level of a duty, an almost
maternal duty.

"Do you mind, sir, if I mention a certain matter?"

"What is it, Miss Plimsoll?"

Miss Caroline put her mouth in order.  "It's--your clothes, sir.  I
mean--your underclothes.  You really do need some new ones."

"Do I?"

Now, I ask you, should not a man know the state of his own shirt-
tails?

"They really are, sir, past--mending--and washing."

"Dear me, as bad as all that?"

"I'm sorry to say they are, sir."

Gurney looked coy.  "Thank you, Miss Plimsoll.  I will do something
about it."

The Rev. John Gurney purchased two new shirts, and some socks and
etceteras, not from Mr. Chignell in the High Street, but from a
new, cut-price shop in the Victoria Road.  The Misses Plimsoll had
a very poor opinion of the new etceteras.  If you held them up to
the light you could almost see through them.  "Dear, dear, what
rubbish!"

"He will sit through them in a month."

Miss Caroline looked austere.  "I wouldn't have put it quite like
that.  What the poor man needs is a mother."

Then, there was another incident upon which the good ladies felt it
their right to register a protest.  There were limits to the
refined patience of No. 7.

It happened too, on a Sabbath.  The Misses Plimsoll had prepared
for Gurney a good Sabbatarian and English dinner, roast beef and
Yorkshire pudding.  Miss Euphemia might not have surprised the
scandal had she not found that she had forgotten a handkerchief and
gone upstairs to fetch one.  Miss Euphemia had a slight cold in the
head.  And what did she see when she happened to look out of the
window, but a most dirty tramp squatting on the little lawn, and
Gurney presenting him with his plate of good Sunday food.

Miss Euphemia rushed downstairs to tell her sister.

"A--tish--oo.  What DO you think he is doing?"

What could Gurney be doing but eating his midday meal?

"Eating his dinner, I hope."

"No, giving it to a most disgusting tramp, and in the front
garden."

"Good gracious, the man's mad!"

Miss Caroline had to run upstairs and see the sight for herself.
There was no doubt about it.  A hairy, red-nosed gentleman sat on
the green grass carpet with the plate between his knees, and Gurney
was chatting to him.  The gentleman's trousers were frayed and
patched, his coat ragged, and a deplorable hat reposed beside him.
Well, I never!  Southfleet did not believe in selling all you had
and giving it to the poor.  Nor does anybody, for that matter.
Even the benign Dr. Richmond could say:  "Never have anything to do
with unlucky people.  It may not be bad luck, but a rotten
heredity."  And he could say:  "Many of the people whom I treat for
nothing give me more trouble and less gratitude than the patients
who pay."  Miss Caroline was shocked.  Fancy a man giving away her
good food to a drunken scarecrow like that!

The window was open at the top, and Miss Caroline heard the
scarecrow say:  "You haven't got a pair of boots you could spare,
guv'nor?"

"I may have," said Gurney.  "I'll go and see."

Oh, would he!  This reckless debauching of the sponging class must
be arrested.  Miss Caroline, full of indignation and a sense of
duty, confronted Gurney on the stairs.

"Mr. Gurney, how--COULD--you?"

"What, Miss Plimsoll?"

"Give away the good food we had cooked for you to a creature like
that?  And--in--our--garden!"

"The man hadn't had a meal."

"So he said.  Look at his nose, Mr. Gurney, just look at his nose!"

Gurney looked down his own nose at the lady.

"It was--MY--dinner, Miss Plimsoll.  I don't ask for a second
helping."

"I should think not, sir.  And I think I heard him ask for boots."

"He did."

"You must be very innocent, sir.  Don't you know what he will do
with the boots?  Sell them and buy drink.  I really must protest."

"Must you, Miss Plimsoll?"

"Yes, I must.  We can't have a scene like this in our front garden.
I am going to send the man away."

Send him away she did.  The tramp was mopping up good gravy with a
piece of bread, but Miss Caroline snatched the plate away from him.

"Go away--at once, or I'll send for the police."

The scarecrow, having filled his belly, winked at her.

"Right you are, old dear.  I've had the fat, and you're a bit tough
and gristly, aren't you.  Take it and wash up."

And with this insolent adieu, he collected his hat and a sack,
belched, and departed.


Southfleet heard of this incident, for one or two neighbours had
witnessed the strange scene, and had commented upon it both kindly
and unkindly.  The Rev. John Gurney might be hailed as a Christlike
creature, or as an eccentric, or even as a histrionic person who
could pose to his public.  The news was passed to the Rev. Egbert
Jones and to Mrs. Jones.  They discussed it at breakfast, and the
vicaress was of the opinion that Egbert should speak like a father
to Gurney.

"I don't think he can quite appreciate the--a'hem--atmosphere of
this parish.  It isn't Poplar, Egbert."

"No, my dear, but--"

"Don't you see that it is bringing disrespect upon the cloth?"

Mr. Jones had just suffered an accident with the marmalade pot, and
the lapse was suggestive.

"After all, Emily, it is somewhat in the tradition."

"What tradition?"

"Of the primitive church.  I'm not a medievalist; I move with the
times, but if a curate of mine chooses to give away his dinner,
what cause have I to--?"

"My dear Egbert, it is too stagey.  Now, I come to think of it, he
does remind me a little of Henry Irving."

"But his dinner is his dinner, to do with as he pleases."

"It would have been much better inside him, than--"

"I may agree, Emily, but it doesn't follow--"

"I think you are being very short-sighted.  We don't want a
mountebank in the parish.  Unless this kind of thing is checked--it
may--"

"May what?"

"Cause criticism--and a schism.  You know how foolish people are.
If Gurney poses as a saint--"

"Well, he may be a saint, Emily."

And then Mrs. Jones said a very significant and prophetic thing.

"It might--er--affect your--authority, Egbert."

"My authority?"

"Yes, I don't think it does for a subordinate to be too popular."

Maybe, those words of his wife's planted a drop of slow poison in
the mind of the Rev. Egbert Jones, but, for the present, he chose
to maintain a discreet watchfulness, and what he described as
tolerance and an open mind.  His little curate might make an ass of
himself, so far as Mr. Jones was concerned, provided that the ass
was not a beast of Balaam.  Probably, Gurney was one of those
harmless idiots with too much emotion and not enough mind, and
Southfleet would smile at him and find him a suitable nickname.
Something like "Little Johnny Kiss the Kids", or "Our Shabby
Saint", or even "Dear Little Blarney!"

Yet, there were other people who were persuaded to take Gurney very
seriously, and Mr. Slade and Dr. Corrie Richmond were among them.
Mr. Slade, being himself somewhat of a saint, and not in conscious
competition with any St. Francis, divined in John Gurney that rare
guilelessness and ardent integrity which to the worldly may seem
histrionic humbug.  All great art is founded on simplicity, and the
artist may partake of that simplicity, be he priest, poet or
painter.  Mr. Slade could assert that there was an art of Beautiful
Behaviour, though it might be more rare than creation in colour,
and the more Mr. Slade saw of Gurney, the more convinced was he
that Gurney was an exponent of that art.  He was utterly and
strangely free from snobbery.  He did not talk down or up, and he
could talk to any man with a naturalness that was unconscious art
and good humanity.  He could talk to the watermen and fisher-folk,
the labouring men, and publicans and sinners as though they were
just men and he just such another man.  He might be found sitting
in a cottage scullery chatting to the good wife while she did her
washing.  He had even been seen helping to hang out that same
washing.

Mr. Slade understood that this complete lack of snobbery might
offend a part of Southfleet.  That was the most strange thing about
the Christian cult as practised by the many.  Their God had been a
carpenter's son and a simple craftsman, but no carpenter could be
admitted to a drawing-room save as a craftsman, and he could not be
recognized as a social equal.

There was old Robinson the carpenter, who still sang in the choir,
an old man with a beautiful head and a beautiful nature, but to
some mutton-headed conventionalist among the ladies he was just
Robinson, an inferior creature who wore an apron.

Mr. Slade might argue the matter with his daughter, for both of
them had passed through the Valley of Snobs, and arrived at natural
courtesy.  Mr. Slade kept a shop; his daughter had been the
daughter of a hotel-keeper.  Moreover, Mr. Slade, with a scandalous
past to his credit, could be regarded as one of those unique
examples of God's mercy, a brand that had been snatched from the
burning.

Said Mr. Slade to Rose:  "There are two forms of humbug, one which
asserts that all men are equal, the other which assumes the false
inequality of the snob.  The most obvious thing in life to any
impartial observer is the unequal social value of various men."

"Yet, they call you a Radical."

"And so I am, I suppose, my dear, in the radical sense.  I like to
get to the root of things.  Social status should depend upon social
value.  Life should sift out the dross from the fine metal."

"But if men had equal chances?"

"The ladder would still remain, my dear.  Some would climb, some
would squat in stupid sloth at the bottom.  The older I grow the
less love I have for the theorists, and the cold-blooded and busy
people who must mind everybody's business but their own.  Your
idealist can be a most dangerous person and often so very
unlikeable."

"Then--if Mr. Gurney--?"

"I think there is something different about Gurney.  He lives the
life, and doesn't merely prate about it."

Dr. Corrie Richmond was a True Blue Tory, perhaps because he was
brought into close contact as a healer with the aristocracy of
brains and of health.  Not that poor physique condemned a man to
dwell with the slugocracy; a fine and sensitive soul could inhabit
a delicate body, like a tempered blade in a flimsy scabbard.  More
spirit and less crude flesh to clog it.  For, regarded as a
physical specimen, the Rev. John Gurney was not impressive, below
the level of his chin.  Two of him might have gone to the making of
a blacksmith, but no two smiths could have forged his spirit.

In the vulgar parlance Gurney was a "Surprise Packet".  Dr.
Richmond found him one day sitting beside the bed of one of his
patients, a particularly difficult patient, one of those surly
souls who appear to be born with a hereditary grievance.  Young
Smiles--the name did not fit him--was a painter and decorator, a
meagre, disgruntled creature with an incompetent chest.  In winter
he suffered from asthma and bronchitis, and to Smiles his physical
disharmony was due to the social disharmonies which embittered him.
He had to paint doors and windows in cold weather; that was an
injustice.  He also had to paint stuffy and dusty interiors, and
that too was an injustice.  All Bob Smiles's sentences began with a
"Why?"  "Why should I be like this?  Why should I have to--?  Why
can't I be--?"  Dr. Richmond described him as a creature born with
a paltry body and a sore soul.  And was the sore soul the product
of the paltry body?

The man had one of those rabid, bitter little faces, a smudge of a
black moustache, poor and prominent teeth, pale yet angry eyes.  He
was like a rat nibbling at something, and that something was a
grievance.  Why, why, why?  Dr. Richmond did not like Bob Smiles.
He suffered him.  The fellow had the gift of the gab, and a
sneering discontent that could poison other men.

And here was Gurney sitting beside the bed of a poor little prig
who boasted that he was an atheist.  Gurney stood up with that
luminous smile of his, and made it plain that he would efface
himself and leave the patient to his doctor.

"I'll get out of the way, sir."

"No need, Mr. Gurney."

"Well, I have work, like you have, doctor."

The sick man's eyes were on Gurney.  "Thank you for coming--though
I don't believe in your stuff."

How gracious!  Gurney smiled from the doorway.  "That doesn't
matter, Bob.  We're just men together."

Dr. Richmond sat down to question and examine his patient.  Yes,
there was no doubt about it, Robert Smiles was better.  If one
could get the bug of self-pity out of him he might be better still.

"You're on the mend, Smiles."

"I can't take that last medicine."

"Well, don't take it.  Try a dose of Mr. Gurney."

Bob looked surprised and supercilious.  "Him?  Funny little bloke.
Means well--I suppose.  Just a dope-merchant."

Dr. Richmond folded up his stethoscope.  "Well, try a dose of the
dope, my lad.  Your trouble is, if I may say so, that you feel sore
with yourself, and sulk about it.  A little soothing syrup might do
you good."



VI


In Southfleet it was considered unseemly to be known as a Radical
in politics, though, to more modern ears, it would sound very mild
music.  Mr. Slade was reported to be a Radical, but then Mr. Slade
was a somewhat exceptional person, and his social heresy was
tolerated, for he was not bitter, and he did not proselytize.  To
be a Tory suggested beer and good old port.  Your Radical was apt
to be a gingery person, though he drank lemonade or barleywater.
Mr. Simmins, the local tax-collector was a Radical, and unpopular.
Mr. Gavin who edited the progressive paper, was also a Radical, and
if not liked, respected.  Southfleet believed in labelling people,
and so it became necessary to label Gurney, though the Church
should be considered superior to politics.

Had Gurney been asked to label himself, he would have been puzzled.

"What are my political views?  Well, really--I don't know."

Lovely innocence, for the world was becoming more and more
political in a rather unpleasant and snarling fashion.

Mr. Robert Smiles had started a Socialist Club for fellow workmen.
Its membership was infinitesimal, but the very existence of so
acrid a society caused conventional Southfleet to see red.  One of
Mr. Smiles's public snarls was reported in Mr. Gavin's paper, and
it shocked Southfleet very seriously.  This ranting little
demagogue talked revolution.  Down with the King, down with the
House of Lords and the Episcopate.  Some of Southfleet's old women
were frightened.  Surely, the Police ought to do something about
it?

The local Inspector smiled all over his large, good-humoured face
when official interference was suggested.

"What, sir, bother about--that?  If there were trouble at any time,
Bob Smiles would be the first to get under the bed."

Robert Smiles had not read the book written by his distinguished
namesake.  "Self Help"--indeed!  Mr. Smiles's vision of the future
state was that of a large sow giving suck to all her progeny, but
Mr. Smiles did not pass on to reflect that what might be good for
swine might be disastrous for man.  Gurney was out to prove that
man had a soul, and that it was not his fate to be a mere sucking
parasite, and it was upon this question of God, Man and Soul that
the Rev. John Gurney caused a part of Southfleet to look askance at
him.

Mr. Robert Smiles, up and working, and having accumulated during
his illness an additional reserve of venom, challenged Gurney to
appear at his club and debate God and the dope scandal.  Gurney
took up the challenge.  He and Mr. Smiles stood up and confronted
each other before a dozen or so rather silent and embarrassed
working-men, for your working man may have a sense of courtesy, and
Bob Smiles was a cad when his tongue got going.

"Now, Gurney, have you ever seen your God?  Have you ever heard
him?  Have you ever witnessed a miracle?  Give me one pinch of
proof--"

Gurney sat and smiled, quite unangered by his adversary's rude
arrogance.

"What are eyes and ears, Mr. Smiles, but the flesh?"

"Well, what's man but flesh?"

"Spirit," said Gurney, promptly.

"Like the stuff in a bottle, eh!  Show me an ounce of your spirit."

"I am afraid I could not.  The inward eye is necessary."

"Inward eye be blowed!  Walk out your God, Gurney."

"I cannot do that, for He is within me."

"Feel him inside you, do you?"

"Yes, Mr. Smiles, I do.  God is present in me.  I feel Him.  I
know."

Mr. Smiles became even more sarcastic, but, for some reason or
other the audience was in sympathy with Mr. Gurney.  It was more
taken with his luminous smile than with Bob Smiles's venomous
mouth.  It began to murmur and shuffle its feet, till, at last, a
florid man with a large moustache let fly in the vernacular.

"Stow it, Bob!  Maybe the gentleman's got somethin' you 'aven't."

"Yes, superstition, humbug," said Mr. Smiles.

"Stow it!  We 'aven't asked 'im 'ere to be insulted."

The report that Gurney had attended a meeting of the Socialist Club
spread through the town, and provoked considerable comment.  It
came to the ears of the Rev. Egbert Jones, and Gurney's vicar felt
it his duty to catechize his curate.

"Is it true, Gurney, that you joined in a debate at a particular
place?"

"Quite true, sir."

"But, my dear friend, I must say that I deplore any political
adventures."

"It was not a question of politics, sir."

"Then, what--"

"The discussion was on the existence of--God.  Robert Smiles calls
himself an atheist."

Mr. Jones raised his hand.  "What have we to do with a vulgar and
ignorant little demagogue like Smiles?  Such people are best
ignored."

"You may be right, sir--but I did feel that--"

"Yes, yes, I know.  The urge to testify.  But, I think, Gurney,
that your presence there was--ill-judged.  One should not flatter a--
whippersnapper--by arguing with him.  And--gossip has been busy.
I deplore gossip.  It is so prone to become garbled."

"I am sorry, sir."

"Well, well, just an error in--tactics.  But, please, Gurney, in
future consider the cloth."

As Mr. Jones had hinted, garbled accounts had got about, and what
Gurney gained on the swings, he lost on the roundabouts.  Working-
class Southfleet might think him something of a saint, but there
were other people who saw him as a sinister shadow.  Mr. Sawkins,
who owned the Caroline Hotel, and was on the committee of the
Conservative Club, raised the point in public.  What sort of little
parson was this who talked red revolution, and got himself mixed up
with scallywags like Smiles?  Mr. Sawkins was very candid upon the
scandal.  He thought that the question ought to be taken up with
the Rev. Egbert Jones.  If Mr. Jones could not keep his pup from
lampposts, the creature had better be found another kennel.

Gurney liked to be out and about early, and knowing that Mr. Slade
was an old gentleman of regular habits, he would stroll up to Sea
View and join Mr. Slade in his progress along the Cliff Parade and
Caroline Terrace to the High Street.  Mr. Slade was a comforting
person when a proportion of the population was beginning to give
you unfriendly looks.  The windows of Caroline Terrace watched them
pass, and the comments were various and characteristic.  Mrs.
Richmond said that Mr. Slade and Mr. Gurney might have been father
and son.  Mr. Sawkins snarled in his beard.  A fellow who had been
in gaol was just the partner for a clerical agitator like Gurney.

Said Gurney to Mr. Slade:  "I hope you do not feel--embarrassed--by
walking with me?"

Mr. Slade glanced up and caught Mr. Sawkins playing Nosey Parker at
a window.

"Ha, it's a dirty bird that fouls its own beard!  No, sir, and I
feel flattered to have your company."

"I'm afraid I'm in disgrace, Mr. Slade, with a part of my
congregation."

"So was--Christ, sir."

"You see, I did not think I should be blamed for defending my
faith."

"Did you really attend a meeting of Mr. Smiles's Venom Club?"

"I did.  But, all men are not venomous, and strange though it may
sound--I did not lack for sympathy."

"You wouldn't.  The hyena and the dog are different creatures."

"But it makes one rather sad, to be misjudged and misrepresented."

"In a very prejudicial world, Gurney?"

"I suppose it is--so."

"Our opinions--so called--are three parts prejudice and one part
honest conviction.  I shouldn't worry, Mr. Gurney.  Just go on
being what you are."

"Thank you, sir.  I have had troubles and trials of my own to
chasten me."

"Same here," said Mr. Slade.  "Come and have some supper with us to-
night."

But one morning Mr. Slade walked solus along Caroline Terrace, and
Mr. Sawkins waylaid him.  Old age was making Mr. Sawkins very
crusty, and more and more of a curmudgeon.  He called a spade a
spade, and it was a very unpolished tool.

"Morning, Slade."

"Morning, Sawkins."

Mr. Slade became naughty when Mr. Sawkins fouled the sweet face of
a sunny morning.  Egg and bacon in beards, and gravy stains upon
waistcoats!  Mr. Sawkins was septic to Mr. Slade's soul.

"If I were you, Slade, I wouldn't encourage that little parson
fellow."

"But you're not me," said Mr. Slade.

"No, I haven't had the privilege--"

"I shouldn't say what you thought of saying, Sawkins."

"Ha, thought-reading, eh!  If you want to encourage a fellow to
preach your property away--"

"And yours?  Supposing you mind your own business.  It may need
it."

Which was a nasty cut, for the Caroline Hotel was not prospering
under Mr. Sawkins's skinny management.  Mr. Slade would like to
have added:  "And go in and comb and wash your beard, and don't
suck your false teeth."  Mr. Slade was a very clean old gentleman.


The Rev. John Gurney was shy with women, or rather--with the
ladies.  He had been a romantic soul, and romance had served him an
unkind trick, but that was his particular secret.  His reputation
was that of a celibate, but there were ladies in Southfleet who had
hopes of seducing him from the high level of his austerity.  Miss
Godbold was one of them, a stout and vigorous gentlewoman who
walked with a stick, and competed with Mrs. Jones in the running of
the parish.  Miss Godbold was mannish, even in her makeup.  She
wore a hard collar, and an expression of soapy and saintly
determination.  She had views upon most subjects, and aired them.
If you were the creature of a certain habit, Miss Godbold would try
to convince you that you should change that habit.  If you took
sugar in your tea she spoke earnestly upon the virtues of tea
without sugar.  She had a very cold blue eye, and she smiled much
like a pale sun on a frosty morning.  She did not know that to the
vulgar she was known as "Old Guy-face".  She district-visited with
great assiduity, and with serene impertinence.  Working women would
say:  "Look out--here's Old Guy-face," and they would lock the door
on her, for nothing but a locked door would keep Miss Godbold from
doing what she conceived to be her duty.

Gurney fled from Miss Godbold as from a large, white maggot.  Mrs.
Hallard, sitting in the garden of Sea View, saw Gurney slip
suddenly through the gate, cross the lawn, and greet her with an
apologetic air.

"Excuse me, may I sit down, Miss Godbold--?"

Rose Hallard smiled at him.  "Yes, do.  Am I--sufficient
protection."

"I sincerely hope so.  A most formidable lady.  She picks you up by
the scruff of the neck.  Forgive me, but I am being almost--
vulgar."

Miss Godbold had sighted her prey, but by the time she reached the
gate of Sea View, Rose, who had become very much the daughter of
her father, had, with a delightful little giggle, staged her
tableau.  She had found a skein of wool, and there was Mr. Gurney
sitting with the skein over his hands, while Mrs. Hallard wound her
wool.  Almost his attitude was that of homage and devotion.

Miss Godbold paused.  So that was the game, was it?  This saintly
little person was paying court to a wealthy young woman.  Strange,
how mean are the motives which the devout and the good assign to
each other!  But Miss Godbold was not to be daunted.  She opened
the gate and walked in.

Rose Hallard's eyes met Gurney's, and a certain roguishness in them
said:  "Prepare to receive cavalry."

She turned to smile at Miss Godbold.  What a bouncing bundle of a
woman was this, hard-boiled egg and soap!  She waddled.  The
flounce of her mannish blue serge coat stuck out like a frill about
her high hips.

"Good afternoon, dear Mrs. Hallard.  How busy we are!"

Dear Mrs. Hallard indeed!  Scrumptious old humbug.  Gurney, the
little gentleman, rose to his feet, his hands looped together by
the swag of wool.  He was mute.  Much better leave the conversation
to the ladies.

"And how are you, Miss Godbold?"

"I am always well, thank you."

"How nice.  Please sit down again, Mr. Gurney.  We must go on with
the good work.  Socks, you know.  My father likes me to make his
socks."

She did not ask Miss Godbold to sit down, nor was there a chair for
the lady.  Mr. Gurney gave Mrs. Hallard an appealing look.  Ought
he not to rise and offer his chair?  Her firm counter-glance bade
him stay put.

"I'm afraid my father is not at home, Miss Godbold.  Did you wish
to see him?"

Miss Godbold had no wish to see Mr. Slade.  She thought him a
rather irreverent old gentleman.

"No.  Let me relieve you, Mr. Gurney.  I'm sure you must feel--a
little--"

"Thank you," said Gurney quickly, "I really am quite--comfortable,
thank you."

There was silence, while Mrs. Hallard with serene composure, wound
her wool, drawing it from over Gurney's thumbs.  Miss Godbold
prodded the grass with her stick.  Could a woman, even a very self-
assertive woman, be more obviously de trop?

"Well, I must not hinder the good work.  You are making yourself
quite useful, aren't you, Mr. Gurney?"

Miss Godbold had a way of breaking out into sudden laughter.  It
was vulgar and unpleasant laughter, and supremely self-revealing.

"I hope so," said Gurney, with a stiff face.

Mrs. Hallard looked up at the lady as though this neighing sound
puzzled her.  Trust a woman to let another woman know, without
words, that she is behaving in a strange and unfinished way.  Mrs.
Hallard's eyes said:  "Why this unpleasant sound?  My sense of
humour must not be sufficiently vulgar."

Miss Godbold might be a very complacent person, but she was not
such a fool as to miss the meaning of that look.  Her face became
the jug, and there was sour milk in it.

"I will not trespass upon your--"

"Oh, must you go, Miss Godbold?"

"I have serious duties to perform."

Her glance was at Gurney.  Silly little squirrel squatting there
nibbling nuts!

"How nice for you.  Oh--good-bye."

Miss Godbold waddled to the gate, and Gurney watched her go.

"What a very earnest lady."

Mrs. Hallard relieved him of the last loop of wool.

"I wonder why good women are--"

She did not complete the question.  She raised her eyes to find
Gurney looking at her in a particular way.  She surprised Mr.
Gurney.  Almost he blushed.  His sudden self-consciousness was
rather attractive.

"I can't get the right word."

Gurney appeared to be searching for it, while he gazed at her
hands.

"Yes, let me see.  Uncomfortable to the eye."

Mrs. Hallard smiled as her father might have smiled.  "I did not
know you were a connoisseur, Mr. Gurney."

"Of what?" said Gurney, innocently.

"Oh, well, never mind."

Gurney rose slowly to his feet.  "I--rather--believe that--the--the
nature--of a--wo--person--shows in the face."

"Do you?"

Gurney was looking very grave, as though he had found something
very precious, and did not know whether to exhibit it or put it
away quickly in his pocket.

"Yes, I do.  But, forgive me, like Miss Godbold I have duties to
perform."



VII


Miss Godbold was moved to turn the sour milk sweet in herself, and
she did it by starting a malicious rumour.  Did Miss So and So know
that the Rev. John Gurney had designs upon a lady with money?  Yes,
Mr. Gurney was not quite so simple and ingenuous as he seemed.  No,
really?  Miss So and So was shocked and peeved.  She was a
Gurneyite in her secret romancings.  Who could it be?  Miss Godbold
shook her large head and looked smug and sly.  No, she felt that
she ought not to tell.  How disappointing!  Well, if Miss So and So
would promise not to repeat the news?  Miss So and So did so
promise, and promptly passed the rumour on to Mrs. Everybody.  It
went from ear to ear, after each receiver had given a solemn
promise that it would not be repeated.

"But," said one lady, "Mr. Gurney does not approve of divorced
persons remarrying.  The sanctity of marriage--and all that."

"But how--?"

"I just happen to know.  A friend told me.  I rather suspect Mr.
Gurney of being a ritualist."

"Well, Mrs. Hallard's money might cause him to change his--
principles.  But how very--cynical."

Apparently, it did not occur to any of the ladies that the report
might be untrue.

Nor, "God forgive me", as Gurney put it to his secret self, was it
untrue in its deeper meaning, for, to Mr. Egbert Jones's curate Mr.
Slade's daughter had suddenly become a figure of mysterious and
poignant significance.  She was so different from--And Gurney got
down on his knees, and asked to be forgiven for feeling what he
should not feel.  But how could he help feeling that Rose Hallard
was a wonderful and a lovely person.  You had but to look at her
mouth and eyes.  Gurney wanted to look at her mouth and eyes, and
listen to her voice, and watch her hands, and know that the thing
that had been born in him was good.  Well, why should he not
cherish this strange new love, hide it in a chalice, and let his
adoration shine in some silent sanctuary of its own?  Was there sin
or shame in such a lovely tenderness?  How could there be, provided
that he did not betray it.

Gurney was troubled.  What of those morning walks with Mr. Slade?
Ought he to continue them if he cherished a guilty passion for Mr.
Slade's daughter?  Oh, dear, how old phrases did turn up, like poor
relations!  Guilty passion?  Could what he felt for Mrs. Hallard be
described as such?

Moreover, Gurney was not very comfortable at No. 7 Cashiobury
Terrace.  It seemed that the Misses Plimsoll, the furniture and the
bed had gone hard on him.  The little prim house had developed an
atmosphere of austere disapproval.  Nettles, nettles everywhere,
and not a smile on a face!  The Misses Plimsoll had heard of
Gurney's various activities, actual and otherwise.  He could feed a
tramp in their front garden.  He wore deplorable clothes.  He was a
revolutionary in his social credo, and yet he could pay court to
Mammon.

Said Miss Caroline to Miss Euphemia:  "I have doubts about Mr.
Gurney's--sincerity.  Are we harbouring a wolf in sheep's
clothing?"

Poor sheep!  Miss Caroline should have said ram.  And the fleece
that clothed the little opportunist was so very thin.

But the Misses Plimsoll did not approve.  They were less sedulous
in considering Gurney's comfort.  His socks ceased to be mended,
and eggs were hard-boiled or premature.  Gurney's world was very
much the curate's egg.

The Rev. John's passion for the truth led him to do a very
significant thing.  He could not take his morning walk with Mr.
Slade on false pretences, or he might feel that he had sand in his
shoes.  Why not tell Mr. Slade the truth, not as it concerned his
daughter, but in its implications--past and present?  Surely, Mr.
Slade would be the one person who could understand him, for Mr.
Slade had suffered in his own life.  So, Gurney took his courage in
his hands and displayed his dreadful secret to his friend.

"You have been so kind to me sir, that I don't wish our friendship
to rest--on false foundations."

"Something worrying you, John?"

Mr. Slade spoke the name lovingly, for was it not the name of the
friend who had set him free.

"Thank you, for that, sir, I should like to make a confession to
you, and to you alone."

Mr. Slade paused.  They had reached the western gate of Caroline
Gardens, and Mr. Slade turned towards it.

"Come in here.  Trees and shrubs don't prick up ears.  I think you
can trust me."

"I know I can."

Mr. Slade led Gurney to a particular seat, a seat that was secure
and associated with many memories, happy and otherwise.  He took
off his hat, and nursed it, and Gurney sat with his hands clasped
between his knees.

"When I was a very young man, sir, I did a most reckless thing.  It
has haunted me."

So, Gurney told Mr. Slade his secret, and Mr. Slade smiled inwardly
as he listened.  Was this the dreadful thing that oppressed John
Gurney's conscience?  How very innocent of him!  But Mr. Slade did
understand its implications, and more so than Gurney realized.
Gurney, as lover and man, had a golden cannon-ball chained to one
ankle.

"Well, that's all, sir.  I know you will respect my secret.  I feel
relieved to have told you.  I hope you don't think--"

Mr. Slade laid a hand on Gurney's knee.  "Thank you, John.  I too
had a secret.  Probably you know it."

Gurney nodded.

"A much more dreadful one than yours, John.  Well, I lived it down.
I have a feeling that if one lives to the best in one--things
somehow come right.  Besides, one can't do more."

"No, sir."

"Well, go on being Gurney.  And come to supper to-night."

"I don't know, sir--whether--I--"

"Feeling sensitive?"

"False pretences, sir.  Well, you see--"

Mr. Slade did see, but he did not say so.  The poor lad was in love
with his daughter, and was terrified of betraying the secret.

"Well, we'll leave it open, John.  Do what you feel like doing.  I
shall understand."

For a month Gurney did not enter the doorway of Sea View, though he
picked up Mr. Slade on most mornings, and walked with him to his
shop.  Sometimes, they were joined by Mr. Golightly, a Golightly
going grey, but as polished and resilient as of old.  Mr. Golightly
was one of those parishioners who liked the little curate, for,
though Mr. Golightly was the people's warden at St. Jude's, he had
discovered in the Rev. Egbert Jones certain prejudices.  Mr. Jones
was affable to Mr. Golightly in the vestry, but under God's own sky
he seemed to remember that Mr. Golightly was a draper.

"And so I am, and be dashed to them," said Mr. Golightly to his
wife.  "It's men like me who keep the Church and the Country going,
and I'm not good enough to dine with him.  Damn it, if that's
Christianity, I'd have done better under Nero."

Mrs. Golightly was a very comfortable woman.  She praised her
husband and did not reprove him.  After all, she had been very
happy with Mr. Golightly.

"Mr. Chatterway was different.  And after all, my dear, you have
done much more for Southfleet than Mr. Jones has."

Mr. Golightly shot his cuffs.  "Well, that's true, Mabel, old girl.
Didn't I give a ward to the cottage hospital, and get the new
sports ground going?  Old Jones is a snob.  Damn it, I prefer the
curate."

For, Gurney was quite happy to sit at Mr. Golightly's supper table,
and be smiled upon and pressed to take second helpings by that
motherly person Mr. Golightly's wife.  Gurney might have the
reputation of being a little advanced in his views upon sociology,
but he wasn't a snob, and he listened with grave interest to Mr.
Golightly's conversation.  For, was not Mr. Golightly a self-made
man, a study in worldly success, and yet generous and kindly, if
somewhat full of reminiscences.

Gurney was sensitive, and the sensitive suffer from feelings about
their fellows, especially so about those obtuse souls who go
bumping along life's pathways and with innocent egoism edge the
less stupid into the gutter.  Gurney worried about problems that
would have been mere swan's-down or gossamer to the vulgar.  If, as
the mystics say, each soul and body has its aura and that with the
"sensitive" that mysterious, spiritual nimbus is of much greater
compass in those of fine and delicate texture, then Gurney's aura
might be measured in yards in contrast to the coarser mortal's
inches.  Also, it was blue, and a very delicate blue.

Said Mrs. Hallard to her father:  "Have we--offended Mr. Gurney in
any way?"

Mr. Slade was peeling an apple.  "No my dear, I think not.  Gurney
is a man of rather fine feelings."

"I'm glad.  He hasn't been here for a long time."

"Reasons, Rose, known only to Gurney."

"And--you?"

"And me, but that is a trust."

Mrs. Hallard watched her father's clean and deliberate old hands
dealing with the apple.  How few people had a touch like his.

"I'm glad.  I have a feeling that Mr. Gurney has had some unhappy--"

Mr. Slade smiled at the apple.  "Eve in the garden, what!--I'm not
saying anything."

"I don't want you to.  I suppose that if one has suffered in one's
own life--"

"Yes, my dear.  One is blessed with compassion and understanding,
or should be.  What foul nonsense--!"

"Nonsense?"

"Yes, that everything should be made safe and easy and luscious for
humanity.  By jove, this is about the best apple I have grown!
Without struggle and suffering and those poignant things that stir
the soul, man is no more than an unlicked cub."

Mr. Slade was munching his apple with evident relish.

"Poor Mr. Gurney's apple was sour."

"Oh, Eve, Eve!  If all apples were sweet, my dear, where would the
contrasts be?  Sour apples and tummy pains are educative to youth."

Did Gurney in his stall on Sundays turn his eyes towards the Slade
pew?  He did so turn them.  And in the pulpit he was conscious of a
particular face, a serene and listening face that seemed more
luminous than any other.  Gurney, when he preached, tried to become
unconscious of individual faces, for a collection of normal English
faces does not encourage inspiration.  As a well-known humorist has
confessed, his urge often was to shout:  "Smile, damn you, smile!
Don't sit there like a lot of supercilious corpses!"  But there
were certain faces to whom Gurney could speak, for his preaching
was more conversational than rhetorical, and his vicar thought it
poor stuff.  There was no erudition in Gurney's sermons.  He was
rather like a child talking to children.

Yes, he could talk to those faces, Mrs. Richmond's, and Dr.
Richmond's, and Mr. Slade's and Mrs. Hallard's, and even to Mr.
Golightly's.  They were live, sincere, comprehending faces.  Then,
of course, there was Mr. Sawkins's face, rather like a mangy old
dog's, suspicious and watchful, as though Gurney was proposing to
give away his bone.  And Miss Godbold's like a bladder of lard, and
Mr. Egbert Jones's critical and patronizing.  There were certain
faces which Gurney did not wish to see.  But those other faces.
That particular face, so exquisite and gentle.

One Sunday Gurney found himself preaching upon Love, Divine Love.
He was being quite eloquent, until his eyes happened upon that
particular face.  Dear God, was he speaking to her?  And would she
suspect?  Gurney became suddenly self-conscious and face-shy.
Everybody seemed to be staring at him.  He began to fumble with his
words, even to stutter.  He paused, looked at the roof, recovered
himself, and continued, but with a more sacerdotal formality.  He
was conscious of flurry.  He wanted to get out of the pulpit.  In
fact he brought the discourse to a somewhat abrupt conclusion.

"And now--to God the Father--"

Mr. Slade and his daughter walked home together, alone.

"Did you notice?" said she.

"What, my dear?"

"Mr. Gurney nearly broke down."

"Did he?"

"Didn't you--?"

Mr. Slade prevaricated.  In fact, he had put two and two together,
Gurney's eyes fixed upon a particular point, and then--that sudden
embarrassment.  And Mr. Slade had wondered.

"Perhaps he saw Medusa."

"Who?"

"Or Miss Godbold, or Mr. Sawkins.  There are faces, my dear, that
almost make one want to spit."


Master George Hallard was home for the holidays, and Master George
had discovered a thing of which Southfleet was ignorant.  George
was a cricket enthusiast; he kept the cards of all the county
fixtures and filled in the results, and knew the names of all the
celebrities.  Mr. Slade, gently consenting, allowed George to
possess a cricket-pitch on one of the lawns, with a practice net to
give some protection to the vegetation.  George, aged ten, was not
yet much of a swiper, but he was dreaming of the days when he might
hit a ball over the old school cloisters.

The business was to find a bowler, for Mr. Slade could only trundle
balls underhand, and that was how George and Gurney had become such
cronies.  It had begun on the cliff, with George defending a poplar
tree with a new birthday bat, and Gurney trundling a compo ball to
him.  Gurney could bowl breaks from the on and from the off, and
cunning sneakers that looked innocent and were sly.  He had put
George out twice in an over,  though George was learning to hold a
straight bat.

"I say, sir, you do send them in."

"I used to play a bit at one time."

"Your turn now, sir."

Gurney had taken the bat, and George's first ball had tempted him.
He had caught it full and fair, and seen it bounce on the roadway,
and just miss a couple of old ladies on the further path.

"Gosh," said George, "that was a snorter," and he had set off to
recover the ball.  But Gurney had been shocked and contrite.

He had dropped the bat, and trotted off to apologize to the Indies.

"I am so very sorry.  I am afraid I startled you.  I did not mean
to hit so hard."

The old ladies had appeared to enjoy the incident.

"Why, Mr. Gurney, you are quite a cricketer."

He was or had been.  J. Gurney had been his school's star-turn, and
he had played on occasions for the Surrey Colts.  There was more
wiriness and wiliness in Gurney than appeared.

Now, Master George was at home again, and stumps and net were up,
and Mr. Slade had given his grandson a real leather ball.  "Now,
don't hit it too hard, George.  Balls cost money."  "But they are
made to be hit, Grandpa."  George was ambitious.  He might be in a
very lowly position at school, but there was no reason why he
should not play for the third eleven, especially with coaching from
Mr. Gurney.  George went in pursuit of his friend, only to find Mr.
Gurney very elusive.

"Hallo, George.  Had a good term?"

Gurney always appeared to be in a hurry, and busy about something,
and George was baulked and puzzled.  Gurney smiled at you just as
of old, but he had an awful lot of duties to perform, and wretched
people to visit, and every evening he seemed to be preparing a
sermon.  George did not attach much importance to Mr. Gurney's
sermons, but he had great respect for Mr. Gurney's bowling arm.

George complained to his grandfather.  "Mr. Gurney seems awful
busy."

"He is, my dear."

"He doesn't seem to have time to play cricket."

Gurney had deprived himself during the holidays of his morning
parade with Mr. Slade.  In cherishing his secret, though he was
compelled to avoid the boy, such seeming churlishness hurt him.
But a solution offered itself.  Gurney had started a Men and Boys'
Cricket Club, and the new Sports Ground was available, and Gurney
smote his forehead.  "You silly ass, why didn't you think of that
before?"

Gurney turned up one morning in time to catch Mr. Slade.

"George in, sir?"

"Yes, still busy with the jam jar, I think."

"Could I speak to him?"

Mr. Slade turned back, and hailed his grandson through the window.

"George, Mr. Gurney wants you."

George abandoned the jam pot, and was out like a flash.  Gurney was
waiting at the gate.

"Hallo, George.  I'm not quite so busy now.  If you come up to the
new Sports Ground after tea, we'll have a little practice."

George's face was that of a cherub.  "I say, sir, it's awfully--
Yes, I'll be there."

"Good.  I'll bowl you leg-breaks."

So, George and Gurney enjoyed themselves, with others, for Gurney
had other lads to coach, and was putting in practice himself as a
new member of the Southfleet eleven.  George would go home to his
mother, with his little freckled face aglow.

"He only bowled me once in three overs."

What an innocent business, yet certain of the Southfleet snoopers
asserted that Mr. Gurney was courting the mother through the son.



VIII


Mr. Slade and his daughter sat in the shade of the marquee, for the
day was a scorcher.  Mrs. Hallard was in white, and her father wore
a grey lounge suit and a Panama hat.  The Gentlemen of Southfleet,
rather a scratch lot, were playing an officers' eleven from
Shoreness, and though Gurney had taken three wickets for seventeen
runs, the soldiers had knocked up a score of 153, and five of the
Southfleet Gentlemen were out for 61.  Mrs. Richmond had come to
sit beside Mr. Slade and his daughter, to watch Charles joined at
the wicket by Mr. Gurney.  Charles was a swiper, and he had been
lucky, for the out-field had missed two catches.  Gurney looked
like a boy going out to do battle with grown men.  His flannels
were somewhat yellow, and his trousers rather short in the leg, and
he wore a black cap with the peak pulled well down over his nose.

Mr. Slade heard a titter behind him.  He glanced over his shoulder
and saw Mrs. Jones adjusting her pince-nez, and showing a splendour
of yellow teeth.

"Really how odd!  Shrunk in the wash, I presume."

The Rev. Egbert was beside her, bland and complacent, and Mr. Slade
sniffed.

"A bit yellow, I admit," he thought, "but no yellower than the
lady's teeth.  Well, wait and see."

Said the voice:  "I did not know he played any games."

The vicar boomed:  "David and Goliath.  I am afraid we are a
defeated side."

Mr. Slade nudged his daughter and winked at her.

"Like to bet on our winning, Rose?"

Mrs. Jones turned her pince-nez upon him.  What could an old shop-
keeper know about cricket?

Gurney took his place at the wicket, was given centre, and waited
for the visitors' fast bowler to attack him.  Gurney's pads looked
too large for him, which they were, being Club equipment.  He had a
rather peculiar stance; he crouched, left elbow forward, bat
straight, and his attitude appeared to amuse Mr. Jones.  What an
odd little figure!  Gurney's first minute was not impressive.  The
fast bowler had been dealing out death and destruction, and Gurney
played him with respect while he got his eye in.  He stone-walled,
and stone-walling can be dull for the spectators.  Two overs
passed, and Charles hit a boundary, but Gurney had not snicked or
sliced a single run.

"Poor little man," said the vicaress.  "He seems quite afraid to
hit anything."

"Ha, wait, madam!" thought Mr. Slade, "don't show your teeth too
soon.  And I do wish you would keep your mouth shut.  Toad-in-the-
hole, what!"

Charles hit another snorter, and it appeared to rouse Gurney to
emulation, but he had not yet warmed up to the smiting stage.  He
had a quick eye and a cunning bat, he began to snick and hook for
ones and twos, responding to Charles's shout of:  "Run, sir."
Gurney ran like a hare, in spite of those enormous pads.  The
austere life he led kept him extraordinarily fit.

The score mounted steadily, and the bowling was changed, Gurney
seemed to like the fast fellow, and was snicking him and cutting
him.  The soldiers tried their "Googly".  Now, Mr. Gurney himself
was a "Googly" and knew all about the tricks.  He waited for the
ball that suited him and hit.  The ball came bounding into the
marquee, and had the impertinence to end its career in Mrs. Jones's
lap.

"How's that, madam?" chirped Mr. Slade.

Mrs. Richmond laughed.  She had a very delightful laugh, but it did
not appeal to the vicaress.

With Gurney and Charles both well set and knocking the bowling
about the score reached its 100.  Fifty-three to go, and four
wickets to fall.  Mr. Slade became aware of someone fidgeting in
his proximity and he traced this restlessness to Rev. Egbert Jones.
Mr. Jones was sitting with a set smirk on his face; he kept tilting
his chair, and Mr. Slade became wise as to the reason for this
restlessness.  Mr. Jones was not pleased.  He was jealous of
Gurney's prowess.

When the score had reached 120, Charles was caught in the out-
field.  He had made 43 runs, and he came in looking hot and happy.
He smiled at his mother, and took off his cap to Rose Hallard.  Mr.
and Mrs. Jones he did not seem to see.

"Well played, Charles," said Mr. Slade.

"Gurney's great, isn't he?  We may pull it off."

Mr. and Mrs. Jones looked glum.

But they did not pull it off.  The last batsmen were rabbits, and
though Gurney knocked up another thirteen and carried his bat, the
soldiers won by eleven runs.  They were pleased with the win, and
they seemed equally pleased with the padre.  It had been a great
game, and a sporting game.  Gurney walked in triumph to the
marquee, with the opposing captain and the fast-bowler on either
side of him.  They were big men, and they made Gurney look like a
boy, but he was not small in spirit.

"Well played, padre."

The spectators applauded Mr. Gurney.  It had been a gallant effort,
and a source of surprise to Southfleet.  Mrs. Hallard was smiling
at him, and there was more in her smile than met the eye.  The Rev.
John could shine among other men.  Mr. Jones was standing up and
solemnly clapping his hands, but without making much sound.  His
wife was squinting, which she did when certain negative emotions
stirred in her.

"Well played, Gurney," boomed the vicar, "I did not know you had it
in you."

Mr. Slade sniffed.

"Sour grapes, you pompous ass!"


The Rev. John Gurney's fifty-three runs caused his credit to rise
several degrees on Southfleet's social thermometer.  Damn it, the
little parson was hot stuff with the bat!  And cricket is cricket
in England.  Dr. Richmond pulled up his new car to congratulate
him.  Mr. Sawkins was peeved.  How could a fellow be an out and out
Radical and yet play cricket?  Mr. Robert Smiles had to have his
sneer, but Mr. Smiles would have funked fast bowling.

"Quite the flannelled toff, ain't he!  Knocking a ball about with a
lot of gents, with people starving."

A fellow workman retorted upon Mr. Smiles.  "Yes, and don't you
wish you could do it."

"Me?  I've got other things to--"

"Go it, old Snarly.  The little man's got guts."

Was it the halo with which his prowess on the cricket-field had
hallowed him, or was it the halo about another head that inspired
the Rev. John Gurney to be a little more bold in his sermons?  If
he was hot stuff on the cricket pitch should he not be more ardent
in the pulpit?  Not that he intended to preach that particular
sermon, at least--not yet.  When he had knocked up a hundred for
Southfleet, he might dare to do such a thing.  None the less, there
was more audacity in Gurney's sermons, and a part of the
congregation responded to them.  Whatever the cynics may say
humanity responds to an ideal when it is sponsored by a man whose
faith and courage are beyond reproach.  The young were with Gurney;
he carried a torch, not a bottle of pasteurised milk.  Some of the
old too were with him, Mr. Slade and those who had acquired
gentleness and a benign smile.  Mr. Sawkins sat as though he could
have snorted.  The Rev. Egbert listened with a hand shading his
face, and a complacency that was disturbed.  He fidgeted; he
frowned, for even Mr. Jones could divine upon many of those faces a
rapt attentiveness that was apt to be lacking when he orated.

"I think I shall have to speak to Gurney.  He is getting too
emotional."

Emily agreed with him.

"Bad taste.  We don't want--er--chapel--atmosphere."

"Indeed we do not.  I have always condemned revivalist methods.
Hysteria in the pulpit is bad for a congregation."

Mr. Jones put out feelers among his fellows, but the response was
not as sympathetic as he expected.  Mr. Jones had no way with him;
he was not welcomed at bedsides and at back doors; he talked down,
not on the level.  He had no sympathy for sin, and Gurney did not
call it sin.  It was frailty in the flesh, from which all mortals
suffered.  The Rev. Egbert had never made a splendid ass of
himself; his daily carrot was just carrot.  And he had never
knocked up a century at cricket.

It was after the preaching of a particular sermon that the
wonderful thing happened to Gurney.  He had been visiting a sick
man in the Old Town, none other than old Rawlins, the Socrates of
Southfleet pier, and he turned into Caroline Gardens to sit and
meditate for a moment upon the refreshing frankness of Samuel
Rawlins.  Old Rawlins was veritable Kipling, and Gurney read his
Kipling.  But on the particular seat he surprised a particular
person, and in panic he might have passed her by had she not risen.

"Oh, Mr. Gurney, you are the very man I wanted to see."

Good Heavens, how could that be so?  Gurney, standing bareheaded,
realized that she too was standing.

"Please sit down, Mrs. Hallard."

She smiled and humoured him, but Gurney did not sit.

"It's about my Eliza.  She is laid up with rheumatism and a heart.
She would so like you to come and see her."

Almost, Gurney blushed.  If Eliza had a heart, so had he.

"With pleasure.  But ought it not to be Mr. Jones?"

"You are Eliza's choice, Mr. Gurney, and it is a free country."

There was a pause, and then she said:  "You see, you have something
to give to us all--like--the--the--humanity--in your last sermon."

Then, a sudden shyness seemed to fall upon them.  Gurney stood
holding his hat, and feeling like a knight who had been crowned
with flowers by his lady.  So, she had liked that sermon.  He was
the chosen of her cook.  And she was there on the seat, with a
strange sheen in her eyes, complete for him in all her loveliness.

Gurney moistened his lips, and looked at her hands.

"That is very--kind of you.  I--I try to speak--what is in me."

She looked up at his shy face.

"Yes--what is in us, Mr. Gurney."

And suddenly he became formal.  "What would be the most convenient
hour, Mrs. Hallard, for me to visit--Eliza."

"Any time that suits you.  I know your day is very full."

So was Gurney's heart.  He gave her a little, self-conscious bow,
hesitated, put on his hat.

"I am always--your--devoted servant."

Devoted?  Oh dear, had he said too much?  He gave a jerk to his
hat, and fled.


Rose remained on the seat.  There was laughter in her eyes, but it
was loving laughter.  Gurney feared no fast bowler, but he seemed
to fear her face.  Always, your devoted servant!  Now, what was
John Gurney's secret?  Was all this sensitive self-effacement due
to that secret, or was it the shyness of a romantic boy?  Her
father knew, but she knew enough of her father to realize that when
he was trusted with a secret he kept it.  She sat serenely sunning
herself in her meditations.  Gurney was no boy, and she was a
mature woman.  She was wise as to many things, life's contrasts,
the profound differences between things and people.  She had come
to know her values, as Lucy Richmond knew them, and to compare the
sensual selfishness of the man she had married and discarded with
the clean selflessness and simple courage of a John Gurney.  Hector
Hallard was dead.  It was reported that he had died of drink in
Rio.  She had not grieved greatly; she would have found grief had
she discovered in the son anything of the father.  Yes, no doubt
Hector would have looked down with superciliousness on Gurney,
while she, somehow, was looking up at him, though she was an inch
taller than he was.  How utterly good it was when you could trust a
man, and feel that if you gave him your faith and affection they
would be safe from treachery and disaster.

Gurney was back at Cashiobury Terrace, profoundly moved, and almost
as profoundly disturbed.  Had he really said to her, "I am always
your devoted servant?"  He had.  And had she thought it
impertinence?  Well--Mr. Gurney's dinner was ready for him, but he
had other food to feed upon.  Boiled mutton and caper sauce!  No,
he could not confront boiled mutton.  But how to explain this
abstinence to the Misses Plimsoll?  They might feel hurt, and
Gurney had a horror of hurting people, unless he deemed it to be
his duty to do so.  He rang the bell, and apologized to Miss
Caroline.

"I am so sorry.  I--I have indigestion.  I don't want to waste your
excellent food, Miss Plimsoll, but I think I will refrain to-day."

Miss Caroline was quite nice about it.  She said:  "Try a
'Beecham'."

Both Rose and Gurney may have over-simplified their values and
their feelings, but those were the days before Freud, and it had
not become fashionable to peer into the imagined and dark recesses
of the self and discover slime and strange creatures there.  We
speak of Victorian repression, but may not a part of it have been
the self-discipline of people who believed in something.  People
who believe in nothing have every incentive for putting both feet
in the trough.  Gurney was Gurney, the year One, A.D.  In his
spiritual make-up he was timeless, a man who divined in himself the
mysterious presence of God.

Meanwhile Eliza waited for him, the good and loyal and sometimes
difficult Eliza.  She had grown even more out-spoken in growing
grey.  No, she did not want a pomposity like the Rev. Egbert Jones
sitting beside her bed and making solemn and sententious noises.
She wanted a man to whom she could talk, and simpler Southfleet
could talk to Gurney.

Gurney rang the bell, and waited, trying to appear the devoted
servant on the doorstep.  Would he be confronted with--her?  He was
not.  Rachel, the parlour-maid, admitted him.

"I have come to see Eliza."

"Yes, sir.  Please step in."

Gurney found Eliza in her neat back bedroom, with its view of the
garden, sitting propped up in bed, with a Bible on her knees.
Eliza took her religion, like her cooking, very seriously, and she
was apt to be short-tempered when she could not cook, especially
those jam-rolls and treacle-tarts which Mr. Slade loved.

"I do hate being a noosance."

Gurney sat and smiled at her.  "Yes, it is a nuisance, isn't it,
Eliza, when you can't do the things you want to do.  But I'm sure
it is not you who are the nuisance.  I have heard of your cooking."

"Have you--now, sir?"

"What's more I have enjoyed it, haven't I?  I remember a suet roll
with raisins and treacle sauce."

"Now, fancy you remembering that, sir.  Mr. Slade does love a bit
of good suet."

"Yes, and it depends upon what we make of it.  I have a feeling
that God respects good cooking."

Eliza sighed and looked out of the window, and Gurney, looking in
the same direction, saw what she saw.  Mr. Slade, as a gardener,
was moving with the times and had become a disciple of Miss Jekyll,
and he was deep in a new border, tying up Hellenium and Michaelmas
Daisies.  Mr. Slade was in his shirtsleeves, and wearing his Panama
hat, and at the moment he was helping his hands by carrying a hank
of twine between his teeth.  Eliza gazed at him as though she could
never be quite happy unless she was cooking for Mr. Slade.

"He does love 'is garden, bless 'im."

Gurney watched the serene old figure.  "And--I think, Eliza,
everybody loves him."

Eliza closed her eyes, and let her head go back on the pillow.

"A wonderful life 'e's led, sir.  What I call a sort of sermon in
trousers."

Gurney gave a quick lift of the head.  "That's really very apt,
Eliza.  Quite a remarkable phrase.  I must remember it."

Eliza opened her eyes at him.  She was sure that Mr. Gurney was
quite a remarkable person.

"Yes, he's 'appy, and he deserves to be, sir.  I do wish that
before he goes 'e could see Mrs. Rose suited with a proper man.
Her first, 'e was a rotten bad lot."

Gurney looked out of the window.  "But perhaps Mrs. Hallard is
content as she is."

Eliza looked at Mr. Gurney.  "No woman is, sir, until the right man
comes along.  That's my opinion."

Gurney was mute, but the inner woman in Eliza was eloquent.  Eliza
had made a discovery.  Mr. Gurney was the very man for Mr. Slade's
daughter, but Eliza did not say so.



IX


Was it love, or the madness thereof that persuaded John Gurney to
preach that particular sermon?  It was the address he had submitted
to Mr. Slade, but in some measure Gurney had modified it, not
because he had watered down his principles, but out of a new
tenderness for the world of men.  There was no Hell Fire and
Brimstone in Gurney.  His creed was founded on compassion, and on a
more subtle understanding of the urges that activate humanity.  Mr.
Slade's shrewd wisdom and his acceptance of the realities had
helped to clarify Gurney's credo, and he too could feel disgust for
sentimental humbug, especially the humbug indulged in by self-
interested reformers.

Gurney did speak of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, but in dealing
with it he followed the example of Dr. Samuel Smiles.  He asserted
that the making of money was no sin, provided that money was used
in a wise and Christian way.  It was the lust for gold, and the
worshipping of it that tainted the economic scheme.  Men were of
varying value in the community, and there was no injustice in the
recognition of special talent and character.  Struggle and effort,
patience and self-restraint were good for the soul, provided that
in the process man remembered that all good things came from God.

It was an eloquent sermon, a sweetly reasonable sermon, and it
caused some faces to light up, others to grow sullen.  Gurney might
be preaching to the lover in himself, and to that beloved face, but
there were other members of the congregation who wanted to
misunderstand him.  Prejudice looks only one way, and the way that
it chooses.  Preach Christ Crucified, and there are men who will
crucify you.

The Rev. Egbert Jones, shading his face with a hand, listened and
was offended.  Really, Gurney was going too far.  This was rank
Radicalism, demagogy, a most unseemly lapse from good taste.  Mr.
Jones grew restless.  Was he jealous of his curate?  Oh no, of
course not.  He was sincere in deploring Gurney's bad taste, this
Nonconformist ranting.  Mr. Jones peered through his fingers, and
was unpleasantly moved to suspect that a part of the congregation
liked this stuff.  Faces were so significant, and some of those
interested and applauding faces belonged to parishioners who
mattered, Dr. Richmond and his wife, Mr. Golightly, old Slade, and
old Slade's daughter.  Well, of course old Slade would suck up such
stuff.  It was part of the pose of the reformed offender.

"I must really talk to Gurney.  I can't have hysteria in my
pulpit."

Mr. Sawkins sat and glowered, but Gurney did not see Mr. Sawkins.
Why should he?  Mr. Sawkins was a scruffy old dog who had grown
old in the wrong way.  He was unclean in person and in mind.  Mr.
Sawkins loved money as he loved himself, and Gurney's sermon
sounded like a personal insult.

"Damn the fellow.  I believe he is preaching at me!"

In brief, the cap fitted Mr. Sawkins so neatly that he was moved to
wait for Mr. Gurney and have it out with him.  He waited outside
the porch, only to find that he was one of a group, and that he did
not belong to it.  Mr. Slade was there.  Of course, Slade would be
there.

Mr. Slade saw that Mr. Sawkins was in a pet, and it made him
mischievous.

"Morning, Mr. Sawkins."

"Morning," grunted the other.

"Wonderful morning, almost as good as the sermon."

Mr. Sawkins looked like chewing his beard.  "I beg to differ,
Slade."

"What, don't you like the morning?"

Mr. Sawkins glowered at him.  Facetious old fool!

Then, Gurney appeared, carrying with him into the sunlight a rather
white, stiff face.  He tried to smile, and the smile was brittle
ice.  There had been words in a corner of the vestry, and within
hearing of the choir, Mr. Jones had, with an immense solemnity, and
the suggestion of a duty unwillingly performed, reproved Gurney,
and Gurney had shown temper.

"I shall be glad if you will call on me, Gurney, after evensong.  I
wish to discuss--what you have just said."

Gurney had been slipping off his surplice.

"I'm sorry, sir.  What is in me must out."

"Ah, yes, Gurney, exactly; what is in you."

"You mean, sir--?"

"We can only give what we have, and if that something is--not--of
the--"

"I stand by what I said, sir."

"Ah, you do!  May I remind you that the Church of England has a
tradition, and that my church is not a Little Bethel."

Gurney had recovered his temper, hung up his surplice and left the
vestry, and here, in the sunlight, he saw the faces of friends.
Mr. Sawkins might be there, but Gurney did not think that Mr.
Sawkins mattered.

"Well, John, you gave us an excellent sermon."

"I'm glad you liked it, Mr. Slade."

Gurney dared to glance at another face.  It smiled at him and
nodded.  "I--too."  And she, at the age of thirty, was supposed to
be the most wealthy woman in Southfleet.  Well, if she had not
quarrelled with his discourse upon the peril of riches, need he
worry?  Worry?  Dear God, he had not fully realized his position.
Even if he had been free, how could a penurious little curate have
paid court to Mr. Slade's daughter without causing the vulgar world
to mock.  "Do as I say, but not as I do!"  Yes, and such a romance
might have been misunderstood even by some of these who listened to
him.

He felt someone take his arm.  It was Mr. Slade.

"I am going to look at--my--grave, John.  Come with me."

"Your--grave, sir?"

"Yes."

Said Mr. Slade's daughter:  "I must go, and help Rachel.  Eliza is
not up, yet."

Gurney raised his hat to Mrs. Hallard, and was led away by Mr.
Slade.  Mr. Sawkins, baffled, followed Mrs. Hallard.  He overtook
her.  He raised his hat and presented her with the Sawkins smile.

"May I ask, ma'am, if you liked that sermon?"

"I did."

"Well, all I can say is that it was very--broad-minded of you.  I
am afraid I am more prejudiced."

"Are you, Mr. Sawkins?"

"So, you don't object to your property being disposed of in the
pulpit?"

"It wasn't quite that, was it?"

"That's how I read it.  Of course, fellows without a penny are
always ready to give away other people's pounds."

Rose smiled quite sweetly.  "Some--fellows, Mr. Sawkins.  I'm
afraid I must hurry on," and she shed him.

Mr. Slade and Gurney had arrived at Mr. Truslove's grave.  There
were fresh flowers here, flowers from Mr. Slade's garden.  He was
still holding Gurney's arm.

"So, you have done it, John."

"Done it, sir?"

"Preached that sermon."

"Yes, but not quite--as--"

"No, not quite, but I think you have crossed your Rubicon.  You
will be able to distinguish the sheep from the goats."

Mr. Slade had removed his hat, and Gurney did likewise.  Mr. Slade
let go of Gurney's arm, and bent down to make some rearrangement of
the flowers.

"Here lies John Truslove, Gentleman.  You and he would have got on
well together.  Both of you Johns, too."

"Was Mr. Truslove a great friend of yours, sir?"

"He gave me my chance and my freedom.  What every man should have,
though not all can take their chances."

"But they should have that chance."

"Of course."


Gurney's interview with his vicar proved less fearsome than he had
feared.  In fact, Mr. Egbert Jones made Mr. Gurney what he
considered to be an apology, for Mr. Jones was not without
discretion.  He said that in the heat of the moment he might have
spoken more strongly than he had intended, and that Gurney must try
to forgive him his affection for the high traditions of the Church.
Gurney was ready to accept sweet reasonableness, and was reassured
by it.  He said that he had done nothing but serve his Imitatio
Christi, and the Sermon on The Mount.

"Quite, quite, my dear Gurney, but one has to remember that some
people have delicate stomachs.  Adapt--the food--to the
parishioner.  Too much red meat--may--produce an attack of
spiritual dyspepsia."

Gurney smiled and nodded.  "Consider the frailties and prejudices
of man, sir?"

"Exactly, Gurney, exactly."

But had John Gurney overheard the conversation that had passed
between Egbert and Emily across the Sunday dinner-table, he might
have questioned Mr. Jones's sincerity.  Mrs. Jones was not without
worldly shrewdness.  Any schism in the parish would be deplorable.
They had to face the fact that Gurney had a certain following in
the congregation.  No, and Mrs. Jones helped herself to more mint
sauce, if Gurney was proving an incubus, and Egbert proposed to get
rid of him, would it not be wiser to wait for some more flagrant
lapse?  Such a lapse was not impossible.  It might provide adequate
evidence to persuade people that Gurney was not a suitable person
for such a parish as St. Jude's.  In fact, Mrs. Jones might have
said:  "Give him sufficient rope to hang himself," but she did not
cultivate such candour.

So much for the Rev. Egbert and his Emily, but Gurney was not to
escape unscathed from public controversy.  Mr. Sawkins had not had
his bite, and was sore about it, and he was a persistent person, a
true product of the Inland Revenue.  He aired his opinions among
his cronies at the club, and it was agreed between them that this
little parson needed chastening.

Moreover, Mr. Sawkins, and men who were much more reasonable and
right than he was, had a case.  The world was entering upon one of
those storm periods when Emperors and engine-drivers seem to share
a grievance, and to be blown up with the wind of unrest.  Were not
the Germans rattling the sword and building battleships, and in
England the Dreadnought had been born.  There was trouble in the
country, too much trouble according to the conservatively-minded.
Agitators were abroad.  Industry growled and creaked.  Life
appeared to be approaching one of those cosmic cycles of storm and
change which are inevitable, but which shock the cautious.

And here was a little chit like Gurney putting his small spoon in
the pot and helping to stir it.  Of course, Mr. Jones was a very
sound man, but he could be too smooth and easy.  If Mr. Jones could
not keep his curate in order, then someone ought to try and do it
for him.

"I'll tackle the fellow," said Mr. Sawkins.

That he was quite the wrong sort of fellow to do such a thing was
not apparent to his club cronies.

The encounter took place in Caroline Terrace, immediately opposite
Mr. Sawkins's hotel.  He had been waiting for his man, and
coincidence and Gurney obliged him.  Mr. Sawkins was sitting in one
of the balconies when he saw Gurney approaching.  Gurney stopped to
speak to a nursemaid, and to make friendly noises to the baby in
the pram, and Mr. Sawkins dashed for his hat and went forth to give
battle.

"Morning, Gurney.  May I have a word with you?"

The Rev. John Gurney was bending over the pram, and snapping his
fingers at a smiling infant.  The nursemaid's gaze was benign.
Gurney was known to most of the Southfleet nursemaids.

"A gentleman wants to speak to you, sir."

Gurney's head emerged from under the pram hood.

"So I see."

Neither of them had spoken in irony, but Mr. Sawkins took it as
such.  He was like a man with a sore corn, and inevitably it would
be trodden on.

"Good morning, Mr. Sawkins.  What can I do for you?"

Mr. Sawkins, with an ominous face, pointed to the gate of Caroline
Gardens.

"Better come in here.  You won't like what I'm going to say."

"Shan't I, Mr. Sawkins?"

"No, you won't."

Gurney looked him in the face and smiled.  "Then why should I
listen.  Is it that you have an unpleasant duty to perform?"

More irony!  Such a duty was not unpleasant to Mr. Sawkins.

"Well, you had better hear it, young man.  It is for your own
good."

"Why are unpleasant things always good--for the other fellow?"

Gurney was having the best of it, yes, distinctly so, but he walked
with Mr. Sawkins into the gardens.

"Is this sufficiently private for you, sir?"

"Anybody can hear what I've got to say."

"Then, say it, Mr. Sawkins.  By all means say it."

Mr. Sawkins glared, and drew a deep breath.

"There are members of the congregation, Gurney, who take exception
to the subversive doctrines you are spreading."

This was quite good for Mr. Sawkins, but it did not remove the
smile from Gurney's face.

"What doctrines?  Have I been guilty of heresy?"

"You're upsetting people, giving the lower orders wrong notions."

"Would you define the lower orders for me, Mr. Sawkins?"

"You know what I mean."

"Do I?  I take it you do not include yourself.  But, surely,
according to our creed, all men are equal before God."

"Humbug!"

"Wait one moment.  I did not say that they were equal in capacity
or in social value.  They are equal as human souls--to whom one
should accord--"

"Say it straight out.  You're a Communist."

This was a dreadful word, and somewhat novel, but it left Gurney
smiling.

"Yes, Mr. Sawkins, in spiritual matters I suppose I am a Communist,
but in worldly matters I am--well, what am I?  Are men all of the
same worth--in their contributions to society?  No, they are not.
I can follow two lines--the Sermon on the Mount, and that saying of
our Lord's, 'Render unto Caesar--'"

This should have satisfied Mr. Sawkins, for it was a very fair
exposition of the case, but when an old dog is in a bad humour and
wants to growl, he may go on growling even if you offer him a bone.
Besides, the bone may not be the genuine article, or poisoned.

"That's not what you said on Sunday."

"I say it now, sir."

"Yes, when you are cornered."

Gurney was going white about the lips, but he continued to smile.

"No, not exactly cornered, sir, and I will go as far as to say that
fools will always be fools, and that sheep will always need a sheep-
dog and a shepherd.  Nor can you make a silk purse out of a sow's
ear."

"I beg your pardon," said Mr. Sawkins, "are you being personal?"

"That is for you to judge, sir.  If you feel like a sow's ear, well--
perhaps--"

Mr. Slade would have loved this naughtiness, but Mr. Sawkins, who
had been waiting to be insulted, seized the offence.

"Young man, I have attended St. Jude's Church for nearly twelve
years, and if you think that a man of my age and position is going
to be insulted by a pup of a subordinate--"

"Then it is the sow's ear, sir.  I say no more."

"I should think not, indeed.  I shall see the vicar about this."

"By all means do so, Mr. Sowkins."

"Sir!"

But Gurney, having been tempted by that wicked interchange of
vowels, felt contrite, and apologized.

"No, I should not have said that, sir."

Mr. Sawkins was not to be mollified.  "You may live to regret it,
young man."

Mr. Sawkins did take his grievance to the Rev. Egbert Jones, but
Mr. Sawkins was the parish complainer, and in his heart of hearts
Mr. Jones loathed him.  Moreover, Mr. Jones was offended by Mr.
Sawkins's suggestion that he could not control his own curate, and
in his own bland way Mr. Jones was almost as rude to Mr. Sawkins as
Gurney had been.  They parted in a state of heat.

None the less, Gurney had made an enemy, and one who boasted that
he belonged to the bull-dog breed, whatever that may mean.  In Mr.
Sawkins's case it did not postulate pride of purpose, but a malice
that endured and waited and watched for its opportunity.  Old men,
having ceased to be interesting to women, may grudge the young that
privilege, or take pleasure in playing the good uncle to romantic
youth.  Mr. Sawkins was no good uncle.  He had been nastily sensual
in secret, and maybe this baulked lust had helped to sour him, for
Mr. Sawkins had been a very unsuccessful Juan.  There are some men
whom no woman can stomach.

Gurney confessed his naughtiness to Mr. Slade, and Mr. Slade rubbed
the seat of his trousers with one hand, and chuckled.

"You called him Sowkins!"

"I did, sir, much to my regret, but--"

"No buts, John, no buts; an excellent kick applied to--Well, well,
you hit Sowkins for six.  But, mind you, he won't forget it.  Old
dogs can wait for their bite."

"I fail to see, sir, how he can get it."

Which assurance was terribly misplaced, though Gurney could not be
expected to foresee a disastrous complex of coincidences.  Mr.
Slade, still chuckling, and not yet forgetful of the flavour of Mr.
Sawkins's footgear, passed the story to his daughter.

"Did he really call Mr. Sawkins--Sowkins?"

"I take John to be a truthful person."

"How lovely!"

And Rose Hallard's opinion of Gurney took on a new appreciation and
flavour, which goes to show that wit and even rude wit, can provide
a laughing garland.



X


The Misses Plimsoll, to whom the habits of their lodger were as
familiar as the condition of his under-garments, noticed that Mr.
Gurney disappeared regularly for a whole day, about once a month.
They gathered that he spent the day in London, visiting friends,
but on one occasion, when investigating the pockets of Gurney's
spare trousers, for the Misses Plimsoll considered it a duty to
attend to the linings of pockets, Miss Euphemia discovered a most
surprising and enlightening object, the halves of two tickets that
had been used at a notorious music-hall.  There had been two
tickets, mark you, and Miss Euphemia did not miss the point.

She showed them to her sister.  "Look what I've found."

"Well--I never!" said Miss Caroline.

"The Empire--too!"

"A disgraceful place!"

Now, how did Miss Caroline know that?

"Two tickets!"

"Then he must have taken somebody."

"Fancy taking anybody--there!"

"And who would anybody be?"

Miss Caroline pursed up her lips over that question.  She supposed
that you did not take respectable persons to a music-hall.  And
Gurney, of all people!  Really, life could be packed with
surprises.

"What had I better do with them?" asked her sister.

"Put them back, of course."

"Oughtn't we to burn them?"

Miss Caroline was in no mood to condone or cover up such an
indiscretion.

"No, put them back.  And say nothing about it."

"Of course not."

But the temptation was too strong for the dear ladies.

The Misses Plimsoll were friends of a particular person, and in the
course of conversation, intimate and engaging gossip, that person
heard about the horrid things that had been found in Mr. Gurney's
pocket.  Was it not extraordinary?  Was it not disturbing?  But,
please, say nothing about it.  Their friend promised to preserve
the secret.  Ye Gods and little fishes, yes.  The information was
too valuable and too significant to be shared with any casual quid-
nunc.  The situation needed exploring.


Gurney travelled third-class, nor was there any studied spruceness
in his appearance.  He had a pensive, serious look, and mostly he
gazed out of the window at a dull and very agricultural landscape,
or at the deplorable suburbs of the great city.  Yet, Gurney had an
affection for those shabby streets; they had been a part of his
life, and to him they were not as the hypersensitive and the
supercilious saw them, rat-runs, rabbit hutches, noisome places
full of sub-human creatures.  There might be a roughness and a
vulgar candour about those cockneys, but they were very much alive,
even in body-odour and esprit de corps, and they could be warm-
hearted and generous, especially to each other.  Gurney gazed a
little sadly at the roofs and chimney-pots and back yards, the home-
made pigeon-lofts and scraps of garden, the factories, the
churches.  What a lot of humbug there was in the world.  The
earnest and the erudite might hold up hands of horror and
compassion over these slums.  Such things should not be.  No,
perhaps not, but what a mistake it was to assume that man was a
lousy and drunken savage because he did not have geraniums in his
front garden, or iron railings to protect it, or bay windows
decorated with mock-Gothic pillars.

Gurney walked out of Fenchurch Street Station, and breathed
familiar and friendly savours.  He would like to have strolled down
the Commercial Road and into Dockland.  Great fellows, some of
those dockers!  But the day was to be given to duty, sad and
serious duty, and to the shadow of a live regret that walked with
him along the crowded pavements.  Gurney was full of his own past,
and a poignant present.  He had not troubled his head about any
portion of Southfleet having been on the train with him.  A strange
innocence possessed him.  He had not seen a particular person
following him along the platform and down the station stairs.

Gurney walked, and lingered as he walked, up Cheapside and into St.
Paul's Churchyard and down Ludgate Hill.  All this was the stuff of
his boyhood, smells, shop-windows, traffic, save that the smell of
petrol was beginning to replace the good old odour of horse-
droppings.  Nor did urchins in red jackets scurry about with super-
dustpans to clean up those self-same droppings.  Change and decay!
Did man really progress?  Would another Christopher Wren ever
create another St. Paul's?  Gurney had searched for the beloved toy-
shop in Cheapside, and finding that it had been transfigured into a
gentleman's outfitters, he had sighed.  Sweeting's oysters!  He had
never been able to afford oysters; he could never remember having
eaten an oyster, though Southfleet cultivated them.  The dome of
St. Paul's floated high above him.  He entered the cathedral, and
sat down--to meditate.

Oh, the Magdalen!  Why had he--?  He had been no Christ to his
Magdalen.

Someone else entered and sat down, but well out of Gurney's line of
vision.  That someone was glad of a rest, and cherishing
unsympathetic corns.  Damn the fellow, was he going to walk right
across London, and loaf outside a series of shop windows?  The
shadower was glad of the shade and the coolness of the great
building, but not glad of its suggestiveness.  There was no scandal
to be unearthed if a man did nothing more heinous than sit in St.
Paul's Cathedral.

Gurney passed out and strolled on, down Ludgate Hill and up Fleet
Street.  The Temple lured him and he wandered in and around its
pleasant precincts, and the shadower cursed him.  Damn this little
peripatetic, and damn all corns!  The gentleman had a newspaper
with him, and challenged by a sudden confrontation, he stood aside
and hid his face behind the Press.

So, on into the Strand and to Trafalgar Square.  Would the National
Gallery or St. Martin's in the Fields persuade this loiterer to
enter?  They did not.  Gurney diverged towards the Charing Cross
Road and Leicester Square.  His follower gloated.  Ha--ha--the
chase was growing hot!

Mr. Sawkins was not unfamiliar with Leicester Square.  As a middle-
aged and secret sensualist he had sniffed around its lamp-posts
and railings, and invited the pretty ladies to tempt the
unprepossessing male in him.  The Empire, the Alhambra, Daly's,
Thurston's, shadow of Sir Joshua Reynolds, the pavements, the plane
trees, the grass, the seats sacred in the main to unsuccessful
scarecrows.  Mr. Sawkins saw Gurney enter the gardens, and seat
himself on a seat that looked towards the Empire.  Mr. Sawkins
prevaricated.  He could not sit down without being in danger of
being recognized, so, perforce, he had to lean hopefully upon the
railings, out of view of Gurney, and with his newspaper ready for
any emergency.  Was he on the edge of discovering some scandalous
incident?  He hoped so.  There was malice in his mothy beard.


It happened, and gloriously so, according to Mr. Sawkins's
philosophy.  He saw a woman enter one of the far gates, a
particular sort of woman, brassy-headed, flashy, buxom.  Barmaid or
tottie?  He saw Gurney rise, and raise his hat.  The lady gave him
a peculiar smile.  She linked her arm in Gurney's, and they passed
out of the gardens together.  Mr. Sawkins followed them.

Ye Gods and little fishes, but assuredly he could cook this darned
little curate's goose for him!  Infernal hypocrite!  But Mr.
Sawkins wanted chapter and verse, and complete evidence with which
to confront and confound this pious humbug.  Gurney was off with a
"Tart" to a brothel, or to her private retreat, and from the manner
of their meeting Mr. Sawkins assumed that these clandestine
assignations were of regular occurrence, and that they explained
Gurney's visits to London.

Mr. Sawkins forgot his corns.  He followed those two up Shaftesbury
Avenue.  They were still walking arm in arm, and Gurney appeared to
be speaking very earnestly to the lady.  Casual passers-by could
not help noticing this piquant couple, the parson and the
flavicomous and painted lady.  A cleric picked up by a Tart!  Well,
well, wasn't that funny!  Treacle or raspberry jam?  Mr. Sawkins
was rubbing invisible hands.  Gosh, what a story he would have to
tell, and solemnly and responsibly so!  He would expose this
philandering little hypocrite.

Gurney and his companion turned into a side street, and the lady
paused provokingly outside a pub.  Gurney demurred.  He said
something to her in an appealing voice.  "No, Flo, please, not in
there."  He drew the lady on.  Mean little tyke, he wouldn't stand
her a drink before getting down to business.  So thought Mr.
Sawkins.  They turned again into another street, paused at the
entrance to some working-class flats, and entered.  Gurney did not
even look round.  He appeared to be absorbed in some argument with
the lady.

Mr. Sawkins smirked in his beard.  He pulled out a notebook and a
pencil, and made notes of the day, the hour, the name of the street
and the number of the building.  He hung about for an hour, but
Gurney did not reappear.  Obviously, the ritual was being
consummated.

"Got him," thought Mr. Sawkins, feeling good, and smiling over the
picture of a little priest without his trousers.

Mr. Sawkins felt so good, that he remained in London to dine, and
allowed himself lobster and half a bottle of claret.  But what a
feast he was preparing for that dirty little humbug!


Gurney sat on a hard chair, nursing his hat, the woman on the bed.

"So, you won't listen to me, Florence."

"Why should I?"

"I have tried to be patient.  I have tried to--"

She pulled a face at him.  It was not a bad-natured face, broad as
to the nose and cheek-bones, luscious as to the lips.  Her eyes
were blue and bold and humorous.  They suggested that what Florence
Gurney did not know about life was not worth knowing, and she
preferred to live it in her own way--thank you.  "The greatest
mistake you ever made, my lad, was marrying me.  Gosh, what a pair
of mugs we were.  You did try hard, Jack, but oh, lord--how we
bored each other!"

"I'm sorry," said Gurney.

She produced a cigarette-case, lit a cigarette, and offered the
case to him.  He shook his head, and she laughed.  Women who smoked
were not in Genesis.

"Oh, what a good boy it is!  Yes, that's real gold, not wash.  Why
did I bring you here?  Well, my dear, my other love-nest is paid
for by a fellow who's most damnably jealous."

Gurney looked at her earnestly.  "Give it up, Florence."

"Me!  Don't be a cuckoo.  I wasn't made for life in the suburbs.
You wouldn't believe it, but I get a lot of fun.  There's a lot of
tosh talked about virtue.  I wasn't born virtuous."

"Who is?"

"You, my lad.  Just think what I was faced with when I came to know
more about things.  Living up to you!"

"I'm sorry, Florence.  Was I a prig?"

"No.  You were a damned sight too good and earnest for me.  Cut it
out, Jack."

"I'm ready, to go back to the old--"

"Don't be an idiot.  ME, a curate's wife in some puddle of a place!
I shouldn't last a month; nor would you."

Gurney's hands pressed hard upon his hat.  "I still ask you--"

"Good God, why don't you divorce me?"

"I don't believe in divorce."

"Oh, hell, why not be sensible?  Isn't there a comfortable woman
you would like to marry?"

Gurney looked at a hole in the carpet.  "I--I can't--"

"So there is.  Gosh, my lad, why don't you marry her.  I'd give you
my blessing.  I'm not a bad lot all through, John.  I was born too
human; that's my trouble."

"I don't think she--"

"Knows about it?  Me?  Or--"

"She knows nothing.  She doesn't even know that--I--"

"Care?  Oh, doesn't she!  I bet she does.  You're just a sweet kid.
You always were a nice kid.  Well, why don't you tell her?"

Gurney looked miserable.  "I couldn't, somehow.  She's so--I mean,
suggesting--I should get a divorce--because--"

She stood up, came forward, and patted the top of his head.

"Poor lamb!  What a lot you know about--us!--Much better get rid of
me, my lad.  I'll make it easy.  As a matter of fact, my present--
wants to make a respectable woman of me.  Funny, isn't it?"

Gurney looked up at her gravely.  "And would you?"

"I might.  He likes his liquor, and he throws the money about."

"Ah," said Gurney sadly.  "I don't drink, and I never had much
money."

His sad face seemed to move her to pity, for, like many of the so-
called sinful, she had warm blood in her, and Gurney looked so like
a forlorn and hypersensitive child.  Almost, she wanted to mother
him, say:  "Now, Jack, my dear, just you go and do what I tell you,
and if you are good and obedient there shall be muffins for tea."
She returned to the bed and, sitting cross-legged, jigged a foot up
and down, and scattered cigarette ash on the carpet.  What could
you do with so selfless and simple a creature as John Gurney?

"Fact is, my lad, you're frightened."

"Frightened?"

"Yes, of telling her.  Why shouldn't I tell her?  I'd give you a
good character."

Gurney did look frightened.  "Oh, no, Florence, I couldn't--"

She laughed, but her laughter was kind.  "Poor Jacko!  What do you
do?  Sit and make dog's eyes?"

"No, I avoid her."

She looked at him with sudden steadfastness.

"As bad as all that, my dear?  Now, you go and see a lawyer, and
start a divorce.  I can give them names.  I suppose you wouldn't
want damages?"

Gurney was silent, fingering his hat.  He gazed at his wife's
knees, rose in a hesitant way, crossed over, bent down, and kissed
her forehead.

"Thank you, Florence, but--"

And suddenly she put her arms round his neck, and kissed him with
emphasis.

"You're much too good for this world, my dear, and you were much
too good for me.  Well, if you change your mind, let me know."

Gurney appeared to be struggling with emotion.  "Yes, Florence, I
will.  But I still feel to blame."

"About me?"

"Yes."

"You dear old infant, it never was your fault.  The one mistake you
made was marrying me.  Remember the old days at Peckham, and that
awful old mousetrap of a dad of mine?  Well!  You thought you were
rescuing me.  So did I for six months.  Forget all about it, John;
wash the slate clean and all that."

Gurney looked sorrowful.

"I don't know whether one can do that with slates."


Gurney returned to Southfleet in the glow of a summer evening to
find that the town was pouring its return load of trippers into the
station.  Gurney extracted himself from all this warm and
odoriferous humanity, and wandered along more quiet and decorous
streets to the cliffs and the sea.  He wanted to be alone.  He did
not want to return to 7, Cashiobury Terrace, and the Misses
Plimsoll and a supper of cold beef and pickles, no, not before
nature compelled him to.  The cliffs were somewhat serene, the
estuary and the sea completely so.  Gurney found a seat that was
not occupied by lovers or garrulous old women, and sat down and
nursed his hat and his problem.  He was not very far from Sea View.
Its windows were looking out into the evening sky just as he was,
but they were happy windows, and Gurney was very unhappy.

He sat there until the twilight came and dew began to descend upon
the grass and upon the seat.  Oh, blessed dew from heaven, would
that it could cool his spirit!  He felt so alone with his own
tantalizing thoughts, and everything he thought of began with "If!"

It was growing dark, and Gurney sighed, and left the seat, and
wandered across the grass and the roadway towards the railings and
hedge of that little white house.  He stood gazing at its windows.
The lights were lit, the blinds and curtains undrawn.  It had
nothing to hide--had that house.  And he--!

Something moved in the dusk.  It was Mr. Slade's Panama hat.  He
had been sitting in a garden chair, an old man in contemplation,
and smoking his evening pipe.  He did not see Gurney, and Gurney
did not want to be seen.  Gurney might feel sentimental about Mr.
Slade, partly because of Mr. Slade's daughter, but this was a
moment when the things of the heart could be too poignant for any
human contact.



XI


It was a serene summer morning.  The sky had innocent eyes; the
tide was in, and the sea watered silk.  Mr. Sawkins came out upon
his balcony, and leaning upon the iron rail, contemplated the
geraniums in the hotel gardens, and the pleasant prospect of the
day.  It would appear that lobster and claret had not disagreed
with him, and the day's duty was digesting itself with a breakfast
of bacon and eggs.  Mr. Sawkins had reached that period in a man's
life when he begins to blow, puffing out his lips with little
spurts of wind, a habit that appears to be unconscious, though just
when a man begins to blow and whether it may be taken as a sign of
senility, are points to be decided by the erudite.  Mr. Sawkins was
not feeling senile.  No, sir, he had a very pleasant duty to
perform, and he blew over it like an old Tom Cat over a saucer of
milk.

Two figures appeared, coming from the direction of the cliffs, the
Rev. John Gurney and Mr. Slade, in earnest conversation.  Mr.
Sawkins emitted a little, self-satisfied belch, and smiled pawkily
behind his hand.  He was in debt to Mr. Slade for sundry
impertinences, and he saw himself in a position to clear that debt.
Old Slade was a Gurneyite, but when he--Mr. Sawkins--made his
disclosure, James Slade would discover that he had been fooled by a
hypocrite.  Impudent old fellow, Slade.  It would be good business,
making him look foolish.

Gurney and Mr. Slade passed by without glancing up at the gentleman
on the balcony.  Gurney was looking earnestly into Mr. Slade's
face, and Mr. Slade was looking straight before him, like some wise
old counsellor considering a problem.

"That's my position, sir.  As I have said, I do not hold with
divorce, and yet--"

"Too much attention to the letter of the Law may be pedantry,
John."

"But marriage is a sacrament."

"Oh, no, John, not always.  It may be a tyranny.  If your wife is
living that sort of life, what sort of sacrament is there in it?"

"None, but--"

"Your continence.  I would say--that--"

"One moment, sir.  I am a very ordinary man, but my calling forbids
me to be an ordinary man.  I have a cause to serve, an example to
set."

"You mean, that the vulgar might blaspheme?"

"I do not fear that, sir, but my Imitatio Christi--is a very real
thing to me."

"Your friends know it, John.  Why not trust--in them?"

"Yes, sir, but the others?"

"Do they matter?  Life is full of mysterious Theys.  Look them
straight in the face and they cease to be theys."

"Then--you think?"

"Why not take your freedom.  I, for one, can see no sin in it.
Well--think it over, John."

Gurney left Mr. Slade in the High Street, and turning back, made
his way down to the pier.  Sea breezes and a stretching of legs
were good for the soul, but Gurney was stopped three times by
people before he reached the pier.  These waylayings were
flattering, for Gurney seemed to be a person whom other persons
were glad to see, and that is a rare proof of favour.  The reaction
to most such meetings may be to avoid them and to pass by on the
other side.  Dr. Richmond, who also suffered from the affection of
his fellows, was finding in the motor-car a chariot of escape, for
it travelled faster than a horse, and could demand that he should
attend strictly to business.

Gurney arrived at last at the Pier Head, after hearing about
someone's ignoble stomach, and someone else's ignoble son, but in
the ticket-office he discovered the shrewd, caustic and hairy face
of old Rawlins.  The Southfleet Socrates had taken a liking to
Gurney, and he boasted of liking few people.  During the winter old
Rawlins had been laid up with bronchitis and Gurney had visited
him, and so successfully that the visit had become a daily affair.
Gurney had been present at the lighting of Rawlins's first
convalescent pipe, and had sympathized with the old man's coughings
and splutterings, and had even condoned them by buying and bringing
him an ounce of shag.

"Funny, isn't it, sir, but we do like doing the things we oughtn't
to do; we don't like--t'other.  Excoose me sayin' so, but that's
'ooman nature."

Gurney had smiled upon him.  "Because one enjoys a thing, Rawlins,
it isn't always sinful."

"There you are, sir.  You ain't one of them 'Don't' doctors.  There
be people who do love sayin' 'no' to everything.  Like to catch 'em
out, I do.  Ties themselves in knots with their bl--beg your
pardon, sir, bloomin' 'umbug."

Gurney had to pay a penny before passing the turnstile, and old
Rawlins, had he had his way, would have suffered Gurney to pass
without paying.  Gurney dipped into a right-hand trouser pocket and
produced a sixpence, two pennies, and a halfpenny in the palm of
his hand.  Old Rawlins looked at them attentively.  It was
understood in Southfleet that Gurney was poor, and that he had
nothing but his curate's pay, and yet he gave money away.  Old
Rawlins was a bit of a miser, and perhaps for that very reason he
saw the rare and veritable saint in Gurney.

"A pennorth o' fresh air, sir."

"Yes, and peace, Rawlins."

Gurney laid the penny down, and old Rawlins let it lie there as
though it was no ordinary coin, and passed Gurney a ticket.  Gurney
was not looking quite his happy self, and old Rawlins wondered.
Was it indigestion or the Rev. Egbert Jones?

"Yes, peace, sir.  One do get sick of seein' too many 'ooman faces.
I see 'em all day."

"Yes, you do, Rawlins."

"Shut up in a 'utch, so to speak.  Why, there be times when I could
spit."

Gurney's smile came back.  How refreshing these simple souls could
be after too much gentility, and the affectations of those who
dared not appear poor.

"I'm not allowed to spit, Rawlins."

"No, sir.  But this 'ere place, or part of it, could do with a bit
of shockin'."

Gurney passed on, and old Rawlins peered out and watched him go
seawards, and then Mr. Rawlins did a peculiar thing.  He produced a
penny from his own pocket and put it in the till, and picking up
Gurney's penny, slipped it into a waistcoat pocket.

"I'll keep that for luck."

Gurney walked fast towards the end of the pier, with the air of a
man who was out by himself and wished to remain so.  The pier was
quiet at this early hour.  The holiday crowd had not yet poured on
to it from steamer and train.  It was a perfect day and the Union
Jack on the flagstaff at the pier head hung in folds that gave but
an occasional flutter.  A few fishermen were leaning upon the
railings.  Gurney descended to the lower deck where the green water
was awash just under his feet.  He leaned upon one of the rusty
chains hanging between the great oak piles, and watched the water
and the play of light upon it.  The moist suck and prattle of the
sea made him think of laughter, soft and inevitable laughter, her
laughter.  Sunlight upon infinite, diamond-like facets.  Light in a
woman's eyes.  Gurney removed his hat.  His head was in the
sunlight, his body in the shadow.  Well, one's body and head should
be like that.  The wet wash of the sea soothed him.  It went on and
on, eternally, like God's will, unhindered by the moods of men.  A
little breeze came over the water.  Reflected sunlight flickered
over the black timber.  There were white sails over yonder.  The
dark bulk of a steamer swung into view; she was in ballast, and
Gurney could hear the beat of the screw.  How like a heart it was!
Serenity returned to him.  Why suffer your own little disharmonies
to creak and strain upon God's earth and sea?


Mr. Sawkins came very near to spoiling the dramatic climax he was
preparing.  Malice tempted him.  How pleasant it would be to take a
rise out of old Slade, to buttonhole him and say:  "Well, I've
caught your little St. John without his trousers.  That dashed
hypocrite has fooled you all quite nicely.  I saw him going home
with a prostitute."  But Mr. Sawkins resisted the temptation.  The
stage was set, and any premature rehearsal might spoil the grand
finale for the larger audience.

Mr. Sawkins waited until the afternoon.  He sent notes by hand to
three or four friends, with a hint that he had something important
to impart, and that he would be glad of their collaboration.  They
would find him at the club between six and seven.  The gentlemen
gathered, and in a corner of the smoking-room Mr. Sawkins stood
whiskies all round, which was rare generosity on his part, but the
occasion deserved it.  He was exceedingly grave and deliberate.  No
smug smirk must deface his sense of civic duty.

"Gentlemen, I happened to be in London the other day, and I was on
my way to Regent's Street and I happened to pass through Leicester
Square.  You may not believe me, for the coincidence seems so
extraordinary, but I saw a certain person pick up a--prostitute--
and go off with her."

"Well, that's not unusual, old man."

"But when I tell you who the person was--"

"Go on, Sam; don't keep us guessing."

"I was strolling one day down the Lowther Arcade."

Mr. Sawkins gave the facetious friend a severe glance.

"This is a very serious matter, Robson.  It shocked me."

"Well, out with it."

"The person I saw was Gurney."

"Gurney?"

"Go on, you're kidding."

"I most certainly am not."

"Why, the naughty little devil!"

"Are you quite sure, Sam?"

"Absolutely.  I was so shocked that I followed them."

"My hat!  And he went home with the Tart?"

"He did.  A low kind of street in Soho.  I have the name and
number."

"Gosh, what a filthy little hypocrite.  By Jove, St. John has been
caught in the slips."

Mr. Sawkins rubbed his hands together.  "Gentlemen, I think it is
our duty to take this matter very seriously.  I--regard it as a
very disgusting revelation of hypocrisy."

"I should say so, Sam."

"Personally, I feel it to be my duty to carry the matter to the
Rev. Egbert Jones.  But before doing anything I decided to ask for
the advice of my--friends."

This self-constituted committee upon morals had no difficulty in
arriving at a decision.  These minor capitalists disapproved of
Gurney because he appeared ready to preach their capital away,
which, after all, was but human nature, and a desire to defend what
was theirs.  They were no more culpable than working-class
Southfleet which approved of Gurney because he seemed to suggest
that money should be transferred from the pockets of the more
fortunate or the more industrious to pockets that were less full.
A great part of human opinion is founded upon personal prejudice,
and created by self-interest, and man has a genius for persuading
himself that what seems right and good for him, should be right and
good for everybody.

It was agreed that Mr. Sawkins, as the disinterrer of this scandal,
should interview Mr. Egbert Jones and expose Gurney's secret sin.
Mr. Sawkins accepted the responsibility; he had expected its
delegation.  Also, it was suggested that some sort of Court of
Morals should be created, privately so, to inquire into the affair.
The Rev. Egbert Jones might call a meeting in the vestry at which
certain prominent parishioners should be present, and Gurney
arraigned before them.

"If it's proved," said one of the gentlemen, "it will be a case for
the Bishop."

"He'll lose his dog-collar."

"Serve the little humbug right."


Mr. Sawkins dined, lit a cigar, and went forth in the glow of the
sunset and the warmth of righteousness and happy malice, to call
upon Mr. Egbert Jones.  Mr. Sawkins did not hurry.  He wanted to
finish his cigar before ringing the vicarage bell, for it would be
bad form to arrive with a cigar in one's mouth when that same mouth
was to utter words of righteous indignation.  Like Mr. Slade, the
Rev. Egbert Jones was a gardener, and he specialized in
chrysanthemums, and exhibited them at local flower-shows.  He
called them his "Mums", which might have been taken as a piece of
symbolism, for on delicate and controversial subjects the Rev.
Egbert could be mum.  He had been pottering round his conservatory,
refreshing some of the flower labels with an indelible pencil, when
Mr. Sawkins rang the vicarage bell.  Mr. Jones had just refreshed
Maiden's Blush, a plant of his own breeding, when the maid came to
tell him that Mr. Sawkins was in the study and wishing to see him.

"Mr. Sawkins, Mary?"

"Yes, Mr. Sawkins, sir."

Mr. Jones said: "Oh, bother" to himself, and put his pencil away.
There was no Maiden's Blush about old Sawkins.  Broken Egg would
have been more applicable.  Now, what did he want?  Wretched
fellow!  Mr. Sawkins was a trouble-maker, a human gadfly who bit
you just when you were feeling at peace with the world.

Mr. Jones opened the study door, and saw the evening sunlight
shining in upon this apostle of virtue.  There are some people who
can express solemnity with an almost apostolic gravity, and Mr.
Sawkins was such.  He rose, holding his hat in front of him rather
like a certain vulgar receptacle.

"Good evening, sir."

"Good evening, Mr. Sawkins.  What can I do for you?"

Mr. Sawkins glanced at the door.

"A very grave and confidential matter, sir.  I take it we shall not
be overheard."

Mr. Jones looked austere.  "This room is a sanctum, sir."

"What I have to disclose is not for idle ears," and Mr. Sawkins sat
down, and seemed to draw a deep and portentous breath.

Mr. Jones put his desk between himself and his visitor.  Strange,
how a particular chair and a particular pose can reinforce a man's
dignity!  Bother old Sawkins!  He was always digging up
uncomfortable subjects, like some body-snatcher busy in a
graveyard.

Mr. Jones put his fingers together.  "I gather, Mr. Sawkins, that
you have something to impart."

"I have, sir, and a very serious thing.  May I say that I took
advice before coming to you.  I am moved by my duty as a citizen
and a parishioner."

Mr. Jones inclined his head.  "And how does the matter concern me?"

"It concerns your curate, Mr. Jones, and so--you."

"Gurney?"

"Precisely.  Are you aware, sir, that your curate goes to London
and consorts with loose women?"

Mr. Jones sat up in his chair.  His lips grew thin, his nostrils
pinched.

"Mr. Sawkins, do you suggest--?"

"I DO, sir."

"A most improper suggestion.  A most insulting one.  I--"

"My dear sir, I am not suggesting--that--you--"

"I should hope not.  This is a very grave accusation."

"And I make it--in all seriousness, and on good evidence."

The vicar calmed down.  He looked at Mr. Sawkins's beard, and
appeared to find inspiration there.  Was it possible that for once
in a while this old moral filibuster was going to prove useful?
This might be the occasion for which Emily had counselled him to
wait.  If this scandalous accusation was true, there would be no
more Gurney in Southfleet or anywhere else.  Even the most devoted
disciples could not condone lechery in a man who had set so high a
standard.

"Perhaps, Mr. Sawkins, you will tell me how you came to obtain--
this--information?"

"Personal observation, sir.  A fortunate or unfortunate
coincidence, just as you choose to describe it."

"You saw--?"

"I did, sir.  I happened to be passing through Leicester Square,
and I saw Gurney pick up a prostitute."

"But are you--convinced--?"

Mr. Sawkins smirked.  "I think, sir, that sort of woman is easily
recognized."

"How very shocking!  And then--?"

"Well, sir, I too was shocked.  I felt it my duty to make sure.  I
followed the couple and saw them enter a disreputable-looking sort
of house in a back street.  And Gurney remained there."

"How--very--shocking!" said Mr. Jones, trying to look pained.

Mr. Sawkins brought out a handkerchief and wiped his moustache and
beard.  They were smeared with invisible venom.

"Are you quite sure of all your--facts, Mr. Sawkins?"

"I am, sir, I have them here in a note-book.  Date, time, place."

Mr. Jones bent his head.  "This is a very grave--disclosure.  It
amazes me."

"My friends and I are of the opinion, sir, that action should be
taken.  I suggest that there should be a meeting in the vestry, and
that Gurney should be asked to attend."

"One moment, Mr. Sawkins.  I think the responsibility is mine."

"It is everybody's responsibility, sir.  Such gross deceit, such
ignoble hypocrisy."

"Quite, quite.  But I wish to reflect upon the matter," which meant
that the Rev. Egbert wished to consult his Emily.



XII


So, the storm gathered for John Gurney, and no warning of it came
to him.  George was home for the holidays, and he and Gurney were
playing much cricket.  The Lads' Cricket Club which Gurney had
founded, and which had caused Mr. Jones to suffer other pangs of
jealousy, was a very live and lusty affair.  Gurney coached his
lads three evenings a week, and had discovered a potential fast
bowler, one Tom Beeson, who was to become the county's professional
star.  Gurney had a way with lads.  He was completely natural, and
utterly unafraid of them, and he did not talk down like the Rev.
Egbert Jones.  There was no, "Now, my boys," about it.  To Gurney
it was Tom, and Alf, and Fred.  The spotty lout seemed to shed his
spots, modify the raucous arrogance in his voice, and absorb
manners as well as cricket under Gurney's example.

He was something of a hero, for simple folk do love to have their
hero.  Gurney did not preach chastity; he lived it, and to lads in
that most difficult of periods when the surge of sex comes in like
the sea, this little man did possess for them a something which
other men might lack.  You might not be able to suppress all that
was in you, but here was a man who set both a visible and an
invisible standard.  Personality can penetrate and permeate the
impressionable wax of youth.  No lad wished to be shamed before
Gurney.  Raw flesh might out, but that something which transcended
it looked up and out into that trusted face, and wished to be like
it and to be liked by it.  Gurney played good cricket.  The game
was the thing.  You could not let your side and your self down by
funking or messing about.  You had to stand up to fast bowling, and
not snarl and talk of bad luck when you lost a match.  Gurney
taught his lads how to take a beating.


Mrs. Egbert Jones agreed with Mr. Sawkins.  What a repulsive
hypocrite was this little curate!  Mrs. Jones, like many good women
with plain exteriors, became rabid and merciless when any Rahab
came into the picture.  This was no mere heaven-sent opportunity to
get rid of too earnest an underling; it was an inevitable and
public duty.  Mrs. Jones was of the opinion that Egbert should call
a private and confidential meeting of the churchwardens, sidesmen,
and one or two prominent parishioners, including Mr. Sawkins, and
lay the case before them.  Let it be decided by this body of elders
what steps should be taken.

The Rev. Egbert Jones accepted his wife's advice.  He wrote
letters, marked private and confidential, to Mr. Marsden, Mr.
Golightly, Mr. Sawkins, Mr. Slade, two other sidesmen, Dr.
Richmond, and three more gentlemen.  Would they attend a meeting in
the vestry at six o'clock on the following Friday to discuss a very
grave matter.  Mr. Jones had been inclined to boggle over the
inclusion of Mr. Slade, for Mr. Slade was a hot Gurneyite,
but maybe Mr. Jones felt some pleasure in the prospect of
disillusioning Mr. Slade.  Mr. Slade could be too obviously a
saintly person.

But two or three of the recipients were not satisfied with the
vagueness of the invitation, among them Mr. Golightly and Dr.
Richmond.  Mr. Golightly liked his invoices to be in proper order.
He walked round to tackle the vicar, and walked out again with
brittle gravity.  He had been shocked, but he had not liked the
pervading scent of Sawkins.  Dr. Richmond, chancing upon Mr. Jones
in the Old Town, stopped his car, and got out.  He too received the
news delivered with chilly caution under the brim of Mr. Jones's
clerical hat.

"Who was the informer?  Sawkins?"

"Yes."

"It would be."  But Dr. Richmond did not add the words he uttered
inwardly:  "The septic old sneak."

Dr. Richmond, having escaped a perilous scandal and professional
destruction by the mercy of God and the magnanimity of two women,
was sympathetic towards Gurney.  Even if the little man had fallen
momentarily from grace and behaved as mere man, well, there were
times when the flesh proved stronger than the spirit.  And to be
spied upon and betrayed by an old Judas like Sawkins!  Dr. Richmond
had few secrets from his wife, and those were professional ones,
and when he told her the story she would not accept it.

"I don't believe it, Corrie."

What a woman!  For she was angry, yet with a serene anger that was
clean and selfless.

"I simply don't believe it."

He looked at her with profound affection.  "You wouldn't, Lucy.
You are--"

"No, I'm not just a sweet fool.  I think I know what life is, and I
simply don't believe that Gurney is a humbug."

"After all, he is a man."

"I know, my dear.  But it is Sawkins's word against his.  And
Sawkins--"

"Is a nasty and septic product.  I agree.  But I don't think that
even Sawkins would invent--"

"He might misconstrue.  What of the story of Christ and Mary
Magdalene?"

Once again Dr. Richmond looked at his wife as at a creature who was
unique.

"It's possible."

"There may be an explanation."

"I hope there is."

Now, both Dr. Richmond and Mr. Golightly approached Mr. Slade, Dr.
Richmond on his wife's suggestion, Mr. Golightly on an intuition
that was his own.  Mr. Slade heard them both, and his shrewd old
face was puckered with mischief.  So, Sawkins had his feet in the
trough!  Ought not Gurney to be warned.  No, sir, let the game be
played.  Mr. Slade would not say what his reasons were, or confess
to private information.  Almost, he chuckled and said:  "I think it
may prove quite an interesting meeting.  Be there.  I don't think
you will be disappointed."

Gurney received a note from Mr. Jones.  He was requested to attend
a meeting in the vestry at six-thirty on the coming Friday.  The
Rev. Egbert stated that it was to be a meeting of much importance,
and on no account must Gurney fail to attend it, but Mr. Jones gave
Gurney no warning of the ordeal that was being prepared for him.
The Rev. Egbert Jones, like many large and looming men with fat
heads and fat thighs, and a rolling voice, was a coward, and maybe
he secretly hoped that Gurney might get wind of the scandal, pack
his bag and disappear.  That would prove both his guilt, and rid
Mr. Jones of an embarrassing situation and a junior of whom he was
jealous.

Gurney remained in complete innocence.  He was on the sports ground
at five-thirty, coaching one or two of his lads, and bowling them
leg-breaks, for they had a match on the morrow.  It was a hot
evening, and Gurney was in his shirt sleeves.  At ten minutes past
six he put on his coat, and left the lads busy at the nets.  His
collar had suffered from perspiration, and was not quite what it
should have been, or would be if Mr. Sawkins had his way.


Mr. Slade sat and smiled and said nothing.  He had crossed eyes
with a righteously indignant and soapy Mr. Sawkins.  Mr. Sawkins
had stated that it was with deep regret that he brought the matter
before the meeting, and Mr. Slade had just smiled at him and said
nothing.  It was a dirty bird that fouled its own beard and other
people's reputations.  The Rev. Egbert Jones sat as chairman, a
carefully grieved and groomed ecclesiastic, who, by the expression
of modest woe that he had assumed, might have been listening to the
story of his dear Emily's indiscretion with the baker's roundsman.
Mr. Slade was feeling naughty, oh, so very naughty.  He observed
the various faces.  Dr. Richmond's face was grave, serious and
silent, as though he was considering some difficult case.  Mr.
Golightly, spruce and alert, had the air of a man who knew when
silk was silk.  Mr. Marsden looked bored; he had been compelled to
forego a game of cards at the Yacht Club in order to deal with this
dirty linen.  Two other gentlemen sat on their hard chairs with
attentive solemnity.  Mr. Sawkins had put his case, and produced
his evidence.  There was silence.

Said Mr. Jones:  "Has any gentleman anything to suggest?"

Mr. Golightly took up the challenge.  "I--most certainly have, sir.
Has Mr. Gurney received any warning?"

Mr. Jones caressed his chin.  "No.  I asked him to attend, at six-
thirty."

"So, he comes in front of us--quite unprepared?"

"That is so."

Dr. Richmond's deep and deliberate voice was heard.  "In my opinion
he should have been warned, and not brought here--"

Said Mr. Slade:  "Yes, in his nightshirt, to stand in the pillory."

Mr. Jones looked pained.  "Gentlemen, it was my feeling--that--"

"You will excuse me," said Mr. Golightly.  "I think there has been
lack of feeling."

"Hear, hear," said Mr. Slade.

Mr. Sawkins chewed his beard; Mr. Marsden looked bored, Mr. Jones
unhappy.

Mr. Golightly pulled out his watch.  It was a presentation piece,
made by the Goldsmiths' Company, and represented the 25th
anniversary of Mr. Golightly's business, a token of esteem from
friends and employees.  Mr. Golightly was paternal towards his
staff, and in spite of certain idiosyncrasies was liked and
respected by them.  His motto was:  "I have made money, and money
shall not make me mean."  Mr. Golightly looked at his watch.  It
had a solemn, but pleasant face, and was becoming a valued friend.

"It is now six-twenty-three, gentlemen.  I take it that Mr. Gurney
will be with us in seven minutes.  What procedure shall we adopt?"

He looked at Dr. Richmond and Mr. Slade who were sitting side by
side, and almost Mr. Slade winked at him.

"I think," said the doctor, "that the responsibility rests with Mr.
Jones.  He should state the case to Mr. Gurney."

The vicar looked embarrassed.  He waved his hands to and fro.

"Gentlemen, I would much prefer that some impartial member should--"

"Will you do it, doctor?"  The proposal was Mr. Golightly's.

"I?  Well, it is not the kind of duty I would choose.  But if--"

Mr. Slade gave Dr. Richmond a gentle nudge.  "It would come--more--
kindly from you, sir."

"Very well.  I'll do it."


Gurney opened the vestry door.  He had had to hurry and he was
feeling hot and apologetic.  He was aware of all those faces
looking at him.  How serious these faces were, as though their
owners were jurymen deciding the fate of some offender.  What was
it all about?  He stood holding the handle of the door, suddenly
conscious of a strange feeling of being accused, but of what?  Had
these other men been in conference, and were now waiting--for him?
Why for him, and why had he not been included in the party?

"I hope I am not late, gentlemen?"

He looked at the Rev. Egbert Jones, and the vicar's eyes slid away
from his.

"No.  Come in, Mr. Gurney."

The next face to the Jones's face was that of Mr. Sawkins.  It did
not veil itself in sensitive obliqueness, but seemed to glare like
a bearded planet straight at him.  There was a curious, gloating
gleam in its pale eyes.  And why was Mr. Sawkins here?

Gurney closed the door.  Unfriendly faces, those two, the one
enigmatic, the other horribly hostile.  His glance passed on, and
met Mr. Slade's eyes.  Mr. Slade was smiling at him, and Gurney
felt glad of that smile.  This austere room had an uncomfortable
atmosphere, and the chairs were hard.

"Please sit down, Mr. Gurney."

This was from Dr. Richmond, and though Dr. Richmond was not
smiling, his eyes were calm and kind.  There was a vacant chair
next to Mr. Golightly, and Mr. Golightly gave it a friendly push,
and nodded at Gurney.

Gurney sat down.  He had been perspiring, and suddenly he felt
chilled.  Something shivered down his spine.  He was conscious of
vague apprehension, like some warm-blooded creature thrust into an
ice-box.  His eyes stood out, and Mr. Sawkins, who was watching
him, began to snicker inwardly.  The little scoundrel was
frightened.

"Mr. Gurney."

Gurney looked at the speaker, Dr. Richmond.  His hands lay heavy on
his hat.

"Mr. Gurney, this is not an occasion that gives me any pleasure,
but in fairness to you--we are here to let you answer a certain
accusation.  A gentleman--who--er--is present, has stated that you
were seen in London in company with a--certain type of woman."

Gurney sat mute, staring at Dr. Richmond.  "A certain type of
woman, sir?"

"Yes," said a voice.  "A common prostitute."

Gurney gave one quick glance at the speaker.  "I was in London--"

"Here are the details.  It is right that you should have them.
Friday, July 10th.  Place, Leicester Square.  You and the lady--
then went to--"

Gurney gave a quick lift of the head.  He moistened his lips, and
seemed about to speak.  Then, his head went down, and his hands
covered his face.

"Ha, got him!" thought Mr. Sawkins.

Then, Gurney spoke.  "Gentlemen, the lady was--my wife."

For half a minute there was a dreadful stillness.  Mr. Golightly,
head up, spruce and grey and competent, turned to glance at Gurney,
and his brows contracted.  Dr. Richmond was also looking at Gurney
with sudden understanding and compassion.  Mr. Jones appeared a
little bewildered.  The other gentlemen were sitting very erect in
their chairs, uncomfortably stiffened by Gurney's emotion.  Mr.
Slade's eyes were fixed upon Mr. Sawkins, and there was smiling
contempt in them, and triumph, for Mr. Sawkins was looking sick.

Gurney's hands came down, and his head went up.

"Excuse--the--lack of self-control, gentlemen, but it was all so
sudden.  I have been in the habit of meeting my wife--occasionally.
Mine was--a disastrous marriage, and the fault may have been mine.
My wife was not--"

He paused and swallowed, and most of those other men looked
everywhere but at him.  They were feeling sore with themselves and
with the situation.  It was Dr. Richmond who laid a large firm
hand, and a large calm voice on the meeting.

"Mr. Gurney, I am sure I speak for all of us when I say that I
deeply regret this rude intrusion into your personal affairs.  I am
sure none of us wish to pursue it further."

There was a murmur from the room.  "Well said, doctor."

"I'm sorry we--"

Mr. Golightly bent over and silently patted Gurney's arm.  Mr.
Jones had found a bland and benignant smile.  It was Mr. Slade who
stood up and looked at Mr. Sawkins.

"I think that an apology is indicated--from a certain gentleman."

All of them looked at Mr. Sawkins, and Mr. Sawkins glared, rubbed
his beard, and appeared to be about to say something.  He did say
something.

"I should like to see the marriage licence."

Mr. Slade went white.  "That's a most damnable--"

But Gurney was up, and standing before Mr. Sawkins.

"If you will come to my rooms, sir, I shall have much pleasure in
showing it to you."

Someone said:  "How's that, Sawkins?"

Mr. Slade answered the question.  "Clean bowled."



XIII


As Gurney walked down the aisle arm in arm with Mr. Slade, and with
Dr. Richmond on the other side of him, he was reminded of that
dramatic day in a suburban church when he had armed his young wife
down the aisle to the exultant trumpetings of the Marriage March.
There was no such triumphant music now, though Gurney's ordeal had
ended in an apparent triumph.  Mr. Jones and Mr. Golightly were
following behind them.  Mr. Jones's voice was nibbling at the air,
for, when the blandly pretentious self in him had been rebuffed, he
seemed to lose his round complacency and become precise and jejune.
The Rev. Egbert was feeling that he had been fooled, if not made to
look foolish, and that, of course, was unseemly.  But was it not
also unseemly that St. Jude's should possess a curate whose wife
was a prostitute?  Something would have to be done about it.  But
what?  Gurney could not remain united to a woman who was living in
sin.

Mr. Marsden was looking at his watch and wondering whether he could
crowd in a game of cards before dinner.  No, but he could go to the
club and thrill its gossips with a most juicy bit of information.
Mr. Sawkins followed some yards behind rather like an eczematous
and smelly old dog whom nobody wished to own.  Mr. Golightly was
very much head-up, and walking on his toes, and feeling as happily
ironical as a silk-mercer who has caught a bagman trying to fob him
off with something that was not Lyons.

Mr. Slade, Gurney and Dr. Richmond paused in the porch.

"You are coming home to supper with me, John."

"Am I, sir?"

"You are."

Dr. Richmond smiled at Mr. Slade.  "You are a forestaller, Mr.
Slade."

"Am I, sir?"

"Yes, I was going to take Gurney home with me."

Mr. Golightly, joining them, shook Gurney by the hand.
"Congratulations, sir."

"Thank you, Mr. Golightly."

The Rev. Egbert Jones loomed down upon them.  He too, should be
congratulating his curate, but his complacency was suffering from
both moral and emotional constipation.  Yet he managed to produce a
polite murmur.

"A most fortunate--finale, Gurney.  I am sure Mr. Sawkins must
regret--"

Dr. Richmond cut him short.  "That the poison did not work, sir."

Mr. Sawkins heard those words, and snarled over them.  "I think I
had better warn you, doctor, that libellous--"

Dr. Richmond gave him a steadfast and contemptuous stare.

So, they passed upon their several ways, Mr. Slade and Gurney arm
in arm, Dr. Richmond and Mr. Golightly sharing their sarcasm upon
Sawkins, Mr. Marsden and the other gentlemen to the club, Mr. Jones
to his Emily, Mr. Sawkins to his hotel.  The Rev. Egbert felt that
his dignity had suffered, and that it was in moult, and that he
could not crow like a good, ecclesiastical chanticleer.  He found
his wife reading the Church Times, and waiting eagerly for news.

"Well, Egbert?"

Mr. Jones, feeling crestfallen, put on his pulpit voice.

"Most--er--confusing.  The woman--er--is Gurney's wife."

Mrs. Jones's pince-nez slid off her nose.  "His wife!  And is--
she--?"

"Yes, ahem--I'm afraid she is."

"A common prostitute!"

"Er, I suppose so."

"My dear Egbert, we can't keep a curate who is married to a woman
like that."

Mr. Jones stroked his chin.  "A most embarrassing situation.  I
must reflect upon it."

"But are you sure that he was telling the truth?"

"He offered to produce the marriage-licence."

"Yes, yes," and Mrs. Jones waved her right first finger like a
conductor's baton, "but don't you see--he may be married, but not
to the woman Sawkins saw."

Mr. Jones had to confess that he had not considered that
possibility.

"Really, Egbert, how easily you men are deceived.  I think Gurney
ought to produce his wife, and let Mr. Sawkins--"

But Mr. Jones had had enough for one day.  His wife, like so many
wives, behaved as though she was a superior being in intelligence
and understanding, and the very large worm in Mr. Jones turned.  He
wanted to say:  "Well, really, Emily, you have a nasty, suspicious
mind, and you can be a terrible prig.  I'm not so sure that the
other sort of woman might not be a relief--on occasions."  But a
vicar could not make such retorts to a vicaress.  What he did say
was:  "I shall really be obliged, my dear, if you will leave the
matter to me."


Gurney felt tired, strangely and inwardly tired, as though the
virtue had gone out of him.  Though other men had shown their faith
in him and given him sympathy, he felt that he had been humiliated
before those other men.  His wife was a loose woman.  He might cry
"Mea culpa", but the sorriness of the whole show had made him feel
a shabby and futile little failure.  How nice to be known as a man
who was so feebly man in the vulgar sense, that the woman he had
married had preferred the casual male!  For Gurney was no
passionless saint, and his very humanity and his self-chastening
had made him what he was, an artist in the fastidious way of
living.  To be stalked and informed against by a man like Mr.
Sawkins!--for he had come to suspect that the discovery had not
been fortuitous.

Mr. Slade kept silent, but somehow he could sense the sorrowful
slackness of the man whose arm he held.

"Treacle tart for supper, John.  I ordered it, in advance."

Mr. Slade continued to speak of the day's last meal as supper,
perhaps out of a puckish notion that tradesmen did not dine at half-
past seven.  Gurney glanced into those shrewd old eyes, so kind and
wise and humorous.

"How--foreseeing of you, sir."

"No need to talk if you don't feel like it."

"Sometimes it helps.  You did believe--?"

"Of course I believed.  So did Richmond and Golightly.  Perhaps I
ought to have warned you, but I rather thought that the Sawkins
petard should be left to explode under his own shirt-tails."

Gurney was silent, looking straight before him.  "I feel--I ought
not to stay here, sir."

"What, leave us?"

"I shall be a figure of fun--to those who--"

"Do not matter."

"To me--all men matter."

"You are being too sensitive, John."

"Or too much the egoist.  Which?  How thin the skin of one's self
can be!"

Mr. Slade pressed his arm.  "Thin skins suffer, but they heal."

When they came to the gate of Sea View Gurney saw Mr. Slade's
daughter sitting in the green veranda with a book in her lap.  Did
she too know?  But whether she knew or not his fear of her was
poignant; and almost he flinched and fled.  But George too was
there, sitting cross-legged on the grass and oiling and polishing a
new bat.  He was up and flourishing it at Gurney, and Gurney felt
glad of the boy's presence.  Though, not much more than an hour ago
he had been bowling to George, such cheerful, cunning balls.  How
much could happen to humiliate you in an hour!

"Oh, Mr. Gurney, Tom Myall can't play to-morrow.  Can I play?"

Gurney looked bothered.  To-morrow's match?  He had forgotten all
about it, and the prospect of that public appearance frightened
him.

"Yes, perhaps you can, George."

"What luck for me!"

"Tut-tut," said his grandfather, "no gloating over somebody else's--
bad luck."

"I wasn't gloating, grandpa."

His mother had been looking steadfastly at Gurney, but when his
eyes turned to hers she glanced at her father.  Mr. Slade nodded.
He still had Gurney by the arm, as though he divined John Gurney's
impulse towards flight.

"Well, I think a little sherry is indicated."

"Not for me, sir."

"Fudge!  Do you good, John.  Do all of us good.  Rose, my dear--"

Mrs. Hallard left her chair.  "I'll fetch the decanter and glasses.
Shall it be out here?"

Mr. Slade nodded and smiled.

Gurney found himself sitting in the veranda beside Mr. Slade, with
George squatting at his feet, his little, freckled face upturned.
Gurney had something he wanted to say to Mr. Slade, but he could
not say it before the boy, and George was happy at the feet of his
hero.

"I suppose I shall have to go in last, Mr. Gurney?"

"Yes, George, I'm afraid you will, but you can carry your bat, you
know."

"Willowwell beat us last time, didn't they?"

"They did."

"I hope we wop them to-morrow."

Mr. Slade somehow divined that restlessness in Gurney, the voice
that would utter words that could not be spoken before the child,
for, to some old men the painted screen of the senses grows thin
and through it shines an infinite understanding.  Mr. Slade would
never wear the dead and passionless face of the very old.  Life had
not lost its mystery, but amplified it.  Mr. Slade could say--
"Strange, but I feel those other invisible things more than I did
when I was young.  I see the soul of a tree.  There is a sun behind
the sun."

"George, my lad."

"Yes, grandpa."

"I forgot about biscuits.  Fetch 'em."

George scrambled up, and disappeared into the little white house,
and Mr. Slade looked at Gurney.

"Well, my friend?"

"Will you tell your daughter.  I--can't."

"Yes, John, I will tell her."

Some of the light came back into Gurney's eyes.  "Did you know that
I was going to ask you to do that?"

"Somehow I had a feeling about it."

"And you sent the boy away.  Thanks, my friend.  You see more
deeply into things--than--"

"John, I feel and enjoy life so vividly, that sometimes I wonder at
it, and ask why--"

"Need you ask why?  God is with us when we see with eyes such as
yours."


Mrs. Hallard took the head of her table, but it was Mr. Slade who
carved.  George and Gurney faced each other, with a bowl of flowers
between them.  Gurney could look full-faced at the son, if he was
afraid of the mother, and perhaps in that pleasant room which was
not too dark and not too light, faces and eyes had a less urgent
but more mysterious meaning.  Gurney was reminded of a picture that
was a particular favourite of his:  Millais's "Lorenzo in the House
of Isabella".  He could not look at his Isabella with Lorenzo's
young and profound adoration, but he could look at Isabella's son,
nor was there any Pot of Basil in prospect for him.

Roast duck and green peas!  Mr. Slade was skilful in dismembering
the bird, and George's eyes were healthily greedy.

"I wish you'd come often, sir."

"Now," said Mr. Slade, "wouldn't you think that the boy was
starved?"

"I like to be hungry, grandpa."

"Bless my soul, at your age, you shouldn't be thinking about being
hungry."

"Well, what should I think about?"

"Not thinking about it at all, my dear."

Gurney glanced at the plate and saw that he had been given breast.
His glance passed to Rose's plate.  She too had breast.  Did that
mean leg or wing for Mr. Slade?  Well, wings would suit him.

"I'm afraid you have given me--the best cut, sir."

"Well, if I have, John, that's--justice."

When a man is in love and impossibly in love no meal may seem
ordinary, and though Gurney had no appetite even for roast duck, he
had to be courteous in showing appreciation.  George's face kept
appearing round the bowl of flowers.  George was puzzled by the
atmosphere and Mr. Gurney's mute and feeding face.  Mr. Gurney was
not like this on the cricket pitch.

"Is yours tough, Mr. Gurney?"

Gurney looked up suddenly, and swallowed.

"Tough, George?  What?"

"Your duck?"

"No, it's a lovely duck."

"Mine's--"

"Leg, my son," said Mr. Slade, "and legs are legs.  My wing is
angelic."

But was George's leg tough?  The possible texture of a duck's leg
suggested other toughnesses to Mr. Slade.  The quality of more
toughness might be valuable to Gurney.  Let him pull faces at the
vulgar-minded.  But what a ridiculous business life could be; and
the best thing you could do was to chuckle over it, and indulge in
gentle irony.  Tough duck and cricket, and Gurney feeling tragic;
and his daughter's mysteriously serene face, and a boy stuffing a
healthy stomach.  Now, what could be simpler than a supper-table
and four people sitting round it, and profounder complications of
the situation might have puzzled a philosopher.

Gurney was glad when the meal was over.  Love and treacle tart
seemed to stick in his throat.  He felt poor in spirit as well as
in purse, and his Isabella was a young woman of wealth.  He could
love her in silence and in secret hate her wealth.  Everything was
against him, poor creature.  This humiliation!  He was glad when he
could go out into the garden with Mr. Slade and watch Mr. Slade
fill his pipe.  Mrs. Hallard did not follow them, and she kept
George with her.

"You must not bother Mr. Gurney."

"But I don't bother him."

"Mother knows best," which was a lame way of expressing something
that she had divined.

"You ought to smoke a pipe, John," said Mr. Slade.

"I don't."

"I know.  Take to it.  A pipe of the bulldog breed.  And bite hard
on it."

Gurney smiled rather wistfully.  "Are you trying to suggest, sir?"

"I am.  You may not be allowed to cock-snooks at the unco good, but
you can cock a pipe at 'em.  Stuff it in the old women's faces, and
brandish a pot of beer."

Gurney looked bothered.  "You think I'm too--"

"Well, I don't know.  Remember the duck's leg."

Mr. Slade told Gurney's story to his daughter, after George had
gone to bed.  She heard it very calmly, for how else should she
hear it?  So, Gurney had a Florence just as she had had a Hector,
and Gurney had fled from Florence but not quite as Hector had fled
from her.  Poor little man!  To be made to bolt by an old ferret
like Mr. Sawkins.  She felt compassionate towards Gurney, but
rather coldly and maternally so.  He might be the shadow of a
saint, and brisk on the cricket-field, but he was still a shadow to
her, perceptible but not capable of producing a vivid sensuous
impression.

"Poor little man."

Her father frowned over those words.  Not much hope for Gurney,
with a flavicomous Florence in the background, and such cool pity
in his daughter's voice.

"Well, you know, rather humiliating, my dear."

"You mean--"

"To be just a poor little man."

"Did I sound contemptuous?"

Mr. Slade lit a last pipe.  Tobacco was always going in and going
out, and the fireplace would be full of unsmoked dottles.

"He thinks he ought to leave us."

"Run away?  But--"

"Cowardly, what?  Well, not quite that.  Too sensitive a pride.
I'm not a betting man, but I think I would put my money on John
Gurney were he ever involved in what is called a tight corner."



XIV


It was not by chance that quite a number of people turned up to
watch the Rev. John Gurney's lads play the lads of Willowwell.
Mrs. Richmond was there, and both her husband and son contrived to
spare half an hour.  Mr. Slade attended to watch his grandson's
prowess, and prowess it was to be, for George caught the Willowwell
"Terror" in the slips, a hot catch, but he held it.  Mr. Slade's
daughter sat beside Mr. Slade, and saw her poor little man's side
play their best game of the season.  Willowwell were a formidable
eleven, and Willow was their Symbol, and the Rev. Reginald Stout
led them, and Mr. Stout was a great smiter.  Tradition allowed a
mature captain to lead the sides, but Gurney looked like a slip of
a boy beside that bearded Norse hero, Mr. Reggie Stout.  Gurney was
not quite himself, and perhaps for that reason his right arm took
charge and bowled with subconscious cunning.  At all events he put
Mr. Stout out with a googly when Mr. Stout's score stood at
thirteen.

Willowwell were dismissed for 73, and Willowwell took the field.
Gurney, sending out his first two batsmen to the wicket, seemed to
avoid a particular pair of eyes.  He could congratulate the son
upon that catch, but he was shy of the boy's mother.  He went and
sat among his lads on the grass in front of the marquee, and while
appearing to watch the game, became lost in sensitive forebodings.
What would youth think of him when it came to know that he had been
accused of lechery with his own wife!  It would be the town's
summer joke.

Things were not going well for the lads of Southfleet.  Two wickets
fell for nine runs.  Mr. Stout was the demon bowler.  Gurney was
sitting in doleful self-absorption when the voice appealed to him.

"You'd better go in, sir."

"What?" said Gurney, emerging from his sensitive stupor.

"Go in, sir, and stop Mr. Stout."

His flock murmured at him, and Gurney smiled.  How pleasant to be
regarded as the champion against the fox.

"I will, after the next wicket.  Now, Fred, England expects--"

Fred marched out rather cockily, and returned less cockily in three
minutes, having been caught in the slips for two.  Gurney was
buckling on his pads.  Things were looking serious, and it was no
time for melancholy lucubration.

"Good luck, sir."

"Hit him for six, sir."

Gurney went forth to battle, feeling suddenly and somehow man.  He
was given centre, and faced Mr. Stout with a smile, and as though
to advertise his recklessness he swiped Mr. Stout's first ball for
a boundary.  The Southfleet chorus cheered.  That healthy whack
appeared to set something loose in Gurney, a sudden devil-may-care
madness.  Almost he said:  "Damn it, I can play this game.  To
blazes with all humbug.  I'll show them."  He did.  He played
fireworks with the bowling.  He could do nothing wrong.

The Southfleet lads were exultant.

"Coo, look at that one!"

"Another boundary."

"Well 'it, sir, well 'it!"

George, who was squatting on the grass at his mother's feet, swayed
to and fro on his little behind in a state of ecstasy.

"That's forty-three!  Oo, there goes another!"

The mother looked down at her son.  How the young did fidget!  And
Mr. Slade looked at his daughter.

"Well, what do you think of our poor little man?"

Mrs. Hallard smiled the shadow of a smile.

"He has--"

"Possibilities!"

Mrs. Hallard glanced rather sharply at her father.  Even fathers,
and beloved fathers, had no right to be ironic when your secret
self was walking in some secret place and laughing--if kindly--at
certain promptings.

The Rev. John Gurney had just hit the winning run, a nice little
snick into the slips when the Rev. Egbert Jones and his wife
appeared upon the scene.  It was right and fitting that authority
should countenance and encourage these lads who were parishioners
in the making.  At this moment these selfsame lads were on their
feet, throwing up caps, and cheering.  Mr. Jones and his wife
looked at each other.  What did all this excitement mean?  They
entered the marquee, Mrs. Jones smiling and poking her chin right
and left.  On public occasions she behaved like Southfleet's royal
person.

Mr. Slade rose to offer her a chair, and graciously she accepted
it.

"What is all the excitement, Mr. Slade?"

"Mr. Gurney has just hit the winning run."

"Indeed!"

Mrs. Jones's smile seemed to freeze.  How--impertinent of Gurney!


Women are spiteful, men malicious, and malice postulates some
compensating sense of humour.  Mrs. Egbert Jones lacked any sense
of humour, though she smiled much and displayed many teeth.  Unkind
people called her smile a grin.  But that is as it may be.  Now,
Mrs. Jones discovered in this cricket business an opportunity to be
shocked and to blame, and such occasions were frequent.  When the
game was over, and Gurney walked back with Mr. Stout, carrying his
bat, his lads rushed out and gathered round him, and attended him
in loud and happy triumph to the marquee.  Never did they gather
round the Rev. Egbert in that familiar and eager way, and Mrs.
Jones, squinting through her pince-nez, was offended.  She
discovered a nice and convenient grievance against Mr. Gurney, a
moral grievance.  Surely, a man and a clergyman who had been
compelled to confess to a social scandal should not have appeared
so publicly and so assertively, and with such crude applause.  It
was--indelicate--of Gurney.  He should have bowed his head, gone
into retreat for a season, and with humility accepted the shame of
so disgraceful an involvement.

George had rushed out to meet the Master.  Gurney was looking hot
and happy.  He had forgotten the prides and prejudices of the
refined.  He laid his hand on George's head as though blessing him,
for George had not batted, yet was ready to forgive.  Gurney had
declared the innings closed, for the Rev. Reginald had whispered to
him:  "I say, old chap, I've got a sick soul to visit--urgent you
know.  Could you cut it short."  And Gurney had cut it short.

So did Mrs. Egbert Jones.  She rose.  She prodded her husband with
the point of her parasol, for Mr. Jones had taken a chair beside
Mrs. Hallard.  He looked up at his wife, and her frown admonished
him, also her glance in the direction of Gurney.  Mr. Jones rose,
with an "Excuse me."  Emily would never allow him much conversation
with a pretty woman, but on this occasion she was not denying him
the beatitudes of beauty.

"I think--we--should be going, Egbert."

Mr. Jones looked slightly puzzled.  But they'd only just arrived.

"Why, my dear?"

This was not the moment for argument.  Mrs. Jones opened her
parasol and walked out of the marquee and past Mr. Gurney and his
mob of boys.  From under the solemn shade of her green parasol she
looked him in the face, and the light that filtered through the
fabric gave to her countenance a tinge of green.  Gurney had begun
to smile, but the smile died away.  Why did the lady look so
forbidding and haughty?

Mr. Slade stepped in among the boys.

"Well played, sir."

"Much too well played," said the buxom Mr. Stout, gazing with
pleasure upon Mr. Slade's daughter.  What was the matter with old
Jones's Vinegar Pot?  Mr. Stout, being healthy and hearty,
preferred a honey-pot or a bowl of roses.

Mrs. Jones and her husband were processing towards the gate.  "What
is the--trouble, my dear?"

Mrs. Jones gave him the kind of look a good woman gives to the
unregenerate male.

"Surely, Egbert, you must have felt--"

"What, my dear?"

"The indelicacy, I might call it--indecency--of your curate
masquerading in public--after--that--revelation."

"But, my dear, the man must--"

"I have always suspected Gurney of being incapable of nice feeling.
Yes, to have married a woman of that description.  Not the kind of
man, Egbert, to have a good influence upon the young."

And suddenly Mr. Jones lost his temper.  He could have exclaimed
with Henry the Second:  "Will no one rid me of this turbulent
priest?"

"Damn it, Emily, I am getting too much Gurney."

"Egbert!  That vulgar word!"

"Well, upon my soul.  I'm sick of the sound of the fellow's name."

"The remedy is obvious," said she.  "Don't be weak, Egbert, don't
be weak."

Mr. Jones muttered something that sounded very like "Oh, go to
hell!"


One of our sages has defined humility as the self-effacing
innocence of a man who is not conscious of feeling humble.  The
Rev. Egbert Jones, nagged at consistently by his wife, did not
become humble, but angrily resigned.  It was useless to argue with
Emily; she was a very stupid and persistent woman who misunderstood
or misread your reasoning, and continued to assert that you had
said that black was white.  Mr. Jones might say to himself:  "Oh,
anything for peace," and retire among his chrysanthemums.  He
surrendered to what his wife described as a "Judgment of Solomon".
Did it occur to Mr. Jones to wonder what Solomon would have made of
Emily?  Not a member of his harem!  Tut-tut!

"I am firmly of the opinion, Egbert, that Gurney should not
preach."

"Not--preach?"

"Certainly not, at any rate for a time.  There should be a decent
interlude.  If he appears in the pulpit--I--shall walk out."

Mr. Jones concealed his inward exasperation.

"It means that I shall have to write two sermons."

"Your sermons are appreciated.  Let Gurney understand that he
should refrain for a time.  If he has any--delicacy of feeling--"

"He may object."

"Well, then, Egbert, of course the problem will solve itself.
Gurney will have a successor."

Mr. Jones lapsed into sarcasm.  "Perhaps you would like to select
him, Emily?"

"I think it would be quite a good idea."

The Rev. Egbert Jones might be jealous of his curate, but he had a
soapy soul, and liked things done with unction.  Moreover, Mr.
Jones knew that Gurney was not without friends.  He did not want
any uproar in the parish.  So, when the vicar approached Gurney on
the problem of not preaching, he did it with a bland and paternal
air, and as he supposed a father might speak to an unfortunate son.
Mr. Jones could appear kind when kindness oiled the wheels.

The sensitive are much at the mercy of the thick or soapy-skinned,
and when his vicar suggested with much solemnity to John Gurney
that he should refrain from preaching for a period Gurney felt
accused of not having responded with sufficient niceness to the
situation.  He took Mr. Jones's paternal unction seriously.  He sat
and looked distressed.  Had he been lacking in the finer delicacies
of feeling, and failed to realize that his association with a
tarnished woman left some tarnish upon him?  He was allowed to play
cricket but not to preach.

"Of course, sir, if you think that I--"

"I do, Gurney, I do.  I think the congregation will understand that
you have gone into--a short period of retreat.  Verbal retreat,
shall we call it?"

That was not a bad phrase from Mr. Jones.  He sometimes wished that
Emily would subscribe to some such ritual.  Now, what would be
Gurney's response?  If he was not fit to preach for a season, if he
was spiritually contaminated and should wash in Jordan, was he a
fit person to serve in the parish?  But Gurney's humility was such
that it baffled the plotters.

"I see your point of view, sir."

"I am very glad to hear it, Gurney.  You see, a priest, like
Cæsar's wife--"

Gurney was looking over the top of Mr. Jones's head at an engraving
of Christ hanging on the Cross.  It seemed to him significant and
symbolical.

"I will meet your wishes, sir.  Do you think I am a fit person to
administer the Holy Sacrament?"

This was somewhat of a poser for Mr. Jones.  He suspected irony,
but no irony was there.

"No--hum, I--well--we are vehicles, Gurney, channels through which
the Spirit passes.  I think you can be admitted to that Sacrament."

Gurney smiled faintly.  It did not occur to him to ask at this
moment why it should be right for him to administer the body and
blood of God, and not preach Him from the pulpit.

Mrs. Jones was listening outside the study door.  She was that sort
of woman, but she could not quite distinguish all that was said,
for Gurney's voice was subdued and quiet.  She heard her husband's
tones of solemn benediction as he gave Gurney to understand that
the ordeal was over, and that he was grateful for Gurney's co-
operation.  Mrs. Jones slid away and across the hall into the
drawing-room, under the impression that her husband had dismissed
his curate.

She squinted brightly up at him with much showing of the teeth.  A
tuft of hair had escaped from the tight bun at the back of her
head.

"Well, that's a relief, Egbert."

"What, my dear?"

"He's going, isn't he?"

Mr. Jones gazed at that tuft of hair.  He did wish that Emily would
cultivate more personal charm, as well as inward virtue.

"No.  He saw my point of view.  Really, I think that Gurney has
behaved to me with--"

"He promised not to preach?"

"For a period.  As I was saying, Emily, I think that Gurney has
behaved--very--considerately.  I--"

Then Mrs. Jones said a very characteristic thing.  "Sly little rat.
I know why he--"

Her husband looked shocked.  "My dear, I think that is a very
unjust remark, and a very--uncultured one."

Mrs. Jones twitched her shoulders.  "I--do--not stand corrected.  I
have good reason to suspect--"

But Mr. Jones showed temper.  "If I may say so, you have a
strangely suspicious mind, my dear."

"I?  Well, really!  If you are so short-sighted, Egbert--"

"You wish to supply the spectacles?  I don't need to wear them."

And Mr. Jones walked out of the room and went to be soothed by his
chrysanthemums.  Really, if Emily went on much more like this he
would find himself becoming a defender of Gurney.


John Gurney passed along Caroline Terrace to the cliffs.  Cliffs
they were not in any rocky sense, but a jumble of earthen walls and
slopes and gullies, shaggy with gorse and brambles, and rough turf.
Here and there, in some bank where the soil had slipped, yellowish
boulders lay exposed, suggesting skulls.  There were many secret
places here, secure from the crowd, where a man could sit or
stretch himself, and stare at the sky or the sea, or close his eyes
and dream.  Gurney found some such spot, and lying flat in a most
unclerical abandonment, watched the white clouds sailing.

There were moments when he wanted to be a boy again, and at this
moment he was a boy again.  He was one with the dead, those two
dear people who had died too soon.  He liked to think of the way
his mother used to sit, with her birdlike head and eyes, and her
little elusive smile that came and went.  She had suffered much--
had his mother, and even as a child, John Gurney had confronted the
problem of pain.  Why pain?  Why those agonies of the flesh and of
the spirit?  Was pain like some cleansing acid that ate the pride
and prejudices and vanities out of you?  Strange, that from pain
there should come peace!  This was not mere sentimentality, for
there were moments when John Gurney experienced a mysterious sense
of continuity.  Nothing died, nothing was dead.  His mother was
still there, sitting in her chair.  Everything linked up.  The past
was just a series of pictures, live pictures which you had passed
by in the great gallery of life, but you could return to them.
Nothing was dead.  Old savours, old scents, old scenes were as
alive as ever, especially so if you could become as a child and
discover in reality the eternal mystery.

Peace came to Gurney.  He was with his mother, and not in the
dreadful, Freudian sense.  Gurney, the simpleton, was so much wiser
than the wise.  He was not troubled now by the Egberts and Emilies,
the Sawkinses and Florences.  Some serene essence in him smiled at
these imperfect humanities.  They were just a part of life.  You
got up and walked on, conscious of that other something in you, and
of all the lovely things that mattered, beauty, simplicity,
sincerity, the eyes of a dog, the laughing face of a boy.  Yes, and
of that other face.  But did she understand?  Though there might be
pain, exquisite pain in not understanding.

"Perhaps she will think me a feeble little fellow?"

But was it feebleness to accept malice and to transcend it and to
say:  "They are but children--as I am, and wayward, naughty
children, but in the heart of a child there should be hope."



XV


Gurney arrived at the top of the cliff.  He had not followed any
orthodox path, but scrambled like a boy up grassy banks and
crumbling earthy ledges.  He had slipped up one of these ledges,
and the knees of his black trousers had gathered mother earth.  His
hat was on the back of his head, and a streak of hair across his
forehead; and like a boy he stood upon the cliff-top, a little
flushed and untidy, yet concerned about the state of his trousers.
He bent down to dust away the soil, but it was moist and adhesive,
and he had to call upon his handkerchief.

Thus it was that she saw him, before he saw her.  She had been
sitting less than ten yards away on a green seat with nothing but
the cliff-edge, the sea and the sky before her, and suddenly that
most unexpected figure had scrambled into view.  He was looking at
his knees, rubbing at them.  How casual and young of him!  How
boyish, to climb when the conventional path would have served.
Then it was that illumination came to her.  She sat very still,
vividly still in a glow of comprehension, her hands lying idle in
her lap.  Of course!  Why had she not divined it before?  Here was
the essential boy, the man-boy in all its implications, its
generosities, its impulses, its simplicities, and also its
multitudinous complexities.  His very tragedy, if it could be
called a tragedy, had been part of his boyishness, a romantic
rescue, just woman as he had seen her and as she was not, the young
quixote not yet man.

And suddenly she understood or felt that she understood.  A strange
tenderness seemed to stir her like a child in the womb.  She could
laugh at him, but with sweet humour, and such laughter could make
that which was laughed at more lovable.  Boy John Gurney, but with
no loutish arrogance, suddenly dismayed and as suddenly
mischievous.  He was looking at her now with a kind of frank
dismay.  He had been caught like a boy climbing an apple tree.

"Oh, excuse me--"

And she laughed, with him but not at him.  All her aloofness seemed
to melt away.  She had no fear of his foolishness.  She could say
just what came into her heart or head.  And how comforting and
joyous was that!

"Your poor trousers!  You ought to take more care of them."

Just that, and as she might have said it to George, a little
reproachfully, yet with a laughing compassion, and a comprehension
of the thoughtlessness of boys and men.

Gurney, handkerchief in hand, stood and stared at her, so stricken
by the assault of his surprise that he forgot to raise his hat.
Almost, she could have said to him:  "Put your hat straight, my
dear.  And that tuft of hair."  She just sat and smiled and said
nothing.

Gurney came out of his stare.  He put his handkerchief away, and
glanced again at his trousers.

"Yes, careless of me, wasn't it?"

"Very.  But why did you come up that way?"

"Why?  Well, I really don't know.  Just because I felt like it."

She looked beyond him at the sea.

"Felt like it?  Yes, one does.  And perhaps it's the best of
reasons."

As a woman she understood that.  She was not the precise male,
measuring out, analysing, boring humanity with tables of
statistics.

"Do you think it is a good reason?"

"What better?  I see a cherry, I feel a want to eat cherries; I do
eat cherries."

He looked at her as though he thought her the most wonderful person
in the world, and her words, words of the profoundest wisdom,
which, in a sense, they were.

"Well--er--yes.  There are so many things one would like, but--"

"Do you always say 'no' to yourself?"

His glance seemed to go inward.  What was his inward self saying?
"I want to sit on the seat with her."

"No," and he went and sat on the seat, took off his hat, and showed
the full length of that forelock.  Like his smile, it was somehow
attractive.

"Do you mind?"

"Why should I mind?"

He had no answer to that.  He looked at the sea, and found his lips
uttering that which he had not thought of saying.  It just came
out.

"I have been--listening--to Mr. Jones."

"We--all--do that, don't we?  Did you like it?"

"Not very much."

"Nor do we."

He gave her a sudden, elfish look.  "Well, I'm afraid you will have
to.  He persuaded me not to preach."

"Not preach?"

"Yes."

"Not--ever?"

"No, only for a time.  You see--I don't know whether you--"

"I know a little."

"Ah, your father.  I asked him to.  He is a most wise man, your
father.  You know, Mrs. Hallard, there are some people who carry
the peace of God about with them."

"I do know that.  So, you climbed up the cliff because--"

There was sudden laughter in his eyes.

"Perhaps that was it, because I couldn't climb into the pulpit!"

There was silence between them for a minute, one of those silences
that are like deep water over which two little ships may drift
nearer to each other.  Gurney looked at the sea, and he looked at
his hat, and a voice within him said:  "Why don't you talk to her
about it?"  And she was saying to herself:  "Shall I ask him to
tell me?"  So, when Gurney made up his mind, which was, after all,
like withdrawing a bolt from the door of a natural impulse, she was
ready and expectant.

"I don't know whether I ought to talk about myself."

She smiled at him.  "Most people do it--without thinking."

How apt she was!  Gurney turned his hat over and looked at the
lining.  It was a very old hat.

"Someone once told me that when a man wanted to begin a confession
he would--try to create sympathy--by saying that his wife did not
understand him.  Is that so?"

"In my experience--yes, and a rather mean method."

"Oh, I agree, I agree.  I wasn't going to say that.  What I was
going to say was, that I did not understand the woman I married."

"You dear innocent!" thought she.

Gurney turned his hat over again, and brushed some dust from the
brim.  "Yes, it was my fault."

"You take the blame?"

"I do.  I did my wife an injustice in marrying her."

"But you did not think so at the time."

"No, of course not.  You see, I was very young,"

She smiled over him and his ingenuous candour.  Very young!  And
was he not still very much in that state?

"Did your wife see it in that way?"

"I really don't quite know.  We were so different.  I ought to have
realized that.  I was a little older than she was."

There was a touch of tenderness in her inward laughter.  He--older
than Eve, older than nature!  And what a John he was!

Well, he had told her, and it had been no plunge into icy water.
Some of his shyness had disappeared, but his strange humility
remained.  He said that Florence's exuberant fleshliness had made
life very difficult for him, and that he had hoped that some day--
Poor lamb, well, no wonder!  No, he had not been a believer in
divorce.  Marriage was a sacrament.

"Even when it is--hopeless?" she asked him.

He rubbed at his hat.  "Well, perhaps there are cases--"

"I divorced my husband.  You know that?"

"Yes."

"His--was a hopeless case.  And I had the boy.  But, tell me; don't
you feel that Mr. Jones's attitude is a little unjust?"

He looked at her and shook his head.  "No.  Mr. Jones is, I think,
a stickler for--what shall I call it?"

"Appearances."

"Perhaps a little more than that.  I suppose that a man in my
position cannot afford tarnish.  Or--ridicule."

"Not ridicule--surely?"

"I am afraid so.  I am not wholly without experience of my fellow
men."

She sat gazing at the sea.  What a strange amalgam he was of
simplicity and shrewdness.  But was not life a complex affair when
you chose to regard it as something more subtle than a human zoo?
There might be several selves in you, not one.  Only the very old
and wise and kindly--like her father--might be able to assimilate
those warring selves into one harmonious whole.

And then he asked her a sudden question.  "You won't mind my going
on being friends with George?"

That startled her, and she was hurt for his sake.  "Mind?  Of
course not.  You are just the man I would choose--for my boy."


Was there a jauntiness about the set of Gurney's hat, a gaillard
lift of the head as he went upon his way?  Maybe there was.  So, he
was just the man she would choose for her boy!  Oh, lovely words!
Well, and if for her boy--?  But that was beyond dreams.  No
matter, she had given him a badge of honour, and old Sawkins and
his crowd could go to Jericho and find no compassionate Rahab
there.  Tut-tut!  As for the Rev. Egbert and his Emily they were no
more than social bumble-bees.  Gurney was walking almost with the
suave, Golightly prance, and then--he ran into Miss Godbold.

She covered the path.  She had a commiserating face.  She planted
herself at the foot of Gurney's particular cross, but not as
adoring woman.  She had a little debt to pay.

"Oh, Mr. Gurney, I do sympathize with you."

Gurney looked puzzled.  "I beg your pardon.  But--why?"

"Such a skeleton in your poor cupboard.  Do you think I could
assist in--?"

Gurney assumed utter innocence.  "What, in cleaning the cupboard?"

"That--in a sense--was my meaning.  I have had some experience of
fallen women."

Gurney looked shocked.  "Miss Godbold, you surprise me.  Is it
possible that--you--were ever a member of the--profession?"

"Sir!"

Her bladder of a face looked so like bursting that Gurney lifted
his hat and hurried on.  Had the mantle of Mr. Slade been laid upon
him?  He found himself repeating the old nursery rhyme.


          "Old Mother Hubbard went to the cupboard
          To get her poor dog a bone.
          But when she got there
          The cupboard was bare--"


In his inadvertence Gurney nearly collided with a lamp-post.  "You
silly ass," said he.  But to whom was an apology due, to Miss
Godbold, the lamp-post, or the dog?


Yet, Southfleet was to surprise and perhaps to sadden Gurney in its
various reactions to his unfortunate marriage.  The story spread,
Sawkins & Co. saw to that, and in the passing from door to door,
drawing-room to drawing-room, pub to pub, became amplified and
distorted.  The most prevalent variant was that Gurney had married
a prostitute.  Well, really!  For, Southfleet was still in long
skirts and showing no calves, and though the emancipation was very
near, a slipping seat in the sex saddle was still the supreme sin.
An odour of stale fish attached itself suddenly to Mr. Gurney's
reputation.  It did not matter how, when or why he had married the
woman.  He was wedded to a harlot, and the implications were
obvious.

The saint, at some period in his life, had been seduced by the
serpent.  Now, how could you get over that?  A man who could mix
with that sort of woman could not be received with confidence into
Christian homes.  Miss Godbold and her ilk had a lovely, slimy
scandal to play with.  Could hands that had fondled a prostitute be
fit to administer the Holy Sacrament?  Miss Godbold and her friends
had very strong views upon the matter, and they carried their
prejudices to Mrs. Egbert Jones, who was in severe sympathy with
them.

Mrs. Jones nagged her husband.  "You must realize, Egbert that
there is a very strong feeling in the parish."

Mr. Jones had suffered such lingual chastisement for years, but
whether it was his digestion or his philosophy that were wearing
thin under perpetual doses of vinegar, the fact remains that Mr.
Jones was growing vulgarly rebellious.

Damn all these old women, why couldn't they let a fellow alone?
Chrysanthemums did not pump piety at you.  So Mr. Jones began to
lose his temper with his possessive and interfering spouse and to
snub her, which was rather late in the day.  Mr. Jones either
should have begun snubbing Emily on their honeymoon; or better
still--he should not have married her.

"Will you kindly understand, my dear, that I prefer to run my
parish in my own way."

Hoity-toity!  Mrs. Jones had an irritating way of ignoring what was
said to her, and of repeating her own statement.

"There is a very strong feeling in the parish, Egbert."

"So you said a minute ago.  I am neither deaf nor senile."

"This feeling--"

Mr. Jones took up the morning paper, and retired behind it.  What
execrable manners!

"Egbert, when I am speaking--"

"Are you still speaking?"

"Please put that paper down."

Mr. Jones did not put the paper down.  He went on reading it, and
he ignored all the remarks his wife chose to make.

Her last words contained an ultimatum.  "If you don't put that
paper down, Egbert--"

Mr. Jones became almost Slade.  "I beg your pardon, Emily.  Did you
speak?"

"Egbert!"

Mr. Jones got up, and humming a popular tune, walked out of the
room with the paper, and retiring to the conservatory and his
chrysanthemums, locked the door on the inside.  He kept a basket
chair in the conservatory, and he sat down in it.  Would Emily
follow him?  She did.  He saw her mouthing at him through the
glass.  He ignored her.  Damn it, if Gurney HAD married a
prostitute, there were other women who could almost persuade you
that Juanry was a virtue.


Mr. Slade was very much alive to the situation.  A part of
Southfleet had its nose in the air, and Mr. Slade and certain of
his associates became active.  Gurney and Mr. Slade were seen much
in company; Gurney and George and George's mother walked on the
pier together.  Gurney was seen taking tea with Mrs. Richmond on
her balcony, and this flagrant flouting of morality produced an
incident that was provoked by Miss Godbold.  Miss Godbold's ethical
impertinence was beyond belief.

The ladies met in Caroline Gardens.

Said Miss Godbold with great unction:  "Dear Mrs. Richmond, I wish
you wouldn't do it!"

"Do what?"

"Give countenance to hypocrisy.  I can only presume that you are
ignorant of--"

And suddenly, Mrs. Richmond let out one of her delightful laughs.

"I am looking at you, Miss Godbold."

Now, what did she mean by that?  Mrs. Richmond had walked on with a
very definite air of detachment, and Miss Godbold remained
pondering those strange words.  She could make nothing of them.
Her consolation was that good-looking women whom men admired were
usually frivolous fools.



XVI


One of the illusions which prevails among both the cynical and the
sentimental is that some particular virtue is to be found in some
particular stratum of society.  Mr. Robert Smiles held that honesty
and sincerity were the private possessions of the working classes.
Mrs. Egbert Jones would have claimed them for her own clique.  She
was for ever declaiming against the slyness and the ingratitude of
the poor.  Ingratitude for what?  Dr. Richmond, who knew human
nature when both sick and well, would have smiled ironically over
the class-superstition.  Virtue, or whatever you chose to call it,
was the halo about the head of some particular person, some
singular individual, like his wife or Mr. Slade.  He called them
The Sensitive Plants, and the notion that they could be appreciated
and understood by the common or garden cabbage amused him.
Cabbages could be useful and worthy vegetables, decent growths, but
they were very liable to be infested by caterpillars and they were
offensive in old age.  Dr. Richmond was a mystical realist.  He was
one of a crowd and yet separative, as most men who follow a subtle
craft are apt to be.  He had no illusions about the mass-mind.  It
could be admirable in many of its reactions, but it was swayed by
crude sentiments and emotions.  It was as fickle as the English
weather.  It expected so much, and in its obtuseness could give so
little of those more exquisite things which are not cabbage.

So, poor Gurney was to be surprised by the loss of loyalty he was
to suffer when a certain thing happened, Dr. Richmond not at all
so.  It was the many who looked askance and gossiped about him at
back doors, and were sure that he was no better than he should be.
"Call himself a clergyman and a gentleman!"  There was ridicule,
the smugness of simplicity in the condemnation.  Besides, there is
some malicious pleasure to be obtained from catching a so-called
gent with his trousers down.  The cruder the person, the more
facile and complacent is the apportionment of blame.  Moreover,
some of these good, simple souls may have felt that they had been
fooled.  Their little St. John had a tail, like the rest of them.

Gurney held a lads' class on Sunday afternoons, and on successive
Sundays he missed one or two of the boys.  When asking the very
natural question:  "Does anyone know why Thomas isn't here?" he
became aware of a certain air of apologetic uneasiness.  No one
appeared able to answer the question.  Gurney, meeting one of the
absent boys carrying a basket in the High Street, stopped the lad.

"Have you deserted us, Charlie?"

Charlie looked flushed and awkward.

"Well, sir, no, sir, but my dad--"

"Your father?"

"Said I wasn't to come any more.  Dad's gone chapel."

They parted, for Gurney, suddenly conscious of the implication, did
not wish to press the question.  The lad's embarrassment had hurt
him.  So, certain parents were of the opinion that he was not a
proper person to mould the characters of the young.

But these desertions followed after a shocking thing had happened,
though how Gurney, as a Christian, could have acted otherwise than
he did his detractors did not pause to consider.


It happened on a Sunday.  Gurney, who had grown a little shy of
congregational faces, or of some of them, kept his eyes more in the
chancel of St. Jude's than of old.  Certain of those faces were not
friendly, and Gurney was feeling sore about a series of affronts
that he had received.  They were dumb accusations, not vocal.
People passed him by.  It appeared that he had become a person whom
certain of his parishioners did not wish to meet.  He had surprised
rude and surreptitious smirks on the faces of working-men.  He had
heard guffaws after he had passed, and remarks which he had felt to
be exchanges of crude humour.  Now, on this morning Gurney walked
to the lectern to read the first lesson, and glancing for a moment
at the faces below him saw a particular and astonishing face, that
of his wife.

Florence!

For two seconds or so he was voiceless.  Was this a terrible
hallucination?  It was not.  Florence was smiling at him, and
Gurney dropped his eyes, and stumbled into the first lesson.  He
held on to the lectern.  He heard a voice reading; he supposed it
was his voice.  He came to a difficult passage and fumbled at it.
Good God, was he going to break down?  He pulled himself together
and concentrated upon the words, and almost he seemed to be
spelling them out like a child engaged in a reading lesson.  Beads
of sweat stood on his forehead.

Florence in Southfleet!  Florence in the third pew on his right and
utterly visible between Mr. Golightly and Mr. Sprague, a very vivid
Florence.  Oh, much too vivid, with an impertinent little black hat
with red roses in it sitting and smiling upon her too brilliant
hair.  One stupefied stare had absorbed all the details and the
implications of her.  Florence's complexion owed much to art.  Her
very blue eyes were bold and jocund.  Almost Gurney could divine
the smell of her.  Was it patchouli?  He had seen Mr. Sprague
glance over a shoulder as though to discover whence some potent
perfume emanated.

What did it mean?  More important still, what was he to do?

Gurney staggered through the lesson.  He gabbled it, and the
congregation wondered.  Gurney was not himself.  His face looked
white and pinched.  And was that not perspiration on his forehead?
Thank God, Mr. Jones was to read the second lesson.  He would not
have to stand again--full front--with Flo's luscious face making
mock eyes at him.  No, there was no malice in her eyes, but a kind
of jocund, rallying friendliness which might be worse.  Gurney
retired to his stall, and his legs shook under him.  He had a dry
mouth and a desperate consciousness of crisis.

What should he do?  What did Florence intend him to do?

Gurney blundered with one of the prayers, and felt his vicar's eyes
fixed upon him.  Should he confess to Mr. Jones?  Mr. Jones had
been less censorious during the last few weeks, for Mr. Jones was
feeling less competitive.  Poor little Gurney!  Mr. Jones was
conscious of being once more the master in his own vineyard, and at
heart he was a good-natured man.

Mr. Jones preached, but what the sermon was about Gurney had not
the least idea.  So far as he was concerned it was fragmental,
adventitious noise, a mere voice declaiming.  Gurney was tucked up
in his stall, and shivering with emotional ague.  For she was
there, not Florence, but his dream-woman.

The inspiration came to him when the churchwardens and sidesmen
marched up the aisle with the collecting plates and delivered them
to the Rev. Egbert who had passed from pulpit to altar.  It was Mr.
Slade's face that rescued John Gurney from chaos and confusion.
That serene old face had confronted storms and tempests and lived
them down.  Courage?  Yes, that was it.  To be the master of the
meanness of your soul.  Was he to show cowardice before all these
people?  The congregation was singing the last verse of the last
hymn, and Gurney, who had been head-down and mute, burst suddenly
into song.

Mr. Jones pronounced the benediction.  The congregation was
standing.  The choir filed out, and as Gurney stood to take his
place, he nodded and smiled at his wife.  Mrs. Sprague, seeing that
glance go past her, turned her head to look, and so did others.
Had the Rev. John Gurney smiled at--that?  Gurney paused outside
the vestry door, and so brought his vicar to a standstill.

"Excuse me, sir, but my wife is in the church.  Do you mind if I go--
quickly?"

Mr. Jones's eyebrows went up.  He had noticed a particular person.
She had been too noticeable to be missed.

"Your wife, Gurney?"

"Yes, I did not know.  It came as--I know you will excuse me, sir."

"You wish to speak to her?"

"I do."

Mr. Jones's eyebrows had come down.  He smiled, and his smile was
kinder than he knew.

"Why, of course, Gurney.  Take off your vestments."

Gurney's eyes thanked him.  He hurried in, disrobed, and emerged in
search of Florence, not thinking perhaps that he had been shedding
other vestments, and that the vulgar world would see him naked.

The church had emptied itself, but Mrs. Gurney had remained, seated
like Pagan Love and waiting for man.  She was in very good odour
with herself, and the perfume of her spread like a bowl full of
violets.  She smiled upon her husband, that broad-nosed, cherry-
ripe smile.  Her hands were gloved.  She was not unlike one of
Rossetti's women, sensuous and splendid, save that she had the
fleshly humour that those dream-ladies lacked.

"Well, John, my dear."

"Florence, what are you doing here?"

"I am staying at the Royal George.  D'you want to kiss me?"

Gurney did not.

"But, Florence--"

She put up her gloved hands.

"See--that?  I'm becoming a respectable woman, John.  Yes, he's
come down to brass-tacks and bed-knobs.  And I've come down to talk
it over."

"You mean--?"

"Our divorce, my dear.  You'll be a sport, won't you?"

Gurney was holding his hat to his chest, and trying not to feel
frightened.  "Come, Florence, we can't talk here."

"Yes, it is a bit--stilted--isn't it.  Let's get back to the hotel.
You can meal with me.  I'd like a glass of sherry after that
sermon."

Gurney stood aside, and his wife rose with crepitations of black
silk, and before John Gurney had realized it she had taken his arm.

"Quite like old times, old lad.  Wedding march and all that!"

Gurney saw the empty aisle and the porch door before him, a panel
of light and publicity, terrifying light.  Nor was that portal of
publicity without a background.  There were figures loitering
outside.  So, Southfleet had smelt--Florence!

Gurney put his chin up and recalled the face of Mr. Slade.  If that
seller of children's toys had flouted the prejudices of the pious,
why not he?  If the thing was to be done at all, let it be done
gallantly and with valour.  Mr. and Mrs. Gurney walked out into the
sunlight to confront those expectant faces, the countenances of Mr.
Sawkins, Miss Godbold and their supporters.  Gurney put on his hat
and took it off again to these dear people.  He smiled upon them.
He might have been leading out his bride.

"Good morning, Miss Godbold.  Good morning, Mr. Sawkins."  He even
patted his wife's hand.

"Friends of mine, Florence."

Mrs. Gurney gave Mr. Sawkins her most brilliant, Leicester Square
smile.  Almost it said:  "Hello, darling.  Feeling like a little
love to-night?"

Mr. Sawkins was not.  The pair passed on, and Mr. Sawkins and Miss
Godbold gazed upon each other.

"Well, of all the impudent--!"

Mr. Sawkins was biting his beard.  It was the same lady, and Gurney
had not lied about his wife.

"Nice business," said Mr. Sawkins.

Miss Godbold made a clucking noise.

"Disgraceful!  How dared that woman enter the house of God!"

Gurney's friends were not in evidence, and he was glad of it.  He
preferred to make this fatal pilgrimage alone, and perhaps he had
never felt more alone than when walking to the Royal George arm in
arm with Florence.  How near one could be to a person in the flesh,
and how remote in the spirit!  But Gurney kept his head up, and
looked Southfleet in the face.  It was astonishing how much of
Southfleet was there to be confronted.  So, they came to the white
portico of The Royal George, and entered, and were met by old
Joseph, the head waiter, napkin on arm, and with a face that was
changeless in its gravity whatever strange things life might usher
in.  It was said of Joseph that had an elephant walked into the
hotel, Joseph would have met the beast with dry politeness.

"Good morning, sir.  Lunching, sir?  Table for one in the window.
I'll get you a tub to sit on."

Florence smiled upon Joseph.  "My husband is taking lunch with me.
Two glasses of sherry in the lounge."

"Yes, madam."

"Dark sherry, none of your pale stuff."

"Two dark sherries, madam."

And Joseph carried his gravity to the bar, and there it burst like
champagne that could not be contained.  The Rev. John Gurney was
lunching with his wife.  Well, if anybody wanted to see life let
'em go and have a look at her.

The dining-room windows of the Royal George gave upon Caroline
Terrace and the Gardens.  A meal was a public occasion and passers-
by could see the pseudo-fashionable folk who fancied the Royal
George for a gay week-end lunching or dining in state.  Joseph
happened to have a window-table vacant and he presented it to Mr.
and Mrs. Gurney, for assuredly they were worth displaying.
Joseph's sense of humour was crusty and sometimes corked.

Gurney flinched but sat down.  He would have preferred the dim
deeps of the interior, for this window was so very naked, and
Florence had ordered a bottle of claret.  Southfleet would behold
him drinking wine with Pagan Love.  Well, in for a penny, in for a
pound!  Maybe the sherry had not been without its effect upon
Gurney's courage.

"Well, here we are," said she.  "I suppose you don't feel like
calling me your Popsy Wopsy?"

"Did I ever, Florence?"

"Not you!  But--he--does.  He's in leather, and he has a villa on
the river at Surbiton.  We were through Boulter's Lock last
Sunday."

Gurney spooned at his soup.  "How old, Florence?"

"Forty-nine.  He's nuts on me.  His other one had religion.
Suppose I'm a relief.  Well, I've got to the age when I like my
food and a comfy chair.  Gosh, how I must have shocked you, poor
little darling!"

Gurney gazed out of the window and saw the bright and freckled face
of George.  George was staring, and no wonder.  Ye gods, fate might
have spared him George, but Gurney smiled and nodded at the boy,
and drowned his embarrassment in soup.

"So, you want to be free, Florence."

"Yes, darling.  You'll be a sport, won't you?"

Gurney wiped his lips.  "If you wish to live your life--otherwise,
I will."

"Well, that's common sense, isn't it.  He's willing to do the right
thing by me.  After all, I was always crushed strawberry and not
angel white.  Born that way, I suppose.  Got it from my dad, I
guess."

"But your father, Florence--"

"Fooled you, did he?  I tell you, my lad, my pa was as hot an old
blackguard as ever took to the tiles, or wanted to and couldn't.
That's what turned him sour, being a sidesman at Peckham and having
to be respectable.  Nasty old humbug he was."

"I wonder why you married me, Florence."

"Suppose I thought you rather sweet, and I was pretty sick of pa.
Well, I'm sorry, my dear."

They had taken their table early, and other people began to gather
for lunch, and as the room filled Gurney was made aware of a
significant change in his wife's behaviour.  Her voice became less
loud, her manners more decorous.  Florence was preparing for
Surbitonian culture by being refined.  And John Gurney was
strangely moved to compassionate comprehension.  Florence was just
the grown-up child, healthily greedy, capable of smearing her face
with jam, vain, the complete little egoist, yet ready to put on
manners and show off and become the perfect little lady.  Well,
well, would not God in His wisdom have given Florence her freedom
to exploit gilded nuts and gold bed-knobs?  After all, what else
could God have done?

"So, you want me to--institute--?"

Florence winked at him, and glanced meaningly at their neighbours.
"Yes, John, if you will."

"Then I will, Florence."

"Thank you, my dear."

She beckoned to the waiter.  "Waiter, we will have Pêche Melba."

"Yes, madam."

"And plenty of peach."


The Rev. Egbert Jones and his wife indulged in a most unsabbatarian
altercation during the midday meal.  The meat was lamb and tough,
and so was the texture of Emily.  She had been listening to Miss
Godbold, and Miss Godbold had a peculiar knack of turning food sour
in the stomach.

"I declare, Egbert, that--that--man must not enter our church
again."

Mr. Jones was feeling exasperated, and not merely over the tough
meat.

"And when, Emily, were you presented with the living?"

"I don't want sarcasm, Egbert.  I insist on your engaging a new
curate."

Mr. Jones laid down his knife and fork.  "And--I--might insist,
Emily, upon your engaging a new cook."

"Let me say at once, Egbert, that the household is my business."

"Well, my dear, why not attend to it more, and leave the parish to
me?"

"Because you seem incapable of--"

"Eating tough mutton?  I suggest most emphatically that you mind
your own business, and leave Gurney to me."

This was rank rebellion.

"After--the impudent behaviour of that woman?"

"One might have some sympathy for Gurney.  I think he showed moral
courage."

"Moral courage, indeed!  Well, I should like to see YOU show some
moral courage."

Then, Mr. Jones said a disgraceful thing.

"Oh, shut up, woman, you give me indigestion."

And strange to say Mrs. Jones did shut up.


George trotted home to Sea View.  Being in his Sunday clothes he
should have walked sedately, but neither Mr. Slade nor his mother
objected to his trotting on Sunday.  The new dispensation was
coming in, and very soon the first great German war would free
women's legs from too much petticoat.  George's toys were not put
away on the Sabbath, nor was he forbidden to read R. L. Stevenson
or Henty.  Mr. Slade believed that if you squeezed human nature too
much on one side it burst out on the other.  Besides, there was
plum tart and custard for lunch, and George was filled with other
curiosities.  Who was the strange-looking lady with whom Mr. Gurney
was lunching at the Royal George?

George asked that question over his roast beef and Yorkshire
pudding.  His mother gave him a silent and considering look, and it
was his grandfather who answered the question.  He held that it was
better to be frank with the young than to treat it to mumbo-jumbo.

"That was Mrs. Gurney, George."

George stared, with a piece of pudding on his fork.  "I didn't know
Mr. Gurney had a wife, grand-dad."

"Well, you know now, my dear."

George slipped the piece of pudding into his mouth, and while he
masticated he appeared to cogitate.

"She doesn't look--like--"

"Like what, my dear?"

"A lady, grandpa."

Mr. Slade and his daughter exchanged glances.  Mr. Slade felt
posed, but the inspiration came to him.

"Things aren't always what they seem, George.  I'm not a
gentleman."

"Oh, yes, but you are, grand-dad."

"I keep a shop, my dear, and gentlemen don't keep shops."

"I don't care.  You are a gentleman."

"Well, then, Mrs. Gurney may be a lady."



XVII


Gurney, greatly daring, walked on the pier that afternoon with his
wife.  It was not a tactful act on the part of one who had been
persuaded to institute proceedings for divorce, but sentiment held
Gurney by the arm, and chattered and bored him.  What a world it
would be if everything was Florence, high-bosomed and perfumed and
pornographic, full of shy artifice that, like a silk skirt,
concealed an exhausting abundance of the flesh.  But Gurney was
feeling that he was saying good-bye to a creature for whom he had
been somewhat responsible.  As for old Rawlins, when he had seen
Gurney pass through the turnstile with that wealth of femininity,
old Rawlins had smacked his knee, and exulted.

"Gosh, well if--he--ain't got a goer!  Shouldn't have thought it of
'im.  That's the sort of bit I'd like to cuddle on a quiet seat
after sunset."

Which goes to prove that old Rawlins's taste in women was not
elevated, and that his opinion of Gurney as man had risen.  Gurney
attended at St. Jude's Church that evening.  He had had a few words
in private with his Vicar.

"If you would rather I was absent, sir--"

"My dear Gurney, I wish nothing of the kind."

"Thank you.  That is--if I may say so--true charity and breadth of
mind.  My wife came here to ask me to divorce her."

"And shall you?"

"What would you advise?"

Mr. Jones had looked blandly benignant.  He was going to rub in his
victory over Emily.

"Well, Gurney, yes.  I presume it will be a straight case.  Not
pleasant for you, I know.  I should take what the Law will give
you."

"I am glad you feel that way, sir.  This tie has been an incubus
upon me--for years."

Mr. Jones marched in to evening service feeling a magnanimous and
fine fellow, and liking Gurney all the better, for Gurney was a
figure in a triumphal procession.  Mr. Jones kept an eye upon
Emily.  She did not walk out as did Miss Godbold, Mr. Sawkins and
one or two others.  Mrs. Jones was feeling an injured woman, but
she remained shut up in the vicarage pew.

Gurney had said good-bye to his wife, and he found Mr. Slade
waiting for him outside the porch.  Gurney was glad of Mr. Slade,
for here was a man to whom you could open your soul, and he was
feeling lonely.  Noisy exhibitionists like Florence drove your shy
spirit to hide like a bird in a bush.

"We are expecting you to supper, John."

Gurney looked frightened.  "Don't you think, sir, I--?"

"No, I don't, John, whatever you mean by that.  You must have had a--
tiring--day."

Mr. Slade took Gurney's arm as though to make sure of him, and to
link up with him.

"Well, it's finished, and so am I."

"You--finished, John?"

Gurney smiled whimsically at nothing.  "I'm either a sad sinner or
a figure of fun.  It is not seemly that I should stay on here."

Mr. Slade did not say "Fudge" or "Nonsense".  He pressed his
friend's arm.

"Some of us want you to stay."

"That's very kind of you."

"Any trouble with--Egbert?"

"No, Mr. Jones has been surprisingly considerate."

"Has he, indeed!  I don't think he is a bad sort of man.  Flabby
and fearful, and vexed with a wife.  May have made him more
sympathetic.  By Jove, I'll increase my Easter Offering!"

Mr. Slade's eyes were humorous.

"As for being a figure of fun, John, it has its advantages.  You
don't start on a pompous pedestal and get pushed over into the mud.
For years, I suppose, I was a figure of fun.  Silly old Slade!  I
even had to clean old Sawkins's boots.  But now I'm cheeky."

Gurney glanced at the serene face and fine white head.

"Humour, sir?"

"Yes, John, laugh, chuckle, make a joke of life."

"A parson is not expected--"

"No, my lad, but how refreshing you would be.  Cock an eye, smile
at everybody, even tickle the old women.  They might pretend to be
shocked, but they'd like it."

Gurney reflected.  "Perhaps I have been a little lacking in a sense
of humour.  By the way, I have agreed to divorce my wife."

Again Mr. Slade pressed Gurney's arm.  "That's not exactly a
laughing matter, but I'm glad of it.  You'll be like a boy with a
clean slate, John."

"What sort of picture shall I draw on it?"

"Just yourself, my lad, and don't think too much about it."

They found George curled up in a garden chair and reading Treasure
Island.  He uncurled himself when he saw his grandfather and Mr.
Gurney at the gate.  There was a curious solemnity about the boy.
He went to meet Mr. Gurney, his frank and freckled face upturned,
and he put out his hand with a childish gravity.

"I'm so glad you've come to supper, sir."

Gurney's eyes lit up.  "Thank you, George."

"And mother's glad too."

Somehow this young candour and courtesy put fear out of Gurney's
heart.  Was it true?  It was true.  He saw her pass out through a
french window into the veranda; she waited for them there, her face
in the shadow, her feet in the sunlight.  Gurney looked at her and
felt that to Mr. Shade's daughter he was no mere figure of fun, but
man in his dignity and uprightness.  He bent his head to her.  A
more romantic impulse would have moved him to kiss her hands.

"If I am trespassing, blame--your father."

She smiled at both of them.  "I forgive you any trespass."

"All my trespasses?  Then, I thank you."


The firm of Messrs. Grigson & Rogers undertook the necessary legal
proceedings for the Rev. John Gurney.  Mr. Grigson was dead, poor
man, but Mr. Rogers served as a somewhat adequate successor, bland
and calm and kind.  It promised to be a straightforward case.  Mr.
Rogers cautioned Gurney as to his behaviour, for Gurney appeared to
be an innocent and magnanimous soul, and ready to condone his
wife's lapse in morals.  It had been his fault for marrying poor
Florence.  Mr. Rogers warned Gurney against any contact with the
lady.  The case might be tried by a judge who had a passion for
suspecting collusion.

"Of course you want it kept as quiet as possible, Gurney."

Gurney looked wistful.  "Hushed up, you mean, sir?  Well, I'm not
afraid of the truth, but I don't want to be pilloried in the Press,
if that is what you mean."

"That is what I DO mean."

"And can you give me any idea of what it will cost?"

"Do you want damages against the co-respondent?"

"Damages?  Oh, no.  I have suffered no damage.  It would be
indecent."

Mr. Rogers smiled inwardly over this sweet innocent.

"Well, we shall get costs against him, though legal costs do not
always quite cover the petitioner's expenses."

"So, I may have to find some money.  I never seem to have much
money, Mr. Rogers."

"I should not worry, Gurney.  We shan't press you unduly.  Meet
your troubles as they come."

Those words might have been prophetic, for though the case was to
be undefended, Gurney was to suffer what were to him painful
humiliations.  He would have to go into the witness-box.  Oh,
horrors!  He stood there and gave his evidence, and was treated
with humour and pity and trickles of contempt by the Great Man who
was in a jocular mood.  The judge made a Baa-Lamb of Gurney.  The
court tittered.  They looked at the lady and the little parson, and
the tableau was not productive of tears.  Florence was dressed for
the part, frail woman seeking security, but her flamboyance could
not be and was not veiled.  She gave the judge soft answers, and
the jury glad-eyes.  She accepted everything that was blameworthy,
and excused her frailties by confessing to the unsuitability of her
marriage.

Ye gods, yes!  The court was in a laughing mood, and though its
laughter flattered the Great Man's wit, it was hard on Gurney.  He
was, indeed, the day's figure of fun.  How had this tame little
fellow managed to get off with this highly-coloured and stoutly-
sexed lady?  The business of bedding-down must have been pure
burlesque, the Variety Stage at its broadest.  The court eyed
Gurney with ironic and humorous pity.  Poor, silly little ass!  And
Gurney, the sensitive plant, felt all these cabbages and
cauliflowers and broad beans rocking on their stalks in rollicking
enjoyment of his adventure in matrimony.

Moreover, the Press saw its opportunity.  One of the new halfpenny
dailies and a Sunday journal made hay of Gurney's matrimonial
comedy.  These gentlemen saw nothing but the comic picture of a
little lamb attempting to satisfy the organic appetite of a fine
and lusty lioness.  The case was reported with some prominence in
these papers.  One headed it:  "The Parson and The Pretty Lady".
Gurney was presented with his freedom and his costs, but Southfleet
was able to read all about its comic little curate and the bashful
background of his marriage.  The Press made a martyr of Gurney,
without realizing that it might be flaying his secret soul.  The
case had been good copy, and the vulgar liked to read of the
follies of their so-called betters.

Mr. Sawkins read the papers and chortled.  His shot might have
missed the mark, but those chuckling paragraphs ought to finish
Southfleet's little St. John.

Mr. Slade, when he read one paper, stuffed it angrily into the fire
and trod it down with his boot.  He did not wish either his
daughter or his grandson to read such comic, sneering muck.

Mrs. Jones perused both papers, pince-nez on nose, and again
attacked her Egbert on the issue.

"You can't keep the man after this, Egbert."

Mr. Jones said:  "Oh, can't I?  I stand by the cloth.  Gurney may
have made an ass of himself, but I'm not going to truckle to the
halfpenny Press."

Miss Godbold purchased six copies of the Sunday rag, and
distributed them to friends.

Dr. Richmond took Gurney out in his car on the country rounds.

Mr. Golightly persisted in presenting Gurney with his Sunday
supper.

Mr. Slade enjoyed his morning walk with his friend, and once a week
Gurney dined at Sea View, but there seemed to be no lover left in
him.  It had been laughed out of court.

But the unkindest cut that Gurney received, trivial though it might
appear, was administered by the Misses Plimsoll.  Miss Caroline
appeared before Gurney, hands clasped, figure erect, lips
compressed and austere.  She presented herself and her sister as
being grieved by the attitude they felt compelled to adopt, but
they were agreed in requesting Gurney to vacate his rooms and go
elsewhere.

Gurney did not protest or argue the point.  There was no froth on
his flagon, but this unkindness hurt him.

"Of course, Miss Plimsoll, if it is your wish, I will go
elsewhere."

Miss Caroline, propped rather like a mummy against the door, gave
him a faint inclination of the head.

"We have a--gentleman--in view.  It would oblige us if you could
make early arrangements."

Had there been some emphasis on the "Gentleman"?

"I will find other quarters as soon as possible.  I presume that
you will give me a day or two?"

Again, Miss Plimsoll inclined her head.


Maybe, Gurney's move was actuated by more than impulse, and that
his consciousness of social unfitness persuaded him to go and dwell
among the publicans and sinners.  His adviser was old Rawlins, not
a bad counsellor in such a crisis.

"Do you happen to know, Mr. Rawlins, of any lodgings in the Old
Town?"

Mr. Rawlins did, and lodgings that were not presided over by a
couple of old neuter cats.

"Sure, sir, there's Mrs. Cotgrove, sister-in-law to Mr. Slade's
Eliza."

"A widow?"

"And one of the comfortable ones.  Name of Polly, and she looks
it."

"Not too--young?"

Mr. Rawlins chuckled.  "Sixty if she's a day.  Vine Cottage, by the
Black Boy.  And if I may say it you'll be among friends, sir."


Gurney went to interview Mrs. Cotgrove, who had been prepared for
the visit by Mr. Rawlins.  Mrs. Cotgrove was "Polly Peachum" at
sixty, a comfortable, rosy, round-a-bout of a woman who should have
worn a mob-cap.  She had sent forth six children into the world
with common sense and cleanliness, and she was missing her husband
and was glad to have someone to do for.  Moreover, she seemed to
divine Gurney's need; he needed mothering.

"Come in, sir."

She was bright and talkative, but not too much so, for life had
taught her that there were times when a man should be left alone.
Tongue-prodding was a matrimonial mistake.  Vine Cottage was a
little old red building tucked away beside the Black Boy's tea-
garden, with a white trellised porch, and a very bright brass
knocker.  It too had a garden, and Mrs. Cotgrove cultivated that
garden.

She showed Gurney a little sitting-room on the ground-floor and a
bedroom above.  They were clean, and possessed an atmosphere of
naïve simplicity.  Cotgrove photos were much in evidence, and sea-
shells and wool mats.  Mr. Cotgrove had owned a barge.

"They are not very big, sir."

"Nor am I, Mrs. Cotgrove."

She crinkled up her apple-face at him.  "You'll want me to cook for
you?"

"If it would not be asking too much."

Mrs. Cotgrove considered him, and said to herself:  "What you need,
my son, is to ask a bit more.  Too little may be worse than too
much."

She turned to the window.  "There's just one thing, sir, the Black
Boy gardens.  Just a bit noisy in summer with trippers and teas.
No drunks, mind you.  Mr. Childs don't stand any nonsense of that
sort."

Gurney smiled.  "Just people and children enjoying themselves?"

"That's about it, sir."

"I don't think I should be disturbed by people and children
enjoying themselves."

So Gurney packed his bag, and carried it himself from the New Town
to the Old, and even the carrying of his own bag was considered by
those who witnessed it, to be a social lapse.  Gentlemen did not
carry things in public.  Yet, Christ carried His Cross.  The Misses
Plimsoll had watched him pass out of the gate.

"Well, fancy him carrying his own bag!"

England was to need two wars to teach it simplicity and common
sense.

When Gurney told Mr. Slade of his change of quarters and how it had
been produced, Mr. Slade showed a certain acerbity.

"Do you mean they asked you to go, John?"

"Yes.  They have a--gentleman--in view."

Then Mr. Slade put his head back and laughed, and there was
irreverent joy in his laughter.

"Gentleman!  And what are you, John?"

"Not quite anything, it seems."

"The damned old Pharisees!  The gentle man.  Oh, dear, why must a
man wear spats and a gold watch-chain to be--such?  And I'm a prime
old cad."

"Then so am I, sir."

Gurney saw the joke and laughed, but during these difficult days
his laughter was not what it should have been.  He felt that people
were laughing at him, and that he had to laugh rather wryly with
them.  There were even rude urchins in the Old Town who proposed to
make a butt of the little curate, and rude urchins can have a
devilish cunning in touching the sore spot.  They waited for Gurney
to emerge from Vine Cottage, and followed him, singing a certain
popular song, with Gurney's name interpolated for "Daisy".


     "Gurney, Gurney, give me your answer, do.
     I've gone crazy, all for the love of you."


Gurney coloured up, and tried to ignore the insult, but such
aloofness did not discourage the rude children.  It was Mr. Childs
of the Black Boy who did that.  He was a very large and potent
person with a black beard and a mighty fist, and if there was any
throwing-out needed Mr. Childs did it himself.  And he was a
Gurneyite, being shrewd, and of a warm and wholesome temper.  Mr.
Childs sallied out, and smacked heads.

"You stop that."

"Boo-hoo," snarled one urchin, "I'll send my dad to see you."

Mr. Childs smacked him again.  "Right'o, my lad.  Send your dad
along."

But no dad dared to remonstrate with Mr. Childs, and the mocking of
Gurney ceased from being easy fun.



XVIII


Whether it was because he was feeling somewhat sick in soul, or
because a particular bug took a fancy to him, Gurney fell ill that
winter.  He took to his bed, and Mrs. Cotgrove mothered him, until
a puzzled and grave Dr. Richmond took a serious view of the case.
Had Gurney been eating oysters or shell-fish?  He had not.  But Dr.
Richmond, after some days of deliberation, diagnosed a particularly
insidious form of enteric, which appeared to be peculiar to
Southfleet.

"The Cottage Hospital for you, Gurney."

"Hospital!  But, doctor--"

"Enteric, commonly called typhoid fever.  It is a brand that we get
down here."

Gurney did not protest or ask questions.  He was feeling a sad and
a sick man.  His head ached, and his bowels had turned to water.
It seemed to him that he was experiencing yet one more failure in
his obscure career.

"I'm in your hands, doctor."

"You are, my lad, and I don't mean to let go.  You are wanted in
this place."

"I--wanted?"

"Most certainly you are.  Not in the Old Town, but in the new cads'
quarter.  But that's a future job for you.  Your business is to
give up just at present and be nursed."

Gurney lay and looked up with feverishly bright eyes at his doctor.

"If you would heal my--spirit, doctor."

Dr. Richmond laid a hand on one of Gurney's.  "Does it need it?  I
shouldn't have said so."

"I'm a failure."

"Some of us don't think so.  Besides, Gurney, I believe that one
can only heal one's own soul.  There are helps, of course."

"God seems to have deserted me," and Gurney turned his face away.

If the Rev. John Gurney was sick, so was the world of men.  In
spite of the theoretical idealists, those dangerous and deadly
people, most men were absorbed in making money or in making war, or
in both.  The Devil's Cauldron was boiling up, and in it would be
seethed thousands of livid corpses.  Gurney was taken to the
Cottage Hospital, a creation of Dr. Richmond's, and put to bed in a
little private ward.  The hands of his nurse were gentle, and he
looked up at her with child's eyes, and apologized for the disgrace
of his disease.

"I'm sorry to be such a nuisance."

Nuisance, indeed!

"My dear," said the nurse, who was Irish, "your being a nuisance is
my job."

But at the moment anything and everything worried Gurney.  He felt
so stupid and so heavy in the head, so weak in the belly.  All the
manhood seemed to have departed from him.  Almost, he was like a
woeful child.

"Doctor--"

"Yes, old man?"

"How much do I have to pay here?  I've got only a pound or two in
the bank."

"My dear fellow, don't worry your head about money.  We'll settle
all that for you."

"But I can't take all this kindness and not--"

"You'll take it just because it's a pleasure to some of us to give
it.  We are not mere--commercialists."

Meeting Mr. Slade, Dr. Richmond spoke to him of Gurney.

"Poor Gurney's very down."

"Dangerously down?"

"I'm afraid so.  More sick in soul than in body."

"He's not in danger, doctor?"

"No, I don't think so, if he wants to be well.  Life has not
treated him very kindly."

"Is he fit to see friends?"

"Yes.  It might help him on."

Mr. Slade became active.  He wrote a letter to George who was at
school, and waylaid several of the lads whom Gurney had coached at
cricket and in ethics.  Did they know that Gurney was in the
Cottage Hospital, dangerously ill?  Yes, they had heard something
about it.  And done nothing about it?  Oh, well, they just hadn't
thought, which is a lapse peculiar to mediocre man.  Mr. Slade did
not indulge in irony and say, "Yes, you are quite ready to take,
but you forget all about giving."  What he DID say was:  "Why don't
you go and inquire for him?  Mr. Gurney has been very kind to you."

Mr. Slade sat daily for ten minutes beside Gurney's bed and talked
of all the cheerful things he could think of, and waited for the
seed he had sown to germinate.  He brought a bunch of Christmas
roses and made a joke of it.

"Guess who sent you those?"

Gurney gazed sadly at the flowers.

"A lady of the same name."

"How very kind of her to remember--me."

Mr. Slade's seed germinated.  On the next visit he found a letter
lying on Gurney's bed, and Gurney's eyes looked brighter.

"Hullo, had a letter?"

"Yes, from George.  Dear Boy.  Read it, sir."

Mr. Slade picked it up and read:


Dear Mr. Gurney,

I'm so awfully sorry to hear that you are ill.  Do get well soon.
It will soon be cricket, and we can't play cricket without you.
I'm afraid I don't get on very well with algebra.--Etc.


Mr. Slade smiled over this very boyish epistle.  Well done, George!
Said just the right thing.  Good boy!  He would send him half a
sovereign.

"Well, there you are, John.  The most important thing in English
history.  Cricket.  You can't get out of it."

Gurney smiled less sadly.  "I am glad one boy wants me."

On the next visit Mr. Slade found Gurney in even better spirits.
He was being allowed to eat thin bread and butter, and five of his
lads had called to inquire for him.

But Mr. Slade or someone else was saving up the secret elixir vitae
for him.  Mr. Egbert Jones called twice a week, and was paternal
and prosy, and feeling kind to John Gurney partly because he was no
longer jealous of him.  Poor little Gurney!  Mr. Jones was not a
bad sort of man, and feeling rather a fine fellow, for had not
Gurney pressed him into playing Balaam's Ass to the bearded Emily?
Yes, Emily--was--growing an incipient beard, and Egbert had
remarked upon it.  "You ought to have something done about it, my
dear.  I believe that adventitious hair can be--"  Strange
phenomena!  Emily had burst into tears, and she had not wept for
thirty years, at least not in Mr. Jones's presence.

"How unkind of you to call attention--"

"Well, my dear, I wanted to help.  Would you care to borrow a
razor?"

Which goes to show that Mr. Jones's adventures in psychology were
not very profound.

But he had Emily's measure, and that of his curate, or he thought
so, and he boomed benignantly at John Gurney.

"Perfect rest, my dear Gurney, perfect rest.  Eliminate worry.  You
will soon be up and about again.  Yes, I do admit that I am finding
the work rather heavy without your assistance.  Get well, my dear
fellow, get well."

Mr. Golightly slid in now and again on oiled feet, and brought
Gurney grapes, which he was allowed to eat if he spat out skins and
the pips.  There was an emollient virtue about Mr. Golightly.  He
was satin and silk, reassuring and bland.  He did not always say
the right thing, but somehow his manner of saying it was what
mattered.

"I trust and believe that all your troubles are behind you, Gurney.
A peaceful interlude, what!  Like shutting up the shop after
Christmas.  We shall all be glad to have you with us again."

Then came the day when the spring stole in and renewed the frosty
eyes of winter, or that was how Gurney felt about it.  The nurse
announced the lovely intrusion.

"A lady to see you, Gurney."

"A lady?"

"Yes, Mrs. Hallard."

It appeared to the nurse that her patient blushed.  Or, was it just
the flush of weakness?

"Oh, nurse, am I--tidy?"

Well, such sensitiveness to appearances was a good sign.  Gurney
had been shaved, and he needed it daily, for there was virility in
his black jowl, but his hair needed attention.  The nurse brought a
brush, and put Mr. Gurney's hair in order, and he submitted like a
child.  He was being allowed to sit up in bed now for an hour at a
time.

"Thank you, nurse."

Gurney scrutinized his hands.  Yes, they were clean hands.  The
nurse smiled over the shine in his eyes.

"Quite ready now, I think."

Gurney was smoothing down the collar of his pyjama jacket.  Only
recently had he given up wearing a night-shirt, for his night-
shirts had gone to the rag-bag.

She--was there in the doorway, smiling at him, and the nurse closed
the door.  She was in black.  Why was it that black became her so
well, when the Emilies and the Godbolds looked dingy in it?  A dark
torch with a glowing head!  Gurney sat and gazed at her.  There
seemed to be a strange stillness in the room, but he could feel his
heart beating.

His lips were tremulous.  They fumbled.  "How--very--er--kind of
you to come."

The vision moved.  It sat down in the chair beside the bed.  It
spoke.

"Are you feeling better?"

"Oh, much better."

Gurney appeared sunk in shyness, inarticulate shyness.  He groped
about for something to say.

"How is George?"

"I took him out on Wednesday."

"Did you?"

"He became very full of sausage roll, jam tart and ginger beer."

"Bless him," said Gurney.

"And I bought him a new bat."

"A new bat?"

"Yes, George is growing--in body and self-conceit.  Apparently, the
bat has to grow with the boy."

"Yes, of course it does."

"He sent you his love."

Gurney raised shy eyes to hers.  He also was sending out love, but
it did not get into words.

He was thinking of the day when he had scrambled up the cliff and
found himself confronting her so unexpectedly.  They had talked,
and talking to her had seemed so easy--then.  He had felt near to
her, but now he was so oppressed by a sense of failure and futility
that her very nearness caused him secret anguish.  She seemed to
him so impossibly fair and aloof, a creature from another world who
deigned to come and sit by his poor bed.

Well, he could talk about the boy.  "George doesn't seem to be very
keen on algebra."

"Were you?"

"I?  Well, no, not very.  I'm afraid I haven't a mathematical
mind."

"My capacity doesn't go beyond checking the weekly books.  Anything
imaginative, or poetry--"

"Appeals to you?"

"I was going to say that to you."

He looked perplexed; his thin, white face questioned a sudden
impression.  Why was she speaking to him of poetry, imaginative
things?

"Poetry.  Yes, and Shakespeare.  Sometimes I feel rather like
Hamlet."

"To be or not to be?"

He gave her a startled glance.  "Yes, in a way."

"Why not--to be?  It is possible, you know, for a woman to be in--
that--quandary.  Things happen and one wilts.  One is all--not to
be, life not worth while."

"'You--have felt like that?"

"Oh, yes.  Why not?"

He lay and gazed at her.

"Yes, I think I--understand.  And it was--the boy?"

"Yes, the boy, and my father.  It is rather the fashion to make fun
of fathers."

"Your father is--"

"Rather unique.  I grew away from my father and then grew back
again.  You see, I have a feeling, John, that life isn't all of one
piece."

He lay and gazed.  She had called him John.

"I'm afraid I'm talking too much."

"That could not be.  But what you said just now."

"About life being not all of one piece?"

"Yes."

She sat, vaguely smiling.

"Well, is it?  Shabby patches and splendid patches, and patience
when we have to darn and mend.  I had to pick up all sorts of
frayed ends."

And suddenly Gurney put his hands to his face.

"Thank you for that.  I--I was being--such a terrible coward.
Things hurt.  I felt--"

He did not see her face as she looked at him.

"Yes, things hurt.  But they do not go on hurting.  And I want you
to go on playing cricket with George."

His hands sank to the bed.  Then, he stretched out his right hand
to her.

"Thank you--for that.  Thank you--for new courage."



XIX


Gurney lay and reflected, eyes closed, hands folded.  His nurse,
looking in on him thought that he was asleep.  But Gurney was very
much awake inside himself, watching a panorama of his past, and
possible pictures of the future.

Well, if he had made a fool of himself, what of it?  All men made
fools of themselves on occasions, some more so, some less, with the
exception of such superior and dyspeptic old curmudgeons as the
Sage of Chelsea.  According to Carlyle the population of the world
consisted of so many million souls, mostly fools, so that he--John
Gurney--could claim brotherhood with the great majority.  Did the
world love the very complacent and superior people who never took a
toss?  Well, hardly so!  You should get up and dust your breeches
and refrain from whimpering.  If you were bowled for a duck you
could walk back smiling at yourself and the spectators.
Sportsmanship, that good English tradition.

"Damn it," said Gurney, and was surprised at himself, "I have been
like a querulous kid whose ears life has boxed.  Why not laugh over
it?  If you can't do anything else--you can laugh."

Dr. Richmond, visiting his patient, found Gurney sitting up and
writing a letter.

"Hullo, that's better."

"Much better," said Gurney.

Dr. Richmond considered him.  Gurney had been so very much down,
and now he appeared very much up, and almost perky.  Could he take
the credit to himself, or had some mysterious life-force bubbled up
in his patient?  Dr. Richmond, the wise physician, was shy of
claiming too much credit for his craft.  In the dark house of the
body the spirit of man carried a mysterious candle.

"Like a lightly-boiled egg?"

"Rather," said Gurney.

"Boiled egg it shall be."

"When can I get up, doctor?"

"Now, don't you be in too much of a hurry.  You'll feel as weak as
a cat."

"Why--a cat?"

And then, for some unexplainable reason, they both started
laughing.

"Well, I don't know.  Cats are supposed to have nine lives.  Any
explanation?"

Gurney looked coy.  "I haven't had much experience of cats.  My
late landladies had one.  They kept it in at night, or tried to.  I
used to hear the chorus in the back garden:  'George--George, come
in, George, darling.'"

"Obviously--a Tom," said Dr. Richmond, "and did George come in?"

"Not always, I'm afraid."

"Well, that goes to prove that nature and cat-sense can be stronger
than silly old women."

"I suppose--" said Gurney, and faltered.

"Out with it, my lad."

"That women can fuss too much, and that cats and men--"

"Quite so," said his doctor, "Half the women in the world never
seem to learn that the best way to keep a man is to let him alone."

"Always, sir?"

"No, not quite always.  There are occasions when the beast likes to
have a sore head stroked, but only by the particular woman."

"Ah, yes," said Gurney, looking dreamy, "the particular woman."

From these occasions Gurney proceeded to get up with rapidity, and
metaphorically to dust his breeches.  He made coy jokes to his
Irish nurse, and even dared to tease the matron.  Funny, but the
women seemed to like it.  Was it that he had taken life and himself
too seriously, concentrated too much on the life that was to be and
not on the life that was?  After all, the present was the pathway
to the future, and if the present was drear and dusty and without
love and laughter, you might arrive at the Golden Gates looking
rather dull and musty.  And what would God say to you?

"Go back, my little prig, and learn to laugh.  I don't like boiled-
egg faces."

Had he been a prig?  As a matter of fact he had not, but it is good
and right that a man should ask himself that question.

Mrs. Polly Cotgrove came to see him.  She looked so rosy and
cheerful and completely wholesome that Gurney felt that it would be
quite nice to kiss her.  He did not kiss her, or even suggest such
frivolity, but he did say:  "Well, you do look well, Mrs. Cotgrove.
It makes me feel better to look at you."  Which saying seemed to
please the lady, for she wriggled and tittered.

"Go on, sir, you are a--one.  Well, we'll all be pleased to have
you out and about again."


Late in March Gurney was back at Vine Cottage, and being fed up by
Mrs. Cotgrove.  Mr. Golightly had sent in a present of a case of
stout and Mr. Slade a consignment of apples and oranges.  Gurney
was taking a tonic, but he discovered the most potent stimulus in
being alive again, and in loitering and looking at things as he had
failed to look at them before.  This interlude appeared to have
given him new vision, or a new self at the back of his eyes.  Mr.
Jones had said with heavy and paternal kindness:  "Now, you just
potter about for a fortnight, my dear fellow," and Gurney pottered
about, and even saw differences in the Rev. Egbert Jones.  He sat
on sheltered seats and looked at the sea and the clouds and at
people, at the little gardens of Caroline Terrace, at the fishing
smacks sailing out from Hill Haven, at the sunsets, the bursting
buds on the trees, blackbirds and thrushes foraging for their
young.  How was it that he felt more a part of this multifarious
world, and less persuaded to preach to it?  Why preach unless you
had something very urgent to say?  And the urgent and secret things
of the spirit seemed to prefer the silence within you.

Southfleet showed itself kinder to Gurney, but not with the
kindness that a man might covet.  Poor little man, he looked so
spindly about the legs and big about the head, and his eyes
appeared larger than they should be.  Southfleet's kindness
condescended.  It smiled somewhat patronizingly, like a titled
lady, upon the little person or parson.

"And how are we to-day, Gurney?  Better.  Ah, that is excellent."

Gurney might be happy in his humility, but he was challenged by
this stooping politeness.  Was he a rather pathetic child who had
to be taken notice of and have his head patted?  Humility is all
very well, but even humility likes to be recognized for what it is.
If Southfleet had ceased to regard him as a Juan in a dog collar,
need it reverse the verdict and treat him as something between a
poor relation and a weak-minded child?

But the discovery which surprised Gurney most forcibly was that the
members of the so-called working-classes were more patronizing to
him than were their so-called betters.  There was no humility here,
none whatsoever.  And Gurney wondered.  Had he been mistaken about
the common man?  Was there something lacking in himself which made
him appear poor stuff to these simple but by no means humble souls?
He remembered the loutishness and the arrogance that he had striven
to chasten in some of his lads, the way they would wrangle and
shout over a contested catch at cricket, and it occurred to him
that the ordinary man was but the lout grown older and somewhat
tamed by necessity and the police.

And their wives?

Gurney had rather fancied himself to be persona grata in the
cottages.  But was he?  Happening to overhear one of these ladies
labelling him to a new neighbour, even his humility grew a little
red about the ears.

"Funny little bit.  No 'arm in 'im, though they do say 'is wife was
a tart.  Worthy little fellah in 'is way."

Worthy!  What a word of contempt!

Did his one particular woman think of him as worthy?

So, Gurney groped his way gradually towards what should have been
obvious, that the simple and the crude-minded are not necessarily
the salt of the earth, or humble saints shining in ignorant
splendour for the confounding of the rich.  Yes, humbug.  These
people were children, and sometimes rather nasty and mannerless
children, blown up with rude emotion, and spitting venom at each
other and at you.

How foolish to assume that because a man dwelt in a little, yellow-
brick hutch, and carried bricks up a ladder that he was a superior
being to those rare and exceptional souls who were somehow endowed
with more sensitiveness and understanding!

Gurney spoke of these problems to Mr. Slade, sitting on a sunny
seat with him at the top of the cliff.  He confessed to the
suspicion that there must be some inadequacy in his own makeup, and
that he was not capable of impressing his fellows.

"I must have mistaken my vocation."

Mr. Slade was gently amused.  In the past he had found consolation
in supplying toys to children, and had watched some of those self-
same children grow up into very uninteresting specimens.  The
promise of childhood could end in smug mediocrity.  Mr. Slade's
philosophy had become more puckish.  He accepted the frailties of
man, and sought to find compensations in them.  All men were
sinners; the thing was to avoid the really nasty and septic
sinners.  Stupidity and self-complacency were to Mr. Slade the most
repulsive of failings, and they walked hand in hand.

"My dear John, the thing is to try and remain benign."

Gurney cocked his head at that.  "Benign?  But doesn't that entail
some feeling of superiority?"

"Maybe it does.  And why not?"

"But the souls of all men are equal--before God."

"Perhaps.  But as I see it the dogma must throw a good deal of
strain on God's feelings of benignity."

Gurney smiled.  Mr. Slade's irony did not offend him, for it was so
smiling and simple.

"Then, if we grant the equality of souls we find ourselves in
something of a dilemma, sir?"

"The devil of a dilemma," said Mr. Slade.

"You mean--one has to differentiate, in spite of--"

"John, my dear, we are all of us potential humbugs.  We have to
humbug ourselves--and others.  You put a horse in blinkers to
prevent him from shying.  There are all sorts of things we can shy
at, nasty things, imaginary things.  As I see it, the business is
to try and retain our good will, even to the selfish and the
stupid.  To spread good will, and not to spend too much time
looking under the bed."

Gurney pondered those words.  "My trouble seems to be, sir, that
people do not want my good will."

"Oh, yes, they do, John, the right ones.  To the rest you have got
to be--master."

"Master?"

"A term that is growing rather out of fashion, especially so to the
Smiles fraternity."

"It suggests--tyranny."

Mr. Slade smiled at him.  "I'll ask you a question, John.  Christ
preached humility, did he not?"

"Yes."

"Yet--His disciples addressed Him as Master."

"Yes."

"Well, do you detect any unseemliness in their use of that title?"

Gurney looked bothered.  "No, er--I can't say I do."

And Mr. Slade chuckled.  "Well, think that over."


Gurney did think it over.  He concentrated all his consciousness
upon the Christ.  He could suppose that Jesus of Nazareth had
enjoyed no social advantages other than those shared by His
disciples.  They had had equal opportunities, all of them simple
men who had lived by the craft of their hands.  And yet, setting
the miraculous aside, there was something odd about it.  The
sayings of Christ had carried through the centuries, and other men
had called Him Master.

And humility?  It was not a virtue that appeared to impress the
modern world.  It did not pay; it did not produce dividends.  What
of the blustering Germans, and the building of Dreadnoughts, and
the new arrogance of the road which the petrol engine had fathered.
What of these rather unpleasant new citizens who were something in
the City, and were polished to the point of greasiness, and whose
very frock-coats seemed to swagger.  Ostentation, proud flesh, a
beefy or a sallow complacency.  Was this not an advertising age?
Did any company for the production of soap or toothbrushes stand
before the world in a white shirt and humbly proclaim its product
to be--"A poor thing, but mine own"?  Hardly so!  It was an age of
trumpet-blowing, bawling, gross overstatement.  The very Press was
beginning to run out of adjectives.  Words had lost the ring of
pure gold.

Gurney was troubled and perplexed.  What room was there for
humility in this blatant, huckstering community?

Was Mr. Slade one of the last of the Old Romans, and he--John
Gurney--a pale little Galahad pursuing an illusion?  What was this
urge in him to be--not better than other men, but better than
himself?  Why conscience, why faith?  What proof had he that what
you did and said and thought mattered, and mattered supremely?
None?  And yet!  Would it be possible for him to shoulder and bump
his way to the trough, put both feet in it and guzzle?  It would
not.  That might be a healthy and a natural urge, and the true
piety of pigs, but somehow man was more than hog.

"No," said Gurney with childish ingenuousness, gazing at the sea,
"I'm not a pig.  Well, what am I?"


What was the answer?  Was he just a man among men, but a little
more sensitive and comprehending than the majority?  A little more
honest, and both more courageous and more cowardly?  Gurney had no
idea, as he sat upon this seat, how these questions were to be
answered for him in that pageantry of pain and pride and
poltroonery which this power-worshipping world was about to stage.
He did not see himself as a knight in shining armour, a little tin-
pot Kaiser bristling with militant moustachios, and stimulating the
bristles of the German Hog.  He was just a rather lonely and lost
little priest, wandering about the maze of his own seeming
ineptitudes, and feeling very much a failure.  Yes, somehow the
virtue seemed to have gone out of him.

The Rev. Egbert Jones, benignant and patronizing, once more
permitted him to enter the pulpit, and Gurney was hesitant and shy.
The message had gone from him.  What could he say to these placid
and complacent people?  He--a figure of fun!  No one got up and
walked out.  Even Mr. Sawkins sat and listened with pawky
condescension.

Mr. Sawkins could say:  "A rotten sermon.  The fellow can't preach.
I expect we've tamed him."

Even Gurney's cricket was not what it had been.  His bowling lacked
its innocent cunning, and as a batsman he appeared to have lost his
touch.  He did not shine before the young.  He was utterly out of
form.

Was it the result of his illness, or of that soul sickness which
hung about him?  The sting and verve had gone from the game of
life.  Mr. Sawkins could gloat over the little man's strange
ineptitude.  Yes, they had darned well tamed him.


Gurney, walking back to the marquee one hot June day after being
bowled for a duck, saw Mr. Slade and Mr. Slade's daughter sitting
in that soothing shade.  What of the Master?  He had lost his
mastery even with the bat.  Did the world wish to condole with him?

"Hard luck, sir."

It wasn't luck.  Gurney retreated to the back of the marquee and
removed the pads that always looked too big for him.  He took off
his cap and wiped his forehead.  He wanted to go away, but the rest
of the game could not be shirked.  He looked at the backs of heads
and shoulders, and then he stole almost stealthily towards the
Slade chair, and stood there like a lost soul.

She turned shoulders and head, and looked up at him.  She just
smiled and said nothing.  Now, how had she known that he was there
behind her?

"Come and sit with us."

There were only two chairs, but the problem was solved by Mr. Slade
and his daughter moving their chairs close together and edging each
to one side.

"Not much space, John, but you are not Behemoth."

"But I shall be--making it uncomfortable for you."

"Well, try.  Come along."

Gurney slipped round and sat down between them, with an arm over
the back of each chair.  How near these two precious people were to
him.  The human contact.  And then he realized that he had his left
arm almost resting upon her shoulders.  The discovery threw him
into naïve confusion.

"I beg your pardon.  I--"

He made as though to withdraw that arm, but the three of them were
so close together that the disentanglement was not easy.  Mr. Slade
twinkled.

"Why not leave it there?"

Gurney glanced anxiously at the daughter's face.

"I am so sorry.  I didn't--"

She gave him a quick, sidelong glance, and her eyes were gentle, if
amused.  "I think it gives us more room--if you sit like that."

"Just as we are?"

"Yes, just as we are."



XX


The Rev. Egbert Jones went yearly to Switzerland, where he took his
holiday in mild mountaineering.  It had been one of those occasions
when he could escape from his Emily, for though Mrs. Jones wore a
pork-pie hat with a feather in it, and carried an alpinstock, she
did not dare the heights.  But Mr. Jones was feeling very male.  He
had asserted his authority, named a new chrysanthemum, and proved
himself right in the handling of Gurney.  Gurney was showing
himself to be quite a good little fellow, mild, not too eloquent in
the pulpit, and less prone to display eccentricity in the
distribution of dinners and shirts.

Mr. Jones was absent in Switzerland during that catastrophic July.
Mr. Jones, like many Englishmen, could not or would not believe
that a continental squabble about Serbia could interfere with a
clerical holiday.  Mr. Jones was not going to be jostled by
truculent Teutons or excitable French.  War?  Nonsense!  Mr. Jones
was enjoying his table d'hôte dinner and half a bottle of claret
after a peaceful scramble, when it was made known to him that the
escape from an explosive Europe might be something of a scramble.
So serious was the news and so gloomy was the Swiss hotelier that
Egbert and Emily bustled upstairs and packed in haste and
perturbation.

The Rev. John Gurney was alone in the parish during that strange
month in summer.  He preached, he administered the Holy Sacraments,
he visited, he played cricket.  Southfleet appeared to be
completely and complacently Southfleet.  The East End swarmed into
it, and sweated and drank much beer, and paddled and bathed, and
went for sixpenny sails, and ate whelks and cockles soused in
vinegar.  Yet, Gurney was strangely fey.  When consecrating the
bread and the wine, the body and blood of God, he had a sudden,
almost mystical fore-feeling of the horrors that were to be.
Blood, yes, and torn flesh, and shattered souls.  He did not read
the news.  He did not need to read it.  Somehow, he knew that
tragic things were about to happen.

Gurney, going about his duties in this serene summer weather,
marvelled at the crowds that filled Southfleet with the odour of
warm humanity.  You heard the murmur of their voices, one long
continuous drone, and the shouts of the boatmen and the hucksters.
"Now then, any more for the Skylark?"  Skylark!--Southfleet was a
Fun Fair.  It paddled and bathed and ate and drank, and sat on the
sands, and played concertinas and sang.  In the evening it poured a
black mass up Pier Hill and the High Street to the station.  Tired
children boo-hooed, and equally tired mothers grew peevish.  Gurney
was made to think of cattle droves, creatures with large and animal
eyes, purblind as to the future.

He had a curious sense of standing like a spectator, observing the
human scene, and sadly apart from it.  These people were his
people, and yet--?  No, one could not be just a spectator.  A
strange unrest stirred in him.  At night he would sometimes go and
sit by the sea, if the tide was in, and listen to it, and watch the
water come purling to his feet.  Tranquil it might be, now that the
crowds had gone, but not with the tranquillity of peace.  It was a
hushed voice speaking of the tragic things that were to happen.

George came home for the holidays, and Gurney went to Sea View on
certain evenings to bowl George balls on his private garden-pitch.
Mr. Slade would sit and watch them, and sometimes SHE would be
there.  There were moments when Gurney would become absent-minded.
He would handle the ball and gaze at it as though seeing visions in
a crystal.

"Is it coming unstitched, Mr. Gurney?"  The boy's voice brought him
to.

"Unstitched?"

George's freckled face was very serious.  "Yes.  You were--"

"Just thinking, that's all."

George grinned.  "About bowling me a new sort of nasty one?"

Gurney grinned back.  "Am I that sort of man?"


The night spread warm dark wings, and George went to his bed.
Gurney and Mr. Slade wandered out for a stroll on the cliffs, to
watch the moon rise over the sea.  Gurney was in a strange,
fantastic mood in which the past and future joined mouth to tail
like a symbolic serpent.  He said that many strange ships had
sailed upon that sea, Roman ships, Saxon ships, and how had the
peaceful people felt when the long-boats of those bloody pirates
had slid shorewards, ominous and black?

"I expect they took to their heels, John."

"Shall we?"

Mr. Slade glanced at him curiously, for Gurney's face looked dim
and thin and visionary in the dusk.

"Feeling prophetic, John?"

Gurney said very quietly:  "There is going to be war."

They were on the edge of the cliff, and the grass was as dry as a
pile-carpet.  Mr. Slade sat down, and Gurney squatted beside him.
They were like a couple of boys with their knees drawn up to their
chins.  Between the gorse bushes they could see the dim estuary,
and the lights of the pier, and the lights of ships going and
coming.  There was silence between them, the silence of sad and
inscrutable things.

Then a voice near them said:  "Give over, Bert.  I'm not feeling
like that yet."

Said Bert:  "Love a duck, my girl, I've got to do it soon or blow
up."

"And me with a kid--before--"

"Well, there'll be kids comin' won't there?  You and me in a tight
little 'ouse with a garden."

Gurney looked at Mr. Slade, and got quietly to his feet.  Mr. Slade
did likewise.  They wandered off to another spot, and left the
lovers to their passion-problem.

Said Gurney:  "Poor young things!  So sure of everything.  No one
seems to feel--"

"Have you turned Cassandra, John?"

Gurney gazed out to sea.  "Lights, just like eyes.  And so many of
them will be closed.  Lights going out everywhere."

This was a new phase to Mr. Slade, but he understood it perhaps as
no other soul in Southfleet would have understood it, save two or
three women.  This little visionary was uttering strange sayings,
and most men might have mocked or misunderstood him, as they had
mocked at Christ on the cross.  "Little Gurney has the wind-up.
Damn it, haven't we got the Navy?"  The blue-eyed boys never see
trouble till it is upon them, and then they blame--not themselves,
but the politicians.  Mr. Slade fingered his chin.  Had he not
found fantasy in a toy-shop, those moods of masquerading
fancifulness, which leave most human cattle staring?

"You seem very sure, John?"

"I am, sir.  Sometimes--we--"

"See ahead, not horse-sense--but God-sense."

"Perhaps that's it.  Lights going out, and those that are left--all
red."

Mr. Slade gazed at the lights of the pier, Southfleet's pride and
symbol.

"Feeling responsible, somehow, John?"

"Yes.  Strange things may happen to all of us."


How was it that when they re-entered the gate of Sea View, and saw
a dim white figure seated in the little house's veranda, Mr. Slade
suddenly remembered that he had a letter to post, and left those
two together?  Mr. Slade took a devil of a time posting that
letter.  In fact he strolled down to the Old Town and savoured the
lights and smells of humanity.

Said Gurney to Mrs. Hallard:  "I'm glad George is so young."

Her sidelong glance begged the question.

"Why?  Oh, well, because he won't be involved."

There was silence between them for some seconds.

"Do you really believe--that it will happen?"

"I do."

"Why should it?"

"I seem to feel a kind of madness in this new world.  Something
both brutal and fine that must out."

Her hands moved restlessly in her lap.  "And you?  Can it affect
you?"

Gurney did not answer that question immediately.  Then he said:  "I
have a feeling--like--being a child on the edge of a strange sea.
I shall have to cross that sea."


Mr. and Mrs. Egbert Jones crossed it on a sweltering day at the
beginning of August, with a crowd of other fugitives, all hot and
tired, and mostly irritable.  Many of them were minus their
luggage, or portions of it, and Emily's trunk was missing, and so
was the feather from her hat.  Egbert had stood for hours in the
crowded corridor of a train, while Emily slept in the corner of a
third-class carriage.  Paris had been pandemonium, or that is how
they described it, a couple of croissons and two cups of scalding
coffee.

"Why do these wretched French always lose their self-control."

Thus spake Emily, who had lost her temper and did not retrieve it
until she had been given tea on the Dover-London boat-train.

Egbert had been only too aware of the loss of that temper.  All the
ills of the holiday had been ascribed to him.  Why must he go to
Switzerland?  Why must he go just when those beastly Germans were
concocting a war?  Why hadn't he foreseen the catastrophe?  Mr.
Jones stood up very well to this vituperation.  He kept his temper
inside a tired and hungry tummy, and managed to be kind and helpful
to fellow travellers.  In fact, Mr. Jones behaved like a gentleman,
and was paternal, if a little pompous.  Why had he gone to
Switzerland?  Why didn't Emily go to the devil?

Tut-tut!  Mr. Jones repressed such irritable impulses.  He had a
packet of chocolate on him, and Emily had the lot.  Poor weak
woman!  Egbert, sagging with fatigue, heat and hunger in the
crowded corridor, had thought of his dear chrysanthemums, and of
the strange lapse of which he had been guilty.  No plant had been
christened Emily.

The Joneses reached Southfleet late in the afternoon, to drive
homewards down a howling High Street.  That was how it appeared to
Mrs. Jones.  Hadn't these people any sense of decency?  Must they
drink beer and sing when a horrible and vulgar war was imminent?
Mrs. Jones's bun of hair looked untidy and distracted, and she
squinted with condemnation at the crowd, so much so that when their
cab was held up, an irreverent cockney, somehow sensing her
hostility, grinned at her.

"'Allo, old gal, yer 'air's comin' darn."

Old girl indeed!  But when the cab drove on Emily put up a hand to
investigate her bun.

"Why do we live in such a vulgar place?  The scum of London."

"My dear, pull yourself together.  If these people can laugh--"

"Laugh!  Now, when--"

Then Mr. Jones said a very vulgar thing.  "It may be because they
have--guts."

Almost it would seem that the gentlemanly Egbert was being
prematurely infected by the coarseness and the broad and desperate
horrors of the war.  Dying men, and those about to die, can laugh,
and perhaps must laugh, if there is good mongrel English blood in
them.  Mr. Jones was feeling pleased with himself, and in
chanticleer mood.  He had behaved rather well on that terrible
journey.  He had comforted women and children with a large and
soapy kindness.  Had not one little woman with soft brown eyes
looked up at him at Calais and said:  "Thank you for all your
kindness."  Ahem--Mr. Jones had felt a little romantic, in spite of
his fatigue.  And somehow he had given Emily a demonstration of
fortitude and manly courage.  He had been rather pleased with that
phrase:  "The country has guts."  Though it would not sound seemly
in a sermon.

So pleased was Egbert with this new and coarse virility that he
used the word on Gurney.

"Guts, my dear Gurney, guts.  This old country sees things
through."

The Rev. Egbert became strenuously martial.  "The Church must make
her voice heard, Gurney," and Mr. Jones preached a rousing and
booming sermon.  He let off the big guns.  Almost he felt himself
to be in uniform, a fine figure of the Church Militant.  He had the
Union Jack hoisted on the St. Jude's flagstaff.  He gave solemn
countenance to hot patriotism by taking the chair at Southfleet's
first recruiting rally.  He spoke solemnly of duty, the
Englishman's home, defence and offence against tyrants.  He held a
special service of intercession.  Emily was told that she should be
active in promoting the growth of the local V.A.D.

"We may not be able to serve in the flesh, Gurney, but we can do so
in the spirit.  If I were a younger man I might almost feel tempted
to shed the cloth and go crusading."

But Mr. Jones was fifty-three and comfortably secure.  He could
become bellicose in absolute safety, and perhaps he did not realize
that younger men had qualms.  They might have to march into the
bloody arena, and surrendering everything, cry:  "Those who may be
about to die salute thee, oh Cæsar."  Mr. Jones was blessed in his
immunity.  He would not be separated even from his chrysanthemums.

Gurney felt things differently.  Were not the flesh and the spirit
subtly inseparable.  Both might--and perhaps should--suffer in a
mystical communion.  "I bleed, both in body and soul."  Was there
not something sacramental in bodily service, personal surrender to
the physical perils that other men would suffer?  Even in the
testing flame of fear the body and the spirit were indissolubly
linked.  Fear?  John Gurney had not experienced it as yet in its
crude, organic fierceness, that over-whelming urge that dries the
mouth and blanches the skin and shakes man to his foundations, and
yet--he had some knowledge of moral fear.  But that might be so
different.  Mr. Jones might peal and thunder in security, but John
Gurney could know the secret shame of not sharing death and
disaster with others.

He was a very silent little man during those first few weeks.  He
had nothing to say upon the war.  He was in no mood to preach upon
it.  How could you preach to other men upon it when you yourself
were outside it?  He had no lead to give, because he was waiting
for the choice that was to lead John Gurney.

He watched the lads gathered outside the recruiting office.  He
watched them marched away in their poor civvies'.  They looked so
young, and often so small.  Their faces wore masks of fallacious
brightness.  Some of them had been his lads, and Gurney had no
words of cheer for them.  He was profoundly ill at ease, and mute.

He met Mr. Sawkins there.  Mr. Sawkins was a hundred per cent
Jingo.  He could froth safely at the beard.

"By Jove, I wish I was thirty years younger!"

There was something nasty about this old dog's yapping.  He even
suggested that Gurney was pacifist.  "Don't you wish you didn't
have to wear a dog-collar, young man?"

"No, I don't."

"Ha, that's the way you feel about it, is it?"

"What I feel, sir, is my own affair."

"Fudge and nonsense.  Every man should feel it his duty to serve."

Gurney was a little flushed.  "And how do you propose to serve, Mr.
Sawkins?  Just by shouting?"

Impertinent little squit!  Mr. Sawkins chewed his beard.  "Let me
tell you that if I were thirty years younger, I'd be--"

Gurney turned away.  There was something shameful in swapping
sarcasms with Mr. Sawkins.


Then, came those dreadful days of defeat and imminent disaster.
What an anti-climax after all the military music, the flag-waving,
the oratory!  Men felt that unpleasant dropping of the belly, the
helplessness of futile lookers-on.  It made them sweat and shiver
in secret, while assuming the facial brightness of crackle-ice.
Grim days, gloomy days.  Thank God for the Navy!  The holiday
crowds were less black, and less noisy.  Almost it seemed to Gurney
that this little town had a strange hush upon it, and stood
listening.  Dr. Richmond, driving in his car, looked stern and
grey, all profile.  He had had trouble with Charles.

"Look here, pater, I'm sorry, but I can't go miking about here
looking at tongues--while--that is going on."

"What do you want to do?"

"Fight."

Dr. Richmond had smiled gently at his son.  "And waste your--
special skill.  You'll be wanted all right, my lad."

"But, damn it, I don't want to be a picker-up and a patcher.  I
want to fight."

"Have patience, my son.  You may be in it more deeply and
dangerously than you know."

Mr. Jones wore a very solemn face.  The news was terrible.  He
pottered about among his chrysanthemums, and did so wish that he
could christen one of them Victoria.  Mr. Golightly's sprightly
stride seemed to have lost some of its elasticity.  Mr. Sawkins
went about growling at his country's generals.  Was it not
notorious that all regular soldiers were hunting, dudish, haw-haw
fools!


Gurney was very sad.  This England--in anguish.  Englishmen over
yonder, beaten men, bloody-footed, unshaven, wild of eye.  Blindly
stumbling with hunger and fatigue.  They were his men, his fellows.
Would this terrible retreat never end?  Could nothing stop these
Germans?

Gurney took the tragedy to himself.  "What can _I_ do?"  What COULD
he do?  Pray?  Could prayer stop that menacing, marching infantry?
Stay that sea of spiked helmets?  But Gurney did pray.  He went
right down into the deeps of himself, and maybe it is God's plan
that man should let a bucket down into those profundities and drink
of the cold calm water of his own soul.  Let a million men do such,
and the Devil is confounded, and evil turned back from the gates of
life and of death.

It was on a serene, September evening when Gurney went down to the
beach in the Old Town and chartered a rowing-boat from Tom Myall.
The tide was in, and Tom Myall shoved him out in deep water, and
Gurney got out the sculls.

"Be long, sir?"

"Oh, perhaps an hour."

"Right-o, sir.  I'll be about.  Can't sit at 'ome these days."

Gurney was not very proficient with the sculls, and Tom Myall
watched him windmill and splash his way out towards the coming
night.  Queer little fish, this curate!  Tom Myall crunched over
the shingle to the sea-wall, and climbing the steps, made for his
pub, in the hope of hearing some news.  God blast those bloody
Germans!  If only someone could give them a knock.

Gurney paddled his way out over the placid water until Southfleet
had become a row of dim house-faces.  He wanted to be alone with
the sea and the sky and that strange entity, his own soul.  Then,
he shipped his sculls and drifted.  He watched the light die away
over the water.  He sat, cradled there, listening, looking.  He had
a most queer feeling that something was coming to him out of
mysterious space.

It did come.  Gurney's head went up like the head of a star-gazer.
He listened.  What strange, inward voice was speaking to him?  Was
it some supernatural voice using the soul of man?

"Be of good cheer.  A wonderful thing is about to happen.  There is
victory in the air."


It was dark when Gurney sculled back to the beach.  A rather
worried Tom Myall was waiting there.  Had the little fellow upset
the boat and got himself drowned?  As the black shape glided in,
the boatman went forward to lay his hands on the bow and haul it up
clear of the water.  Gurney had shipped his sculls, but in a most
unwaterman-like manner.  And how had Gurney managed to strike the
right portion of the beach?

"I was getting a bit worried about you, sir."

"Were you?" said Gurney.  "I'm sorry.  Everything's all right."

Tom Myall gave him a hand.  "I wish the news was all right, sir."

"It is, Tom.  How much do I owe you?"

Tom stared at Gurney.  "Well, I was up at the pub, and there was
nothin' to let off about."

"There will be, Tom.  How much do I owe you?"

"Call it one and a tanner, sir."

Gurney groped and found what he thought was a shilling and six
coppers, and paid the boatman.

"Good night, Tom."

"Good night, to you, sir."

Tom Myall watched Gurney climb the steps of the sea-wall.  Funny
little blob!  What did he mean by everything being all right?  Tom
pulled the boat up and returned to the pub for another drink and
also to discover that Gurney's shilling had turned into a
halfpenny.

"Well, I'm blowed!  Have to see 'im about it to-morrow."

But when Tom Myall heard the news next day he kept the halfpenny
for luck and surrendered the shilling.

Gurney went straight up Pier Hill, and along Caroline Terrace to
the cliffs.  He had the face of a visionary, and as such he came to
Sea View, and passed in through the gate.  The blinds were down and
the windows lit, but someone was sitting in the veranda, and Gurney
knew to whom he would utter that strange message.

"Is your father in?"

"Doing accounts."

Gurney took off his hat and passed a hand over his forehead.  "I
have had news, good news."

She was leaning forward.  "Good news.  But the last communiqué--"

"Yes.  But the news came to me.  I was out in a boat.  There has
been a victory."

She looked up at him.  "But--how--?"

"I don't know how.  It just came to me.  May I sit down with you?"

"Yes, John.  Oh, how wonderful--if--"

"There is no 'if'.  Somehow I am sure."

His hand touched hers.  Oh, wonderful night!  John Gurney sat
holding her hand.



XXI


Someone spoke of the victory as "The Miracle of the Marne", and to
Gurney it was as miraculous as the way the news of it had come to
him.  He did not question the prophetic voice.  Had he not heard
it, and been filled with a strange and profound peace and a feeling
of exaltation?  Assuredly, there were mysteries beyond the ken of
man.

When Rose Hallard saw the news on the printed page, she sat and
gazed abstractedly at the teapot, so much so that her father's
attention was challenged.  He had glanced at the paper before
breakfast, and sworn that God and bacon and eggs were right with
the world.

"Giving thanks, my dear?"

She came out of her stare, and smiled.  "Yes.  But, do you know--
John foretold it."

"So John is a military expert!"

"Don't tease, father."

"Sorry, my dear."

"When you were doing accounts last night John came.  He had been
out alone in a boat, yes, in the darkness.  And the news had come
to him.  He was quite sure."

Mr. Slade looked at her and then looked at his plate.

"Well, I don't question it.  John may be among the prophets.  After
all, there are things we don't know about the souls of unusual
men."

Down in the Old Town Tom Myall had a small crowd round him.

"I tell you 'e told me last night.  Been out alone in Ethel in the
dark.  Worried I was.  Thought he might have capsized.  'E's not
good in a boat."

"Garn, tell us another, Tom."

"I am tellin' you.  He came in and said there was nothin' to worry
about, and that there'd been a victory."

"Who put 'im in the know?  Someone in a yacht or barge might 'ave
shouted it at 'im."

"Bloody likely!" said Tom.  "There must be somethin' unusual about
the little fellow."

"Call 'im a prophet, then!"

"What if I do?  It takes some explainin'.  Anyhow, I've kept 'is
lucky 'alfpenny."

But plain men do not like the unexplainable, anything which offends
their common sense, and Tom Myall's auditors mooched off as
scoffers.  Who was Gurney that he should know more about "the war"
than they did?  Why, the fellow had not had the sense to tell a
respectable woman from a tart.  All men are envious, and the
complacency of the common man can be incredibly--complacent.
Finding itself overshadowed, it may turn its back on the mountain.

"What, Mont Blanc?  Never heard of the fellow.  Give me a good
blancmange!"  And mounting his little facetious nag, the common man
thinks he has jumped the Jungfrau.


The sprightliness returned to Mr. Golightly's walk, Mr. Jones,
entering his conservatory with great solemnity, and a glass of
water, gravely rechristened his latest--"Victoria"--baptizing her
with full sacramental unction.  Mr. Sawkins went about growling.
He had been a prophet of gloom and he was peeved.  But, after all,
it was a French victory; the British Army, led by Huntin' Haw-Haws,
had had little to do with it.  Mr. Sawkins played the sceptic.  He
grizzled in his beard.

"I hope it's true.  They may be making the best of a bad job.  Wait
and see what happens next."

Mr. Sawkins clicked his false teeth at foolish optimism, and
rattled the old bones of the elderly ladies who dwelt in his hotel.

Mr. Jones was tying a label to Victoria when the maid came to say
that Gurney was in the study.

"Ha, show him in here, Bessy."

Mr. Jones was in a genial mood.  He beamed upon Gurney, and
introduced him to Victoria.

"Rather--apposite, I think, Gurney.  Victoria, and a lovely
carmine."

Mr. Jones put two fingers behind a flower and displayed it.

"Perfect petals, perfect shape.  May there be many such."

Gurney admired Victoria, though he preferred an English rose to
this Japanese tam-o'-shanter.

"You must be very proud of it, sir."

"I am, Gurney, I am, though of course one should realize with true
humility that one but tries to improve on Nature."

Gurney was looking pensive.  He was wondering how Mr. Jones would
take the news, his news, but the moment seemed propitious.

"I have a favour to ask, sir."

"Yes, Gurney, what is it?"

"I want to join the Forces as a chaplain.  I hope you will release
me."

Mr. Jones's eyebrows went up, but not unpleasantly so.  Well, who
would have thought that this little fellow had the--guts?  But it
was a very commendable proposal.

"You wish to join up, Gurney?  Well--"

"And go overseas, sir, to share--as much as I can--what other men
have to suffer."

"A very admirable spirit, my dear fellow."

"You may be able to get an older man to take my place.  Of course,
I will remain with you until you get help, if you wish it."

Mr. Jones caressed his chin.  It was incipiently double.

"Thank you, Gurney.  I appreciate your--consideration.  I will see
what I can do about it.  Let me say that I think your choice does
you credit."

"Thank you, sir."

They smiled at each other.  Gurney was thinking that old Jones was
not a bad sort, and Mr. Jones was thinking that he really did like
this little man.  And then Mr. Jones did a pleasant thing.  He
produced a pair of scissors, snipped a flower from Victoria, and
presented it to Gurney.

"Wear it, my dear fellow.  A kind of badge of courage, what.  Put
it in your buttonhole."

Gurney did so, and vicar and curate shook hands.


When Southfleet heard the news it was both kindly and unkindly
amused.  Now, of what use would this funny little fellow be to the
British Army, even as a wearer of the black cross?  Southfleet
suffered from the common illusion that courage and the martial
virtues go with looks.  Now, just consider Captain Hargreaves of
the local Territorials, standing six feet two, blond, buxom,
overbearingly handsome, and then take a squint at Gurney.  Poor
little pop-gun, and not even loaded!  The ladies said of Captain
Hargreaves:  "What a splendid soldier he will make," and the dear
ladies were completely wrong.  Captain Hargreaves proved to be a
dreadful failure, and in secret a rather dastardly failure; for,
after two months in the trenches, he came home suffering from
neuritis, and his men were glad to be rid of him.  He had earned
the title of The Dug-out King, and his abode had been christened
Windy Corner.  As for his malady, a cynical medical officer might
have described it as "Funkitis".  Captain Hargreaves's colonel and
the self-same M.O. had held consultation.

"Oh, send the blighter down, Gates.  He will only be a danger and a
darned nuisance."

Mr. Sawkins guffawed over the news.  Little St. John in khaki!
What a joke!  But it would be one way of getting rid of the fellow.
Mr. Sawkins dared to become facetious in the face of Mr. Slade, and
these two old hostile dogs growled at each other.

"Now, we shall win the war, Slade."

"Why--we?"

"Well, I shall help to pay for it."

"Then sell your pants," said Mr. Slade, which was vulgar of him.

Mr. Sawkins sizzled.  "I can remember the days when--"

"I cleaned your boots.  There are certain people in this town who
are not fit to clean Gurney's footgear."

"Meaning me?"

"Just as you like."

And Mr. Slade left it at that.


Not until November did his country find a use for Gurney, nor did
its casual attitude suggest that a little padre was of any
importance.  Chaplains were a convention and were "Taken on the
Strength" as a sort of sop to the Deity and the Churches, and they
could be of far less significance than a regiment's mascot, even
though that creature was a goat.  Doctors were necessary,
veterinary surgeons were necessary, and in a cavalry regiment the
vet was of more importance than the M.O.  Mr. Gurney was to go to
his great adventure like a lamb to the slaughter, but a lamb that
carried no pennon.

The Rev. Egbert Jones had managed to obtain the services of a
middle-aged curate, one the Rev. Herbert Simkins, baldish and mild
and blue-eyed.  Mr. Simkins would suit Mr. Jones very well, being a
sort of buttered scone, and completely uncontroversial.  Emily
approved of Mr. Simkins, and so did Miss Godbold.  He had a sweet
and succulent way with the ladies, a nice tenor voice, and he could
play on the piano.  Moreover, he was unmarried, possessed no
patchouli past, and had a curious and bland facility for suggesting
that each and every lady was the one and particular charmer.  Miss
Godbold could refer to him as "Dear Mr. Simkins".  Mr. Simkins's
handshake was flabby but he had such nice, pink, gentlemanly hands.

Gurney spent a week in London buying kit, and waiting to be fitted
by his tailor.  He stayed at an hotel in Bloomsbury, and during the
day he made pilgrimages to those parts of the great city which had
both memories and live associations for him.  He visited his old
school and was surprised to find that it had grown smaller, and
that the boundaries he had hit at cricket must have been quite mild
swipes.  Yes, he still had his cricket, but would cricket be of any
use in the Army?  He took a bus to the East End and wandered, and
sought out Bert and Alf and Fred, but Bert and Alf had joined up,
and Fred was depressed, nursing a septic finger.  Gurney found
London somehow strange and vaguely unfriendly.  It was like a woman
who had taken to trousers and who strode right through and across
the sacred fields of philosophy.  It seemed to be fragmental and
fractious in its moods, both animated and dour.  Night life
appeared to be flourishing.  The home front had not learnt to
laugh.  Maybe it would never do so, but grow tetchy and tired, and
lose its manners.

Gurney attended at his tailors.  They were not Savile Row, for
economy was necessary, and neither Gurney's tunic nor his breeches
were up to the Guards' standard, but a breezy young fitter
pretended to be pleased with the result.  After all, if criticism
had been forthcoming, Gurney's physique might have borne it, not
the tailor's craft.  He had trouble, too, with his cap.  His very
large, long head was not accommodating.  Also, his little legs and
the leggings produced were not sympathetic towards each other.
Gurney paid his bills, and gave instructions for all these goods to
be delivered to his London hotel.  His dress rehearsal should be in
private.

It was so, and Gurney stood in front of a wardrobe mirror
and surveyed himself.  No cause for personal vanity here!
Even Gurney's humility had to accept the picture as frankly
unimpressive.  He did look a funny little figure of a man; his legs
were too short, his breeches wrinkled, his cap a mushroom growth.
He took in his Sam Browne a hole or two, and saw that he had a
waist, the wrong kind of waist, like a girl's.  His tummy seemed to
stick out.  There was no swagger in the mirror's reflection, no
smartness, no masculine gallantry.  He was just a little curate
bundled up in brown.

"Well, well," thought Gurney, "I am what I am.  I shall be what I
shall be."


Southfleet Station.  Gurney had three days left to him before he
was to report for duty at a Kentish sea-coast town.

The station was quiescent on this November day, the High Street
just the High Street.  Gurney felt self-conscious in his uniform;
he was wearing his great-coat and he carried a cane, but without
swagger.  In fact, so shy was Gurney that he was tempted to take a
cab, but he dismissed the temptation as cowardly.  A red-nosed
outside-porter took charge of Gurney's valise and kit-bag, and
saluted him with alcoholic servility.  He addressed him as
"Captain", and Gurney felt that he was being made a fool of by a
beery cringer out for tips.

"Vine Cottage."

"Right y'are, Captain."

Gurney rid himself of the fellow.  He had no desire to magnify his
first public parade by associating it with a leery loafer and a
hand-barrow.  He should have felt full of swagger and he did not.
His tailor had cut the great-coat too long, and it seemed to hang
almost about his ankles.  Gurney carried his cane like a flower
held by the stalk.  He did not swing it or beat a leg with it.  No
strutting hero--this!

Gurney was within ten yards of Mr. Slade's shop when he saw Mr.
Sawkins coming towards him.  The very gorge of Gurney's shyness
seemed to rise at the prospect of a meeting with Mr. Sawkins.  He
diverged, and almost trotted into Mr. Slade's shop, and found
himself being smiled upon by two young assistants.  To the women at
that time anything in khaki was exciting.

"Mr. Slade in?"

"Yes, sir, in the office."

Then, one of them grasped the transfiguration, and gave a little
giggle.

"Why, it's Mr. Gurney!"

Gurney crossed rapidly to the office door with its panels of
frosted glass.  There had been something frosty in that giggle.
Would he always be a figure of fun to this so English Southfleet?
Did no one divine that other aspiring, bright-eyed, valorous child
inside him?  To be unusual is to be suspect, and ridicule may be
more potent than the policeman.  Sex and a man's stomach are the
prime movers of the many, but Gurney belonged to the brotherhood of
bastards and hunchbacks in whom the bend-sinister and women's
disfavour may light a bitter or a beatific flame.

Gurney opened Mr. Slade's door, still hearing that suggestive
giggle.  Gurney was no peacock, and he had not much of a tail to
spread, but the various irreverences that he had suffered were
beginning to sting him into a quiet anger.  There would be no
outward flare, but the inward blaze might prove unextinguishable.

Mr. Slade was at his desk, entering figures in a ledger.  He looked
up, cocked his head, and showed all those shrewd kind wrinkles
round his eyes.

"Hallo, John!"

"Hallo, sir."

Gurney closed the door, and Mr. Slade got out of his chair, and his
eyes did not look at Gurney's uniform, but into Gurney's eyes.

"Well, John, launched on the great adventure?"

Gurney smiled.  He took off his cap and surveyed it.  "No feathers
in it, I fear."

Mr. Slade's eyes shone keenly.  They were not the eyes of an old
man.

"But there will be, John, there will be."


How would She see him?  As those giggling girls had seen him?  He
had been asked to sup at Sea View, and it was a strangely scared
little man who rang the bell and waited in the darkness.  It was
Eliza who opened the door to him, an Eliza who had prepared a super-
supper and was determined to welcome the hero.  Eliza was a
Gurneyite of formidable fierceness.

"Good evening, sir."

"Why, it's you, Eliza!"

"Yes, it's me."

And Eliza looked him over with favour.  "My, it's good to see you,
sir, in uniform."

She took his cap and helped him off with his great-coat, and hung
it up.

"I'm glad you've got a good warm coat like that, sir."

"So am I, Eliza."

Her motherliness warmed him.

She opened a door and stood aside.  "Captain Gurney, ma'am."

She was alone and sitting by the fire.  And where was her father?
Why had Mr. Slade been suddenly inspired to go in search of
champagne?  She did not rise but turned to look at him, and her
upward glance was on his face.  The khaki-clad body was a shell,
the essential spirit of him in his eyes.  And for that upward
intimate glance he blessed her.

"Come and get warm, John."

She was in a low chair, with a tuffet beside her.  She put out a
hand and like some simple soldier of the Cross Gurney bent down and
kissed her fingers.

"Forgive me, but--"

He became confused, and sat down hurriedly, with the firelight
playing upon his face.  It has been said by a wise mother that
woman is always nearer to reality than man.  Man, the supposedly
practical, is the dreamer of dreams, while woman suffers him to
dress her in his dreamstuff, and wears it like fancy-dress at a
children's party.  The lot that Nature has laid upon woman is
marked by a rhythm of malaise and pain.  She bears children, she
nurtures them, she loses them.  She suffers the child in man, and
if she loves him will plan to protect that child, even when it is
fractious and foolish, and perhaps--unfaithful.  Her prestige,
whatever the new freedom may have to say about it, is in its full
flower when her marriage can be proud and happy.

So, Rose Hallard sat beside John Gurney in the firelight, and knew
him as a dreamer, but as a dreamer whose vision of a notable life
was not mere illusion.  Such humility as he possessed, mounted upon
courage, might find the carnal crowd strangely at his feet.  This
little man would never be fractious or unfaithful, yet his
simplicity was no mere gilded image, but subtle, complex and
sensitive, as alive and various as the earth in the spring.  And to
such a woman as Rose Hallard there was but one thing that he
lacked.  Dominance, not the dominance of mere strutting egoism, but
that personal panoply than can shine, though it may be no more than
a white sheet.  She knew now that she could love him even though he
was laughed at, but she wished to love him as a man who could
laugh.

"How does it feel, John, to be in uniform?"

He stared at the fire.  "A little--ridiculous."

"Oh, no, my dear, not that.  Call it--masquerading, and then--"

She paused, and he turned questioning eyes to her.

"And then--reality.  I suppose a uniform becomes as familiar as a
skin, so much so that you forget it."

He smiled.  "In forgetting one's self."

"Perhaps?"

"How very wise you are."

"I wise?" and she laughed.  "I have always understood that men hate
wise women."

His impulse was to tell her his secret, and while he hesitated, Mr.
Slade came into the room, holding a bottle of champagne by the
neck.  Gurney drew a deep breath.  What relief!  So near had he
been to blurting out words that might have put a barrier between
them.  If she were to suspect?  Dear innocent, as if she did not
know.

"Hallo, John!  Don't be shocked.  Even crusaders are allowed to
celebrate."

Gurney stood up, and looked at the bottle.  "I should like to feel
that I am a crusader."

Her voice answered him.  "You are, John."

He gave a quick movement of the head.  He looked down at her.

"Am I?"

She nodded, and Mr. Slade, who was observing them, laughed in his
secret soul.  When would John Gurney discover the truth and his
voice?  Would champagne stimulate the lover in him?

As a matter of fact--it did not.



XXII


Gurney's first weeks at Chalkstone were not particularly happy
ones.  He was billeted with two old ladies on the sea front,
together with three medical officers, an elderly Scotch
quartermaster, and an A.S.C. major.  All these other men had
definite jobs to do, but Gurney's day was vague and desultory.
These other men were pragmatists, and close to reality, while
John Gurney's duties were ethical and unpractical.  His military
duties were limited to a weekly service and sermon, for his
senior officer, a clerical major, was a man of jocund energy
and breeziness, who took to himself a large portion of the
ecclesiastical feast.  Gurney was permitted to manage a reading and
amusement room and library, and to show himself at the Services
Club, but these duties depressed him.  He felt like a hanger-on to
the tail-board of the great machine, and he was rewarded with
little but the dust.

He hated having to preach to these men.  They sat and listened, as
on duty, and shuffled their feet, and were like a crowd of vigorous
young animals shut up in a market square.  They would so much have
preferred to rush out and kick a football.  They gazed at him
stolidly, and it was obvious to him that they were bored.  So was
he.  He was becoming prejudiced against oratory, his own and
anybody else's.  He could not pour out the hearty and patriotic
guff that his senior emitted with the naturalness of a man
belching.  In fact, he felt a humbug, a hired superfluity.  Almost
he could hear men saying:  "What darned use in a war is a bloody
parson?"  He was fed and paid as a sort of stage supernumerary.
Deep down in him was a profound discontent.  He felt that he was of
no significance to these men; he did not drill, doctor, or feed
them.  And his passionate urge was to lay his hands upon them, get
a grip upon their manhood, prove that by sharing their perils and
hardships he was somehow brother and man.

Words, words, words!  And a voice in him was clamouring for "Deeds,
deeds, deeds".  Doing came before talking.  How humiliating this
sermonizing could be.  A rebellious voice would pester him while he
was trying to preach.  It shouted:  "Humbug, humbug.  What you
should be doing is looking fear in the face.  You are just a little
schoolmaster fellow.  Those who can't do, teach."

Nor did John Gurney feel happy in his billet.  He had the worst
bedroom in the house, but that was of no consequence.  He met these
other men at meals, back from their various activities, while he
had just been pottering about like a French clown at a circus.
They had things to talk about; he had nothing.  Moreover, he
realized that his presence placed a certain constraint upon this
very male community.  Someone might begin a story, remember the
presence of the Church, and cut the story short, or--with a grin--
apologize for it.

"Sorry, padre."

So, they regarded him as not quite man!  In fact, though they liked
him in a casual and tolerant fashion, they were kind to him as they
might have been kind to a creature that was not quite normal.  They
even teased him.

"What's the day's good deed, padre?"

Yes, he was just a kind of boy-scout.

Now, of all the many men who were preparing for the great adventure
there were, probably, but very few whose whole urge was to be
translated to the bloody business out yonder.  Gurney was one of
the few.  In fact, he became so importunate, and was always
badgering his senior for a transfer to active operations that the
Rev. Major Moncrief became bored with him.  Why couldn't the
wretched little fellow stay put?

"Oh, very well, Gurney, very well.  We will see what we can do."


Gurney received letters from George, from Mr. Slade and from Her.
Yet, how far away that other world seemed with its Sawkinses, Miss
Godbolds and Emilies; and maybe Gurney was not sorry to be remote
from that part of it.  How narrow it was, how prejudiced and
ungenerous, the heritage of Victorian fathers whose morality had
spilled unwanted daughters upon the world and left them to the care
of posterity.  On the other hand there were the Richmonds, Mr.
Golightly, Polly Cotgrove and old Rawlins.  And those letters from
Her!  They surprised him, filled him with a secret and wondering
exultation.  She wrote easily yet intimately to him as to man, and
in a little while he escaped from self-consciousness on paper, and
wrote to her as man.  He even told her of the ineptitude of things
that troubled him, the futility of merely talking, his impatience,
his sense of shame.

She answered him as one who understood, and to whom his confessions
were precious.  Her letters became to him a source of secret
strength.  He carried them about with him.  They were his passport
to the world he asked for.  He could smile over his associates'
broad or bawdy stories.  What did they matter when he had that
other symbol?  A kind of amused and gentle tolerance came to him.

"Sorry, padre."

"Go ahead.  You must have your fun."

He wrote his letters to Her in his little shabby bedroom with an
attaché case on his knees.  "My Dear Mrs. Hallard" became "Dear
Mrs. Hallard", then "Dear Rose".  He lingered over the writing of
those two words.  Rose of Heaven, Damask Rose, the Romaunt of the
Rose, but not yet--if ever--Roses in Picardy.  There was perfume in
the inscription.  He liked to think of her reading his letters
before the fire, or in the deep and secret shade of the veranda,
with the sea and sky before her, and his confession in her heart.

"Dear John."

Was he really her dear John?


Then came the day, a bleak bright spring day when Gurney had notice
for overseas.  The badgered Major had badgered others.  "Rid me of
this restless little fire-eater."

"Want embarkation leave, Gurney?"

"Can I have two days, sir?"

"Of course."

"Will it be France, sir?"

"Yes, France."

Gurney was happy or unhappy in having no relations whom he wished
to see.  His father and mother were dead, and his various aunts,
uncles and cousins were not of his world.  John Gurney had been the
family "sport", and he had been despised by two or three broods of
peculiarly blatant and bumptious cousins who dwelt at Bromley and
Ilford, and were all busy in the city.  They were young men who
might talk a great deal about the war, and keep out of it as long
as possible.  As for the female members, they had been particularly
offensive to Gurney, large, strenuous, sallow young women with
kinky black hair; all arrogantly capable.  Gurney packed a
haversack and set out for Southfleet.  If Mrs. Cotgrove could not
put him up for two nights, he could go to the Regency Hotel.

But that was not to be.  Gurney, marching down the High Street, and
feeling somehow that his manhood was to be justified, ran straight
into Mr. Slade who had popped out to inspect a newly-dressed
window.  The extraordinary thing about Mr. Slade was that he had
managed to transcend all local snobbery.  He kept a shop, but in
Southfleet he was a social somebody.

"Hallo, John!"

"Two days' leave, sir.  I'm for France."

"Rather sudden, my lad."

"Not too sudden for me.  I am going to see if Mrs. Cotgrove can
take me in."

"Oh no, you're not, John," said Mr. Slade, with a hand on Gurney's
shoulder.  "You are coming to us."

"But, sir--"

"No buts about it.  George is at school.  I'll walk round with you
now."

"Hadn't we better give Mrs. Hallard some warning?"

Mr. Slade looked at him with affectionate slyness.

"All right, use our telephone."

"Not I.  But you, sir."

"All right, I'll do the dreadful deed."

Mr. Slade had a telephone in his office and Gurney, cap in hand,
stood and listened.  Mr. Slade appeared to be enjoying the
conversation.  "John is here.  Two days' embarkation leave.  I want
to put him up.  Can you?  What?  Oh, yes, don't bother, I'll run
round to the shops.  Well, I'll send him along.  Thank you, my
dear."

Mr. Slade hung up the receiver and smiled at Gurney.

"You are to report at once, Captain Gurney.  Superior's orders.
About turn, quick march."

Gurney took the cliff road.  A north-east wind was blowing, but
what did John Gurney care for the wind.  That wayward nymph--the
English spring--might be shivering in Victorian muslin, but the sun
was shining, and the sea was a'glitter, and he was to spend two
days with Her.  What a prelude to the great adventure!  Gurney came
to the gate of Sea View, and hesitated there like a child pausing
before opening some precious parcel.  Was he afraid?  He was,
deliriously afraid, shaken by exquisite anguish.  To think that
he--!  He saw a curtain move, a hand wave.  He walked up the path to
the white trellised porch, and as he reached it the door opened.
It was she who opened it.

Gurney stood mute.  Then he raised a hand to the peak of his cap.

"I'm afraid I'm putting you to a lot of trouble."

She looked at him steadfastly, but there was soft laughter at the
back of her eyes.

"You are, John."

"I can easily go to--"

"My dear, don't be silly."

Her face seemed to float forward to him.  What was the surprising
and exquisite inspiration that caused him to--?  Good God, he had
kissed her!  Had she invited the--?  Oh, no, of course not!  How
could he think such a thought?  He stood there rather like a
flabbergasted boy.

"I hope--you--didn't mind, Rose?"

"Come in, my dear."

"Somehow, I--couldn't help it."

"Nor could I, John."

"Really?" and he just stared at her.


Perhaps no man in the British Army ever enjoyed his last days in
England as John Gurney enjoyed them.  He had no responsibilities to
leave behind, no emotional outbursts to dread, no fears to assuage.
He was Ye Perfect Gentle Knight walking with his lady, who was not
yet his, and whom he had not the conceit or the audacity to claim!
He just looked and loved and was happy, happy as he who is above
the mere greeds of the flesh, and can leave his rose untouched upon
the tree.  He was content to be near her, to look into her eyes, to
talk or to be silent.  Strange, little fellow!  Able to feel the
mystery of feeling as he did, to savour the perfume of it, and not
to rush into some passionate finale, and demand the last favour,
before going out to meet with death.

Mr. Slade watched them and was wise in cultivating a benign
aloofness.  Let these two dear creatures find each other in their
own way, and walk and talk as they pleased.  Mr. Slade was always
disappearing into the garden, or finding letters to write, or
memories to revive.  Almost, he used a watering-can upon these
memories.  And what would Southfleet think if--?  Did it matter?
Damn that part of Southfleet which loved to put skinny fingers into
the honey-pot and such bony knuckles!  Did they choose to be seen
in public together?  They did.  They walked on the pier, and old
Rawlins, having saluted them, smacked his thigh.

"Lord love a duck, what'll all the old women say about that?  Well,
what I says is:  'Damned good luck to 'em both.'"

Southfleet did comment upon this particular parade.  Gurney was on
embarkation leave and was spending it at Sea View.  He had been
seen walking on the pier with Mrs. Hallard.  He had even been seen
leaning with her over the railings and--

"No, my dear, I really can't believe--that!"

"But I assure you--"

"Holding her hand?"

"Yes."

"But I can't believe the local beauty could see anything in a funny
little--"

"Local beauty, my dear!  Tee-hee!  She must be over thirty.  The
merry widow, what!"

Apparently, certain of the local ladies could not imagine any woman
being merry with Gurney.  They suffered from the Captain Hargreaves
complex, the fellow who could pull fierce moustachios, and slap a
leg, and become much less fierce in the face of the enemy.


Gurney had to report back to Chalkstone, whence he would be
labelled to his destination, and his return journey could carry him
through London.  He wanted to take George out to lunch.  Why should
they not both see George?  So, a telegram was sent to the master's
house in Canonbury where George was a boarder, notifying the Rev.
William Wardle that Mrs. Hallard would collect her son at the
school punctually at noon.

They stood at the gate together, beside the porters' red brick
lodge, and looked across the asphalt and the grass to the great
mock-Gothic building with its two fat granite legs where the steps
went up.  Or were they two grey tusks in the building's maw?
Yonder was the gymnasium.  The great yellow brick walls of
warehouses and factories shut in half the playground like gaunt
cliffs.  The planes and poplars were faintly tinged with green.  A
clock struck twelve, and down those granite steps a little black
figure in its Sunday suit came running.

Said his mother:  "What a strange thing, that it should be
necessary to insist upon a Sunday suit."

Gurney was watching the boy.  "Discipline, I suppose.  I don't
expect it will spoil George's appetite.  Besides, you know, I ought
to approve of Sunday suits."

"And do you?"

"Not--always."

Was George surprised to see Gurney with his mother?  Maybe he was,
but Gurney's presence seemed to stimulate the boy's pleasure.
George was not a jealous child, and his hero was in khaki.

"Oh, I say, Mr. Gurney!"

His mother kissed him, and there were no other boys there to mock.

"Mr. Gurney's come to say good-bye.  He is going to France."

And what did George think of that?  Not much, or a great deal?
George's world would be the same world, guns and khaki-clad
soldiers, and no longer of German manufacture, boredom on the
school bench, thrills at cricket.  Maybe, both his elders were
inwardly wondering how the boy might feel about--Oh, that was
hypothetical, and not yet to be confronted by either of them.  The
day was the day, a boy's healthy tummy the justification.

They took a taxi in Aldersgate Street, and drove to a small city
restaurant with which Gurney was familiar.  George sat between
them, separating them, yet somehow linking them together.  George's
animation had died down; he was unaccountably serious and silent.
This mood and his Sunday suit seemed to be in sympathy.

Said his mother:  "You want a new hat, dear.  It's rather shabby."

George did not appear to be interested in hats.  He sat and stared
out of the windows, mute and self-contained.  His mother's eyes and
Gurney's met over his head.

"What would you like for lunch, George?"

George seemed to reflect.  "Oh, I don't mind."

Now, what was the meaning of that?  The emotional processes of the
young might be mysterious and disturbing.  This other entity had to
be considered.  Neither his mother nor Gurney were Freudians, but a
child is a child.

"Roast beef and Yorkshire pudding, George, or sausages and mashed
potatoes?"

Gurney had a sudden feeling that the suggestion was dreadfully
crude.  Somehow, the boy had not a mashed-potato face.

"I don't mind."

They were driving down Cheapside, and Gurney was conscious of
embarrassment in the presence of this silent boy.  Had George
divined?  Was he imposing upon this child unhappy forebodings?

Then George spoke.  "Will you have to go into the trenches, Mr.
Gurney?"

"I hope so."

The boy looked up at him anxiously.  "You will take care of
yourself, won't you?"

Gurney smiled a funny, wincing smile, and put his arm suddenly
about the boy.  "I will, George, I will."



XXIII


John Gurney arrived at Havre in the gloom of a grey morning.
Everything looked grey, the sea, other ships, the town whose
greyness was the dirtiest of all.  Gurney had spent the night on
deck, eschewing a cabin with wire bunks where an assortment of
other officer reinforcements had spread itself.  One of them had
snored prodigiously, and Gurney had missed that music.

But, perhaps, he had some glimpses of the future.  He would have to
live with men who snored, and smoked foul pipes, and perhaps told
fouler stories, and whose conversation could be bald and boring.
Not an easy life for a sensitive soul.  Gurney had felt acutely
alone during that channel passage, with no stars and no lights
showing, and with his secret self beholding reality in the dark
glass of the future.  There had been pangs at parting, and it had
been so public a parting, on the pavement outside the restaurant,
with the boy looking up wide-eyed at both of them.  He had not been
able to say that which might have been said.  If he could have
kissed her.  Why hadn't he kissed her?  And yet her hand had held
almost fervently to his.

"Bacon and eggs, you fellows!"

Someone had discovered a café canteen for officers, and Gurney's
inner man responded to the cry.  He sat in silence with other men,
human pottery on the wheel of fate, and ate his breakfast, and no
one noticed him.  A brittle cheerfulness prevailed, but it was thin
ice.  All these men were on the edge of the unknown and the
unknowable.  Gurney, watching those feeding faces, thought how
strange it was that some of them would die.

There was a doctor among them; the doctor did not go unnoticed, and
Gurney realized that a doctor might matter.  Oh, terribly so!  If
you were disembowelled or dismembered, or in agonizing pain, it
would matter to you that there was a man at hand who was capable
and of a good courage.  Were all doctors like that?  Gurney
wondered.  His belief in the equality of souls might receive shrewd
shocks.  He would hear men say:  "That windy rotter."  Yes, other
men, maimed and moaning or deadly still, would ask for a man with
capable hands.  A doctor mattered.  But a parson?  He handled
neither bomb, rifle, nor bandage.  He was just a voice; perhaps a
presence, and it might be an unwelcome presence.  His duty was to
strengthen and console men's souls.  He was a soul-doctor.  But did
these men ask for religion, or rather--the conventions of the
parish pulpit?  In their dark hours would they turn to the priest,
and cry; "Father: God help me"?  Did they believe in a God?  Gurney
slowly drank his second cup of coffee, unnoticed, and unincluded
in the brotherhood.  Already, he was feeling an alien, an
uncomfortable creature who might be tolerated if he did not raise
virtue too loftily upon a flagpole, or look sour and glum when the
primitive in man broke loose.  No, his was not going to be an easy
task.  Other men might suspect the prig, and he had to prove
himself man.

Gurney spent a week in a camp for reinforcements on a bleak hill
outside Havre.  No one seemed to know anything about him, or to
need him.  He mealed at a communal mess run by a somewhat sinister
young French woman, in a hideous villa, and slept in another villa
inhabited by a melancholy and black-bearded Frenchman and his wife.
The Lady of the Mess was known as Madelin.  She was murky and thin
and hard-lipped.  She was young, but looked as though she had never
been young.  Her parchment face threw off badinage and amorous
squibs as a tambourine might repel peas.

"Don't you fall for Madelin, padre."

"You could have her for five francs."

"But she'd give you clap."

Gurney sought to drill himself into accepting this irresponsible
playfulness.  The austerity must be removed from his smile.  A
benign tolerance, a human feeling for the frailties of the flesh!
And was it frailty, or just nature?  But he longed to escape from
this half-way house.  It seemed so strange that he, who was so
eager to plunge into the real business, should find it so difficult
to get there.  Was it that parsons were not wanted, that they were
mere accessories, after-thoughts.

The order came at last from the camp commandant.  He was to report
to a Divisional Headquarters at Bethune.  He packed his kit, and
attempted to pay for his billet, but the melancholy Frenchman would
not accept a single franc.

"We do not take money from those who come to help us, monsieur."

That touched John Gurney, and made up for Madelin and the Mess.  He
and the Frenchman shook hands.

"Bonne chance, monsieur.  You see, I can be no use.  I am a
consumptive."

Gurney's French was not well oiled, but he gathered the man's
meaning, and was moved by his sad and sallow face.  Almost, that
luxuriant beard seemed to grow on a mask of wax.

"That is--" but Gurney could not find the word, so he shook hands a
second time, and departed.

Bethune was a somewhat sinister town, gloomed over by its grim
black church tower with eyes like owls', save that they were empty
eyes.  Here and there the teeth in its narrow streets were broken
where shells had brought down the houses.  It possessed shops and a
civilian population, all shabby and vaguely sinister like Bethune
itself.  South of Bethune lay a colliery district, and the coal
dust might have spread over the place!  It had the grimy face of a
collier, and even when the sun shone its grey pile continued to be
grey.

Gurney left his kit with the R.T.O. and went to report to
Divisional Headquarters.  He found it in a château-villa off the
main place, and under the shadow of the owl-eyed tower.  He was
dealt with by a sergeant-clerk who advised him to report to Major
Morgan, the senior chaplain, at D. Mess.  D. Mess had its home in
another villa, in a little square where lime-trees were coming
sadly into leaf about a patch of starved grass.

All the members of the mess were out upon their various duties, and
the mess-orderly advised Gurney to wait until Major Morgan
returned, so Gurney sat in the chilly, tile-floored room, with
nothing to keep him company but a few old periodicals and
magazines.  A most depressing room, this, ugly and unwelcoming, and
John Gurney went out and strolled about Bethune, and forgot to
salute sundry senior officers, who, seeing his badge, passed him by
as a green little padre.  Gurney was hungry, and wondering where
and when he would get his next meal.

Returning, tired and depressed, to D. Mess, he found a long, lean
man with a face like a grey old fox's, sprawling in a chair, and
reading a magazine.  The reader turned his head and looked up with
cold and unfriendly eyes at Gurney.  He wore the insignia of a full
colonel, and the badge of the R.A.M.C.  Gurney was sufficiently
experienced to salute him.

"Who are you?" said a thin, harsh voice that was addicted to
sarcasm.

"My name is Gurney, sir.  I was advised to report here."

"By whom?"

"A sergeant at headquarters, sir."

"A sergeant?  No business of his to send you here.  This is--my--
mess."

"I'm sorry, sir.  I was told I should find the senior chaplain
here."

"He may be in for tea."

The doctor colonel gave him another of those cold looks.

"My mess is full.  Major Morgan will have to settle you somewhere."

The colonel returned to his reading, and left Gurney standing, and
feeling completely superfluous.  An ornamental French clock ticked
on the mantelpiece, and but for that sound there was silence.
Gurney stood gazing at the back of the long, lean doctor's head.
It had a little baldish spot in the midst of its greyness that was
like a pale and hostile eye.  Gurney turned and crept out, but his
boots made a creaking sound on the tiled floor.  He was not going
to stay in a room where that frosty and unfriendly presence froze
his sensitive pride.  The colonel glanced irritably over his
shoulder, but did not attempt to prevent Gurney's exit.

"Where do I go now?" thought he.

The mess-orderly passed him with a tray of cups and plates.  Tea?
How pleasant would have been a hot cup of tea.  It was quite
ridiculous, but Gurney felt very near to tears.  And then, as he
was about to put his hand to the vestibule door, that door opened
with a jocund heartiness, and just missed Gurney's face.

"Hullo!  Sorry," said a voice.

Gurney found himself gazing into the broad and vital face of Major
Morgan.  It was a Welsh face and a Welsh head, both sombre and
luminous.  It had dark eyes that could be both fierce and
infinitely kind.

"Hullo, are you Gurney?"

"Yes, sir."

Major Morgan put out a hand, and its grip was comforting.

"Just heard about you from headquarters.  Come in.  Where's your
kit?"

"At the station, sir."

"I'll have it sent for."

Gurney stood hesitant.  "Forgive me, sir, but I'm afraid I'm not
very welcome here."

"What?"

"The colonel in there said his mess was full."

Major Morgan looked capable of blurting out a very vulgar and
expressive word that was not for the lips of clerics.  So, Colonel
Sykes had snarled at this tired and depressed little man.  Colonel
Sykes's day was largely spent in snarling at people, and in
catching them bending, for this was one of the war's great games.
Major Morgan's Welsh blood was up.  Colonel Sykes might be his
senior but the red dragon could counter the grey wolf.

"Just wait a moment, Gurney."

He disappeared into the mess-room, and the orderly emerged from it
with discreet haste, closing the door after him.  Gurney stood and
listened to two voices.  They began quite politely, if with
frigidity, but in a minute or so they were battling in the air like
angry birds.  Gurney could not help hearing portions of the
argument.

"Shut up, Morgan.  You have no idea of discipline.  This is my
mess, and I--"

"The mess is not run for your special pleasure, sir.  What, in the
name of God, are we supposed to be doing out here?  You may be my
senior, but--"

"I should advise you to remember it, Morgan.  One padre is enough
in my mess.  After all, what use are you fellows?  Personally, I
can't see--"

"No, you wouldn't, sir.  I quite agree.  You have no understanding
of men, or of what--"

"Look here, Morgan, if I have any more impertinence--"

"You can have as much as you please, or as you deserve, sir.  I
will just ask you one question.  Am I to go and see the General on
this matter?"

"You can go to blazes as far as I am concerned."

"Very well, sir.  When a man is hungry and tired, and has come out
here among strangers, only to do his duty, you would turn him
away?"

"Oh, well, damn it, bring the fellow in and feed him.  He can go to
one of the Ambulances to-morrow."

"I think I had better see the General."

"Oh, all right, all right.  I don't want to be hard on one of your
pups.  Let him sleep here to-night."

"Thank you, sir.  I will send for his kit."

Major Morgan came out, very white but smiling, and his black hair
vulgarly victorious.  He knew Mr. Sykes, and that this senior
snarler was not popular with the other members of the Staff.  The
grey fox could fawn, and the Division's General, who was a
gentleman, did not like that sort of beast.  Colonel Sykes had a
vulpine smell, and no great reputation for courage in unpleasant
places.

"It's all right, Gurney.  I'll send for your kit.  Got a valise?"

"Yes, sir."

"I think we can drop the 'sir' between padres.  You can shake down
in my room to-night."

Gurney's face lost its tiredness, and became luminous.

"Thank you, thank you very much."

And so began a friendship that was to grow and deepen between two
men who were too passionately absorbed in their work to be jealous
of each other.


Major Morgan sat on the edge of his bed, John Gurney on his
unrolled valise.  Both were in their pyjamas, and Major Morgan was
smoking a pipe.  A most unecclesiastical figure was this
Welshman's.  Gurney was asking questions, and Major Morgan was
answering them and reflecting upon these same questions.  Their
implication was somewhat unusual.  He knew, and knew with some
fierce impatience, that irreverent things were said about the
"Cloth", and that some of the representatives whom the war had sent
him did not sustain his own strenuous standard.  Surely, the one
man who should not fear death or shirk it was the priest who
preached immortality, and yet in Major Morgan's experience too many
chaplains had too sacred a respect for their own skins.  They were
content to potter about in the back areas, talk, and eschew the
terrible test of flaming fear.  For Major Morgan knew what fear
was, and how it could transform a man into a mean and quaking mass
of selfishness.  It was a natural reaction, a savage urge towards
self-preservation, but man's ordeal lay in the transcending of it.
Did other men respect a priest who preached to them when they were
in billets, and was never seen in the trenches?  They did not.  Why
should they?

"Can I go everywhere?"

"What do you mean by everywhere, Gurney?"

"Where the men have to go.  The trenches and the gunpits, and the
aid-posts."

Major Morgan, elbows on knees, one hand embracing the bowl of his
pipe, and two large white feet protruding from striped pyjama
trousers, looked with interest at this neophyte.

"Yes, if you wish to."

"Do I need a pass or anything?"

"No, the job is the pass.  Should any C.O. call you up, refer him
to me.  But the right sort of C.O. won't."

"So, I just go where the urge wills."

"Just so, Gurney.  The urge.  You want to be with the men?"

"Yes."

"Good.  You won't like some of the things you may run into."

"I suppose not, but that's my--calling."

"Care about preaching?"

"Not much."

"Good.  Being in the dirt and the danger with the men is the best
sort of sermon.  And they understand it."

Major Morgan was thinking:  "I'll try and get him placed with
Bruce's ambulance.  They are a good crowd.  They had rather a
sickener with Bluett.  This little fellow ought to be a useful
contrast."  He bit hard on his pipe and stared at his own feet.

"I'll try and put you with one of our Field Ambulances, Gurney, the
best of them.  They are covering the forward area at present.  The
colonel is named Bruce, a dry Scot, but a good one.  No palaver.
Can't stand shirkers."

"Thank you."

"They had rather a windy specimen previously, so, it will be your
chance to reverse the verdict."

"I'll try to."

"I guess you will."

"Are there any other--duties."

Major Morgan twiddled his toes.  "Yes, burying the poor dead."

Gurney nodded and was silent.


When that most characteristic figure walked into the ambulance mess
at Abele Farm he found Colonel Bruce alone and writing a letter to
his wife.  Major Morgan was a singular member of the Church
Militant.  He carried a staff that was nearly as long as himself, a
kind of pastoral symbol, but useful in bogged and muddy trenches.
Men would see him striding, staff in hand, puttees and mackintosh
caked with slime, a smile in his eyes, head up, a man fit for men.
Colonel Bruce raised a grizzled head, brushed his ginger moustache,
and fixed the chaplain with a pair of very blue and ironic eyes.

"Hullo, Morgan.  Business or pleasure?"

"Both, sir."

"Sit down.  No use offering you a drink?"

"None at all, sir.  I'll smoke."

Colonel Bruce grinned, and sat waiting.  He was known among the
irreverent as "Old Ginger Grin", but it was a term of respect and
affection.

"Well, what do you want?"

"Why should I want anything?"

"You generally do."

They grinned at each other.

"I have a new padre, sir."

The man at the table had a very expressive nose, broadening at the
tip, yet suggesting a rubber mobility.  It appeared to grow broader
between those very blue eyes and the grizzled and reddish
moustache.

"Thanks, Morgan, but--"

"Yes, I know, sir; Bluett was a poor specimen."

"More than that, padre.  He did you people a lot of harm."

"I know that too, sir, but thanks for your candour.  This new man
is of very different stuff, or I'm no judge."

Colonel Bruce rubbed his chin.  "We are a rather--happy crowd,
Morgan."

"I know that too, sir.  I have a reason for asking you to take
Gurney."

"And the reason?"

"He wants to be in the thick of things, asked me whether he could
go everywhere, especially the trenches."

The Colonel's very blue eyes narrowed.  "That sort of fellow?  Not
just--hot air and ignorance?"

"I should say most certainly not.  The quiet, silent sort.  No
prig, sir.  I told him he wouldn't like some of the things up
there.  He won't.  None of us do, but unless I'm a poor prophet he
won't be kept from it."

"Rather a contrast to Bluett."

Major Morgan looked fierce.  "I wish you wouldn't keep rubbing in
Bluett."

"Sorry, padre.  Well, I'll give your little fire-eater a trial
trip."

"I'm extremely grateful to you."

The colonel grinned.  He knew that his surrender would not be
popular with his officers, but Major Morgan was not an easy man to
refuse, and the Scot and the Welshman liked each other.  Morgan had
come to ask a personal favour, but Colonel Bruce knew that behind
Major Morgan loomed Divisional Headquarters and the figure of its
Commander, who, as it happened, was a man of religion.  Major
General Carfax had a high colour and an equally high conception of
duty, that virtue over which the little highbrows lift contemptuous
legs.  The Rev. Basil Bluett had been something of a highbrow, and
when he had betrayed deplorable cowardice, and had been interviewed
in person by old Carfax, he had, with soapy unction, entered into a
psychological explanation of the lapse.

"You don't quite understand, sir.  I'm a sensitive fellow.  My
reactions are not those--"

But the General had caught him up.  "Of a soldier and a gentleman,
Bluett.  You had better go home to the old ladies.  You are no use
to us."

Major Morgan went upon his way, round the great muck-pond in the
courtyard, and out by the farm gate-house and across the moat.  He
was smiling.  How pleasant were these great silver-throated
poplars!  He missed an in-coming Ford ambulance by two minutes.  It
contained a sick Tommy, and a most unsick R.A.M.C. captain, one
Captain Geoffrey Griggs.  Captain Griggs was sandy like his
colonel, but with a large, moon-like, freckled face and mischievous
blue eyes.  He looked very stout and solid, but the thickness of
him was not fat but muscle.

Captain Griggs entered the mess by the window.  It was fitted with
two pairs of low, wooden steps.  The colonel had resumed the
writing of his letter.  He looked up and smiled his old-dog smile.
Captain Griggs was his particular pet, a man whom you could put in
a hot spot and who would not turn to grease.

"Everything all right?"

"Quite, sir.  That shell shook up Cherry Château a bit.  No one
hurt."

"I've got a piece of news for you."

"What's that, sir?"

"We are to have another padre."

Captain Griggs said:  "Damn."



XXIV


A limber, going into Bethune for stores, picked up Gurney's kit,
but he himself chose to foot it to Abele Farm.  The way was easy.
You took the Locon road, crossed the canal by a brick bridge, and
then saw across the fields that stately plume of trees.  So Gurney
saw it on that spring morning, with the sun shining and the sky
blue.  The great white poplars, marching two abreast, opened out to
stand about the homestead with its white walls and red roofs.
Abele Farm was one of those lucky places which shells had spared.
The farmer was with the French army, but his wife carried on the
work with the help of one old man, two boys, and three girls.

Gurney's eyes had a smile in them.  How green were the meadows and
the fields of young wheat!  The war-beast had not trampled them.
Larks were singing up above.  What strange place was this, while
over yonder, not so very far away, bloody things had been happening
and were about to happen.  Gurney passed a little pond that was
white with water-crowfoot.  He paused to gaze at it.  Peace wore a
white garland, and he was to find a home.  He had felt so very
homeless during the last few days, a man for whom no letters would
arrive.

He went on, turned into the poplar avenue, and saw the queer old
gatehouse framed by the trees.  It was topped by a lead cupola
containing a bell.  Abele Farm sat on a little island in the midst
of a moat, and the water was like black glass.  Clumps of marsh-
marigold were in flower.  Eastwards, and crowding against the wall
of a granary, an apple-orchard was in full blossom.

Gurney paused at the gate.  He made the sign of the cross.  His
lips moved.

"Peace be upon this place."

He entered.  He saw men in khaki, a motor-ambulance with a red
cross upon its side, a woman sewing at a window.  An officer
stepped out of one doorway, and into another doorway.  The grey
stones of the courtyard surrounded the huge manure-pit that was
shaped like an open-air bathing-pool, and it was here that Gurney
became conscious of the smell.  It assailed all newcomers, but
familiarity bred--not contempt but a certain insensitiveness to
this perpetual odour.

Gurney looked about him, and felt lost.  A very old man was
carrying fodder into a cowhouse.  An R.A.M.C. corporal came out of
a doorway, and to him Gurney addressed himself.

"Excuse me, can you direct me to the Officers' Mess?"

The corporal gave Gurney an appraising stare, and saluted.

"Up those wooden steps, sir, over there, and in at the window."

It seemed a strange method of approach.  He thanked the corporal,
rounded the manure pit, and came to the steps.  He mounted them,
and stood framed in the window.

The Officers' Mess was at lunch.  Gurney saw the sunny room, the
whitewashed walls, the long table, the tiled floor, and those six
men in khaki.  His body had shut off some of the light, and
simultaneously--or so it seemed to him--six faces turned to look at
him.  And they seemed strangely silent faces, critical, mute,
unwelcoming.

Gurney moistened his lips.  "Excuse me, I'm the new padre."

The faces remained smileless and unfriendly.  Then the oldest face
spoke.

"Mr. Gurney?"

"Yes, sir."

"Come in.  Had lunch?"

"No, sir."

"Come in and have some."

Gurney stepped in, feeling rather like a man who was to take a
plunge into cold water.  He got rid of his haversack and coat.  The
mess had gone on with its feeding.  Gurney looked for a chair, and
there was no chair.  He stood hesitant.

"Smith," sang a voice.

The mess-orderly put his head in.  "Yessir."

"Another chair."

"Yessir."

Gurney sat.  A plate with bully beef and vegetables was placed
before him, also--cutlery and a glass.  It so happened that Gurney
had been placed at the foot of the table opposite Colonel Bruce,
and before beginning his meal, he crossed himself, and with bent
head said a silent grace.  This little piece of ritual did not pass
unnoticed.  Someone winked at someone else, and someone pulled a
face.

The figure at the head of the table wiped its moustache.  "I had
better introduce you, Mr. Gurney."

"Thank you, sir."

"Captain Griggs, Captain Ryder, Captain Smart, Lieutenant
Hornblower, Lieutenant Toms."

The men appeared to find the ceremony provocative.  Each officer
when named gave Gurney a nod or a bow.  Gurney bent his head in
turn to all of them.  There was playful prejudice in the ritual,
ironical appraisement.  The new padre looked a funny little bit of
goods, and yet--this interpolated enigma had dignity.  He met all
their glances without flinching.  He lacked the soapy smugness of a
Bluett, nor was his voice that of an ecclesiastical eunuch.

It was Griggs who made the suggestion.  "Have some beer, padre?"

Gurney smiled.

"Yes, thank you, I'd like some beer."

Gurney had to catch up with the others, and he concentrated upon
bully beef and vegetables, but if the mess was taking stock of him,
he too was not blind.  So these were the men with whom he would
have to live.  Captain Ryder was dark and serious with a moustache
draping prominent teeth, a horse-faced man with strained eyes.
Captain Smart was rather like his name, debonair and dudish and
very smart about the legs.  Lieut. Hornblower was very tall and
thin and with grey eyes that could be cold and disconcerting.  Toms
the Quartermaster looked just a high-coloured cheeky boy.  Gurney
examined them all with shy carefulness, but to him Captain Griggs
was the pick of the bunch.  There was a friendly challenge in that
broad, freckled, good-humoured face.

Gurney's kit had arrived before him.  It lay in the Orderly Room,
and Colonel Bruce remembered its existence, and Gurney's need of a
bed and a batman.

"I'm afraid we shall have to put you in a tent, Gurney, for the
time being.  In the orchard."

"Nothing could please me better, sir."

"Have you a camp-bed?"

"No, sir, but I can sleep in my valise."

The mess was finishing rice pudding and tinned apricots.

"I can lend you a bed, padre."

This was from Captain Griggs, and Gurney's face lit up, and these
two men smiled upon each other.

"Thank you, but I shall be quite comfortable on the grass.  Thank
you very much, all the same."

The mess looked at him a little more attentively.

"Gurney will need a batman, Griggs," said the colonel.

"No, sir, really.  I can look after myself."

"What about boots, padre, and shaving-water?"

"I sometimes clean my own boots.  I can."

There was a little laugh, but with him, not against him.  Gurney
may not have known it, but he was making progress.

"But what about the shaving-water, padre?"

Gurney smiled.  "Yes, that would be rather a problem."

"Smith," sang a voice, "Mr. Gurney wants his sweet."

"Yessir."

The colonel was filling a pipe.  "I think you had better have a
batman, Gurney."

"I will be guided by you, sir."

"Detail a man, Griggs, will you?  What about Honneyset?"

Captain Griggs was emphatic upon the subject of Private Honneyset.

"No, not Honneyset, sir.  My chap, Bannister, can look after both
of us, anyhow for the time being."

Smith placed a plate of rice and apricots before Gurney, and Gurney
thanked him.

"Have some more beer, padre?  We've got a barrel in stock."

This was from Toms, the Quartermaster, who acted as mess-president.

"Thank you," said Gurney, "I think I will have some more beer."


John Gurney, assisted by Private Bannister, spent the afternoon in
settling into his tent.  It was pitched in a grassy aisle between
the apple trees, and Gurney kept putting his head out of the tent
to look at these lovely trees.  Bannister had produced a camp-bed,
though Gurney had refused it, but he accepted it now, and not under
protest.

"Where did you get it, Bannister?"

"Captain Griggs, sir."

"It is very kind of Captain Griggs."

"He's an A.1. Sport, sir."

Bannister was a fair boy with Sussex blue eyes, and a fallacious
air of innocence.  He disappeared, to return with a camp table and
an empty sugar-box.  He placed the table beside Gurney's bed.
Gurney had been unloading some of his belongings on to the bed.

"A table, Bannister!  Quite a luxury.  Does that also come from
Captain Griggs?"

"Yes, sir."

Gurney placed his Bible on the table, and Bannister took note of
it.

"Got a canvas basin and bucket, sir?"

"I believe so."

"A tin mug?"

"No, I'm afraid not."

"I'll have to scrounge one."

"What does scrounge mean exactly, Bannister?"

"Borrow, sir," said the fair boy, with a grin.

The sugar-box was to serve as a dressing-table and a chest of
drawers.  Bannister spread a ground-sheet beside the bed, pushed
his cap back, and looked about him.

"All ship-shape, sir.  But, gosh, you've got no chair."

"I can sit on the bed, Bannister."

"Must have a chair, sir.  I'll go and borrow one from Madame."

He disappeared, to return with a cane-bottomed chair, and a
triumphant grin.

"Got it, sir."

"How did you manage, Bannister?"

"Oh, just scrounged it."

"But won't the French lady miss it?"

"I'll make it all right with her, sir.  She doesn't do so badly out
of us."

Gurney smiled.  "It seems very peaceful here, Bannister.  I haven't
heard a gun.  How far are we from the front line?"

"Oh, about three miles, sir.  Jerry's been quiet these last few
days.  Which means the old blighter is saving up something nasty."

When everything was garnished and in order, with Gurney's shaving-
mirror suspended from the tent-pole, Gurney took his chair and
Bible out into the orchard and sat down to meditate and consider
his impressions.  He had come to Abele Farm feeling a superfluous
nobody, but maybe he was feeling a little less of a nobody.  Yes,
his duty was to convince these other men that he was man and not a
clerical excrescence.  The chill of the first plunge had passed,
and Gurney sat in the sunlight between the trees, and felt a
hopeful warmth spreading through him.  He opened his Bible, but he
did not read it.  The inward book in him sufficed for the moment.

He could write home now, to Her, to Mr. Slade and to George.  No
longer was he a wandering Jew.  He had an address, and by the Lord
God Almighty he would try to keep it.


Actually, Gurney fell asleep in the orchard of Abele Farm, for he
had passed two or three nights in the rough while on transit to his
final destination.  He had abandoned Madame's chair for the grass,
with his haversack stuffed with a towel under his head, and his
Bible beside him, and that was how Captain Griggs found him, like a
child asleep in the sun.  Captain Griggs stood, for a moment,
looking down at him and his Bible, and finding himself attracted by
Gurney's peaceful and sleeping face.  There was something unusual
about this little priest, a simplicity, a serene naturalness that
made you wonder.

Geoffrey Griggs was about to turn away and leave Gurney to his
dreams, when John Gurney's eyes opened and looked up at this other
man.  A smile lit up Gurney's face like the sudden smile on the
face of a very young child.

"Oh, it's you!  I'm afraid I've been asleep."

"Why not?"

Gurney sat up.  "I have to thank you for that bed."

"What about rheumatism, padre?"

"Why rheumatism?"

"That grass.  Isn't it damp?"

"I don't think so."

"Then I'll try it."

Captain Griggs sat down, with stout legs crossed.  The muscles
bulged under the puttees.

"Not too bad.  Pleasant spot--this."

"Lovely," said Gurney, "you wouldn't think the war was so near."

"Quite near enough.  Your first experience?"

"Yes."

"It feels a bit funny at first, you know."

"I suppose it does.  Is it easy to find one's way up to the line?"

"Quite easy."

"I shall be able to go up to-morrow.  I am looking forward to it--
tremendously."

Captain Griggs, one hand grasping a hairy wrist, gazed steadfastly
upon John Gurney.

"Is that--your--idea, padre?"

Gurney looked innocently surprised.  "Why, of course.  That's why I
came out here.  I want to go up the line every day."

A peculiar smile came into Geoffrey Griggs's eyes.

"You had better be shown around the first time or two, you know."

"I suppose I might get lost?"

"Nasty places here and there.  Green heads get shot at."

"I'm afraid I'm very green."

"I shouldn't say that.  I am going up to one of the aid-posts to-
morrow to see a pal."

"Can I come with you?"

"If you feel like it."

"Thanks, most awfully."

Captain Griggs, who acted as adjutant, left Gurney for the Orderly
Room where he had letters to sign, and in so thoughtful a mood that
he missed both the sergeant-major and the sergeant-major's salute
as he crossed the courtyard.  Madame, sewing at her window, smiled
upon him, and Captain Griggs did not see her smile.  As the most
popular and trusted officer of the Field Ambulance Captain Griggs
might have been soused in smiles, but hands in pockets, freckled
face mooning in the sunlight, he was absorbed in the strange
innocence of Gurney.  Yes, there was no doubt about it, the little
padre did want to go up the line, and every day, damn it!  His face
had lit up like a boy's at the prospect of an exciting party.

Gurney was washing his hands in his canvas basin.  Captain Griggs
had told him that tea was at 4.30, and Gurney's wrist-watch made
the time 4.15.

Geoffrey Griggs, having signed what there was to sign, made for the
mess, and found Captain Smart alone in his glory, censoring letters
and very casually so.  Captain Smart was apt to be slack upon
detail, save in the matter of dress.

"Hullo, Fatty.  What do you think of the little geezer?"

"What little geezer?"

"Our new priest, of course."

Captain Griggs frowned.  There were occasions when the
facetiousness and the debonairness of Captain Smart annoyed him.

"He's not a little geezer."

"Feeling fatherly?"

Captain Griggs sat down and rocked his chair.  If Smart was not
careful he would get his backside kicked one day.

"Going up the line with me to-morrow."

"I see.  Pushing his face into it, are you?"

"No, I'm not.  His idea.  Wants to go up the line every day."

"Go up every day?"

"Yes."

"Christ, the silly little boob!  He'll soon get cured of that."

Captain Smart opened a letter and glanced at it perfunctorily.
Captain Griggs was still rocking his chair.

"Casual brute, aren't you, Smarty?"

"What, me?"

"Yes, you.  I'll bet you a new pair of breeches he goes up every
day."

Captain Smart scribbled on an envelope and tossed it aside.

"I'm on.  I haven't recovered yet from Bluett."



XXV


It was a very peaceful morning, and Gurney's impressions of the day
were in time with nature; the larks singing up above were conscious
of no war.  Captain Griggs and Gurney followed a field path beside
a canal whose waters were as placid as the sky.  The green world
was lushing up.  Aspen trees kept up a sibilant tremulo, and their
shadows flickered on the water and the grass.  They crossed a
bridge, and came out upon a country road with one-storied cottages
dotted along it.  French peasants were still living here.  Gurney
saw a man in blue trousers hoeing in a field.  They passed a
cottage with a big lilac bush in flower.

Said Gurney:  "How very peaceful everything is."

Captain Griggs pulled a face.  He might have said:  "Yes, much too
peaceful.  Me no likee," for such periods of peace could end in
sudden frightfulness.

"When Jerry is quiet, he may be up to tricks."

Gurney had paused to smell the lilac which hung over the white
fence.

"Do you see many Germans?"

"Just one in six months."

"Only one!  How very--"

"Wounded prisoner.  Nasty great swaggering brute.  What about
loving one's enemies, padre?"

"One should pity them."

"Sorry.  Nothing doing on my side.  One doesn't love people who let
off gas."

They followed the quiet, sunny road.  A Frenchwoman came out of a
cottage, and smiled upon Geoffrey Griggs.

"Bon jour, Monsieur le Capitaine."

Griggs touched the peak of his cap, and passed on.

"The last cottage."

"Why does she live there?"

Captain Griggs grinned to himself.

"Ask me another.  For the good of the troops.  She calls herself a
patient of ours.  I leave her to Smart."

Gurney looked puzzled.  "She must have great courage."

Captain Griggs suppressed an explosion.  "Oh, undoubtedly, padre,
undoubtedly, but she's not quite a St. Joan."

More trees, red thorns that would soon be in flower; an orchard
that had a somewhat dishevelled look as though a storm had swept
over it, and torn off some of its branches and left others hanging.
There were things in that orchard, funny-looking arbor-like
structures, but no men in brown.  Gurney gazed at them.

"Gun-pits, padre."

They moved on under the shade of the thorns.  Red May, so near to
death and to fear!  How strange, how sweetly strange!  God must
have spared these trees.

Then Gurney saw something else, beyond the trees, queer-looking V-
shaped structures, like the ribs of overturned ships.  The sky
showed through them, and suddenly Gurney understood.  Those were
houses, roofless houses, cobwebs of wood, tileless and dead.  He
was silent.

They came to another road, a different kind of road.  There was
something sinister about it.  The sun shone, but this was a ghost
road.  It seemed very open to the sky, unpleasantly so.  Queer nets
decorated with ribbons were strung along part of it.  The stillness
and emptiness were challenging.

"We begin here," said Captain Griggs, and walked quickly across the
road to the opening of a shallow communication trench, and Gurney
followed him.  Yes, there was a difference here other than the mere
change in the surroundings.  What was it exactly?  Fear?  This was
the land of fear.  They were waist-deep in the trench, and on one
side a fence of wire-netting shut them in.  How frail was this
barrier and this screen!  It seemed strange to be walking with the
green growth level with your waist, and this wilderness stretching
away towards the sky-line.  Grass, weeds, water, a melancholy
flatness, and over yonder the dry bones of those slaughtered
houses.  An eerie silence seemed to press upon this level country,
a silence that was almost solid.

Gurney became aware of a quickening of Captain Griggs's pace.  The
trench bottom had dried up.  There were yellow buttercups close to
Gurney's hand.  He put it out and touched them as he passed.

He asked a simple question.  "Why this wire fence?"

Captain Griggs's voice came back over his shoulder.  It, too, had a
difference, though Griggs may not have realized it, the quietness
of this haunted, sun-lit desolation.

"To inspire one with the illusion that we can't be seen."

"Can we?"

"Well, yes, I expect so.  In the summer the grass and the weeds get
up high and provide more cover.  Besides, we're just two, and not
worth a shell."

Gurney was smiling.  How strange and pleasant to be in sight of the
enemy.  Almost he wished for the compliment of being shot at.

"I think they might give me my baptism."

Captain Griggs paused for a second and looked round into Gurney's
face.  It was smiling.

"Better not ask for such favours, padre, or we may get it."

They went on.  They came to the place where the wire was not, and a
low bank of earth took its place.  Here was a notice-board standing
awry and scrawled on with chalk:

KEEP YOUR HEADS DOWN.

THOSE WHO LOVE LIFE DON'T LOITER.

Captain Griggs looked back, and somehow his face was different, set
and stern.

"Can you read, padre?"

"Yes."

"Well, read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest.  Green heads have to
be educated."

Beyond them lay a gap in the earth wall, and Captain Griggs bent
low and did not loiter in the crossing, and Gurney followed him.
The trench grew deeper, the walls higher.  They turned a corner and
came suddenly upon life, men sitting with their backs to the
rampart, smoking, cleaning equipment, or just doing nothing.
Gurney felt thrilled.  His first Tommies actually in the trenches!
He smiled upon them, especially upon one lad who was picking lice
out of a shirt.  Gurney would have liked to stop and speak to these
men, but Captain Griggs ploughed on.  He seemed to be in a hurry,
for Captain Griggs, though Gurney did not know it, had one of those
windy moods upon him from which all men suffer.  Moreover, he was
somewhat fey, misliking this spell of tranquillity, and mistrusting
it, and feeling tight in his tummy.

They took another trench that was banked high with sods, and here
and there there were gaps in the banking which had not been
repaired, and through one of these gaps Gurney saw two little
mounds, and two wooden crosses.  He stopped and stared.  Those
graves had a freshness.

"Two poor lads."

Captain Griggs faced about.

"Yes, come on, padre."

Gurney came on.  There had been a slight rasp of impatience in his
new friend's voice.

"Were they killed?"

"A month or so ago.  Your predecessor should have buried them.  He
funked it."

"Then, did no one?"

"Yes, old Morgan came up and did the job."

Their last communication alley opened into a trench that crossed it
at right angles, and suddenly Gurney realized that he was here.
Men were strung along this trench, but they were armed men, rifles
ready to their hands.  They had queer, quiet, expressionless faces.
There was a silence here.  A young officer was peering through a
periscope.  Gurney smiled at these stolid faces, but only one of
them smiled back at him.  He heard something said as he squeezed
along in Captain Griggs's wake.

"Another bloody sky-pilot."

These men did not seem very friendly to the Cloth.

They passed dug-outs, noisome-looking places.  Then Captain Griggs
turned sharply into a sap that ran backwards from the front line.
They came to another dug-out, a more sumptuous affair, heavily
sandbagged, and with a red cross sign fixed beside the entrance.
Captain Griggs dived inside.

"Hallo, Squib."

"Hallo, old man."

Gurney stooped and peered in.  He saw a man lying on a stretcher,
two others sitting on a bench, an officer writing at an improvised
table, two orderlies standing by.  The medical officer had a
little, thin, pale face, and his eyes looked tired and frightened.

"Come in, padre.  This is Captain Harker.  Squib, our new padre.
Come up to see the life."

The M.O. smiled.  Somehow, his face looked wrinkled and old.

"Come in, padre."

Griggs sat down on a box.  "Anything doing?"

"No, quiet as hell."

Gurney was amused.  He had imagined hell to be a somewhat noisy
place.

"All right for dressings, etc.?"

"Quite."

Captain Griggs was tapping his leg with his cane.  He appeared
restless.

"Anything you want?"

"Whisky is a little short.  Could you manage--?"

"I'll try.  I thought your CO. was a cellar-merchant."

"Something went wrong with our last case."

"Bad luck.  Well, we'll be getting along.  I'm looking in at Cherry
Château."

"Lucky let off for them last week."

"It was."

Captain Griggs got up.  "Bye-bye, Squib."

"So long, old man.  Cheerio, padre.  Glad to see you any time."

"Thank you," said Gurney.  "I hope you will see me often."

They left the aid-post, and passed back along the sap.  Captain
Griggs was walking fast.  He had that nasty feeling on him, and a
man did not loiter unless there was an actual job to do.  Strangely
enough, Captain Griggs's unpleasant sense of premonition was to
prove prophetic.  They were half-way up the sap when the thing
happened.  They seemed to Gurney like sudden, sharp claps of
thunder over yonder, strange screamings in the air, explosions,
fountains of dirt going up.

Captain Griggs went flat.

"Get down, padre, get down."

But, Gurney did not get down.  He stood as though paralysed,
listening, looking.  There was strange tension in his tummy.  He
seemed to be standing in the midst of a noisy and catastrophic
earthquake, bewildered yet alert.  Captain Griggs, flat on his
tummy, could have told him that this was what was called a shell-
storm, but a clod of earth had arrived on Captain Griggs's back and
winded him, and he was wondering whether it was something worse.

Scattered soil hit Gurney in the face.  He saw that the sap was
blocked with earth ahead of them.  Then, the guns switched suddenly
to the left.  Captain Griggs turned over and sat up, feeling his
back.  His face looked grey.  And just as suddenly his eyes seemed
to bulge in a shocked stare.

"My God, the aid-post!"

Gurney turned and looked, and saw a jumble of dishevelled sandbags.
The post had been hit, and in that moment something came alive in
John Gurney.  Almost it seemed to be another person in him that ran
towards that wrecked dug-out.  He could hear cries coming from it.
"Oh, my God, help, Oh, my God, my God!"  Those men were buried in
there, smothered under the caved-in roof and walls, and that bitter
cry roused John Gurney to a kind of blind frenzy.  He began to tear
and scrabble at the fallen sandbags like a dog in a rabbit-hole.
He just didn't hear Captain Griggs's voice, and Captain Griggs,
having given him one astonished stare, turned about and ran.  He
scrambled over the mess of earth and up the sap to where men were
crouching against the parapet.

"Help, you fellows, the aid-post has been hit."

When Griggs and his rescue party crowded down the sap they saw a
strange sight, a backside and a pair of squirming legs.  That wild
little tyke Gurney had managed to tear and scratch a hole in the
debris, and was wriggling his way in.  The men with picks and
spades stood for a moment, blankly staring.

"Who the bloody 'ell is that?"

"Is he comin' out or goin' in?"

Captain Griggs pushed a cap back from a white and sweating
forehead.

"That, my lads, is our new padre, and he's going in."

At that very moment the backside and kicking legs disappeared.
Gurney was in.

Griggs inserted his head and shoulders into the hole.

"Padre."

"Get a light," said a voice.  "I can't see."

"Look out, old man, it may cave in--worse."

"Get me a light," said the voice with a kind of fierceness.

Captain Griggs wriggled into the hole.

"Shove me, you fellows.  Padre, I'm coming in.  We'll get some
light."

Captain Griggs was pushed like a torpedo into its tube.  There was
silence, the sound of a match being struck, and then a voice.

"Hullo, out there."

"Yes, sir."

"Enlarge that hole.  Be careful.  Half the roof's down.  Take as
little as you can, or we'll be sunk."

The men began slowly and carefully to clear away the debris.  They
heard voices within.  "Poor old Squib, afraid he's a goner.  Hold
on there, lad.  We'll get you out."

The men outside worked with a furious concentrated carefulness.
The hole grew larger, and the light streamed in.

"Come on inside, just two of you.  We want a lift here."

Two men crawled in.

They had recovered both the living and the dead from that tragic
mess and had laid them in the sap, when the German guns switched
back.  Gurney, bare-headed, was kneeling beside the body of Captain
Harker.  Griggs and the men went flat or pressed themselves against
the sap wall, but Gurney remained kneeling, lips moving, hands
together.

"Padre," said Griggs, "get down."

Gurney either did not or would not hear him.

"God!" said one of the Tommies, "this bloody padre is a bit of all-
right."


The shell-storm ceased as suddenly as it had begun.  There were two
dead men in the sap, two wounded, two who were "shocked".  Captain
Griggs was attending to the wounded, and Gurney still kneeling by
the dead when two officers came scrambling over the fallen earth,
the battalion colonel and adjutant.

Now, Gurney had no idea of the mess he was in.  He had a dirty
face, wild hair, earth all over his clothes.  The colonel, a very
tall man, glanced with a kind of shrinking compassion at poor
Harker.  He looked so small and white and crushed.  And who was the
fellow kneeling by him?  The colonel turned to Captain Griggs.

"A bad business, this."

Griggs rose from his knees.  He too was very dirty.

"Yes, sir, a direct hit.  Ghastly bad luck."

The colonel nodded at the kneeling figure.  "Who's that?"

"Padre Gurney, sir.  He went in alone after the men, just scratched
his way in like a terrier."

"Did he!" said the colonel.  "You were in too, by the look of you."

"Yes, but the padre was in first."

The colonel went and laid a hand on Gurney's shoulder.  "Thank you,
padre.  You did a damned brave thing."

Gurney looked up and smiled.  "Well, I couldn't help it, sir.
Those poor fellows in there."

The colonel turned to his adjutant.  "We shall want to report on
this.  Get all the details, yes, particularly about--the padre."


It was some time later in the afternoon when two very tired and
dirty men walked into the courtyard of Abele Farm.  Stretcher-
bearers had carried the wounded and the shocked to the A.D.S., and
thence a motor-ambulance had brought them to Headquarters.  They
had had a tale to tell.

"It was the padre who got us out."

Men were standing about, and when they saw these two dirty figures
a sort of cheer went up.  Captain Griggs looked annoyed.  "Oh, shut
up, you fellows."

Colonel Bruce and two other officers came to the window of the
mess, Colonel Bruce was sporting his ginger-grin.  He watched those
two earth-stained men circle the great manure pit.

"Well, padre, you seem to have run right into it, on the first
occasion."

Then his grin died away.

"A stiff whisky and a wash.  Come in."

He did not say that they had done damned well, but he put out a
hand and drew Gurney up the steps and into the room.  Captain
Griggs followed.  He flopped down in a chair, stretched his legs
out, and was silent.  He was all-in, and haunted by poor Harker's
bleached little face.

"Damn it, someone give me a drink.  And tell Bannister I want a
bucket of hot water."

"Yessir," said Smith.

"And tell him he'd better clean up the padre first."



XXVI


John Gurney fell asleep in his tent with the feeling that he could
sleep the clock round, but the night was not to be so completely
peaceful.  He dreamed; he dreamed that he had been buried alive and
was struggling and stifling, and in the midst of this night-terror
he woke up.  He was shivering; he had his blankets over his head,
and he thrust them off and sat up.  His heart was beating fast and
hard, and suddenly he realized that the elemental man in him had
been frightened.  It was quaking, and the camp-bed quaked with it.
Had he been scared to death in that dreadful trench?  Well, yes,
for a second or two, until he had realized--And heard those piteous
cries.

Gurney put his hands to his head and prayed, and there was
thankfulness in his praying.

"Thank God, for letting it happen to me like that.  I might have
run away.  Please God, give me courage, always."

He lay down again, and a strange peace descended upon him.  He had
not done so badly.  He had shown these other men that he was no
Bluett.  And She would have no cause to be ashamed of him.  Should
he tell her about it?  But that would be showing off.  And
presently he fell asleep again, profoundly at peace, nor did he
hear a blackbird singing in the dawn, nor the farm noises, nor the
voices of men.  Sometime about half-past seven Private Bannister
slipped into the tent with a cup of early tea and three slices of
bread and butter, and gently he woke Gurney.

"Early tea, sir."

Gurney blinked at him.  "Why, Bannister, how very kind of you."

"Glad to be of any use, sir.  You're to stay in bed and sleep it
out.  Colonel's orders, sir."

Gurney drank his tea and ate his bread and butter, and went happily
to sleep again.  He did not wake until the sun was high.  Someone
was sitting by his bed.

"Well, Gurney, had a good sleep?"

John Gurney looked up into the face of Major Morgan.

"Hullo, sir.  I'm afraid I'm--neglecting duty."

Gurney sat up and Major Morgan put out a big hand and pushed him
back again.

"Hardly that, Gurney!  I've heard all about it.  Well, I was right,
you know."

"About what, sir?"

"About you, my lad.  By the way, it is the special wish of the
Surreys that you should bury those poor fellows."

"Thank you, sir.  I wish it had been otherwise."


There was a little war cemetery in the orchard west of the ruined
village, and there Gurney read the burial service over Captain
Harker and the men who had died with him.  It was a very simple
service, with the guns silent, and the larks singing overhead.  The
battalion colonel and adjutant, and two other officers and a dozen
men stood beside the graves while Gurney read the service for the
burial for the dead.

When the service was over, the colonel went to shake hands with
John Gurney.

"Thank you, padre.  I have never heard it read more to my liking.
Come up and have lunch with us in the mess."

"With pleasure, sir."

"By the way, I am putting in a recommendation--on what you did."

"Are you, sir?  Very good of you, but I only did what--"

"Yes, just that, padre.  But we don't always do what we might have
done."

"No, sir.  I might have run away."

The colonel smiled at him quizzically in spite of the sadness of
the occasion, and Gurney retired behind an apple tree and unrobed
himself, and stuffed the vestments into a haversack.  The
headquarters mess was a sandbagged structure built into the
interior of a farmhouse in the derelict village.  The colonel and
Gurney strolled together up the village street, and from one of the
roofless cottages a black cat suddenly appeared, meowed, and rubbed
against Gurney's legs.

"Well, if that isn't an omen, padre!"

Gurney bent down and stroked the creature.  "I hope so, sir."

"Even the cats salute you!"

Three other officers were gathered in the mess, including Lieut.
Hornblower who had been detailed to act as temporary M.O. in place
of poor Harker.  Their glances were friendly.  Gurney was very much
man among them.

"Hullo, padre, it's good to see you."

"Come and squat."

Gurney was given the seat on the colonel's right.  He was a guest
of honour.  He felt that he had received promotion.


Smith was laying tea when Gurney returned, and Smith, like all
other plain men, had become bright and polite to Mr. Gurney.

"Hope you feel rested, sir."

"Yes, Smith, thank you."

"Post's in, sir.  Letters for you."

Gurney's eyes lit up.  "That's good news.  Where are they, Smith?"

"Over here, sir, on the side-table."

Gurney went and looked and saw Her writing.  Well, well, well, if
this wasn't the climax of a halcyon day!  And there was another
letter; it looked like Mr. Slade.  Gurney gathered them up, and
slipped them into a tunic pocket.  He was caught in the act by
Captain Griggs.

"Hullo, padre!  Letters?"

Did Geoffrey Griggs imagine it, or did Gurney blush?


The reading of such letters was a private affair, and after tea
Gurney carried them to his tent in the orchard, and sat down on his
camp-bed with a letter on either knee.  Which should he open first?
Mr. Slade's was the choice, for Gurney was just a little afraid of
that other letter, because it could mean so much to him.  Mr.
Slade's letter was cheery and chatty, with all the local news, and
ended with the information that his friends in Southfleet were
missing him.  How strange, but Mr. Slade's letter made John Gurney
feel homesick, though it could not be said that Southfleet had been
very kind to him.  He had a sudden longing for the cliffs and the
pier, and Caroline Terrace and its gardens, and the church, and the
funny old front of the Old Town.  Yes, and the cricket-ground and
his lads, and his roses at Vine Cottage, and the white house with
the green shutters and Her.

He looked at her letter.  Would it be formal; would it be
disappointing?  Almost, Gurney's hands trembled as he opened the
envelope.  He unfolded the sheet and read.

"My dear John--"

Gurney experienced a thrill.

Her dear John!

If only he could be her dear John?  But was not that presumption?

But what a letter!  It seemed to slip at once into an easy, and
happy intimacy.  She asked for all the news.  Was he settled
somewhere, and did he like his new post?  It could not be said that
there were any profundities in her letter, but that was of no
concern.  Almost, she prattled to him as a woman talks over her
work, and this was the very essence of a confidence that sank
straight and deep into Gurney's consciousness.  She wrote to him as
if--But, oh, wasn't he assuming too much?  And she was sending him
a parcel as soon as she received his permanent address.  He was to
tell her of anything that he needed.

Gurney did a ridiculous and boyish thing, he put her letter to his
lips.  Yes, her hand must have rested there.

And then he had an inspiration.  Dared he ask her for a photograph?
He did not quite know whether he had the audacity.

But that evening, while the mess was playing Bridge, he sat down
and wrote to her and to her father.

And he did dare.  Would she send him her photograph?  As an
afterthought and as a sop to the conventions, he asked also for a
photograph of George.


Gurney did not think of himself as a hero, for man's heroic age is
past.  No longer does he wear fine feathers and go upon colourful
adventure, tossing a spear at the dawn, laughing and gay and
splendid in the shining armour of youth.  That strange creature--
modern man--has so muddled up his clever little gadgets that he can
never be sure whether he is taking a bomb or a hot-water bottle to
bed with him.  His very wars have become shabby affairs, mere muck
and misery, blood and torn entrails.  Fear has spread black wings
over the world, and Gurney felt and understood that fear, and
somehow realized that life's business of the moment was to
challenge and conquer Fear.  Love had to come back into the world,
and faith, and compassion for one's neighbour.

So, in all humility, Gurney set out daily upon his pilgrimage,
confronting fear in his own person, for he discovered that there
were occasions when fear gripped him.  No longer was he the
innocent visitor to those trenches and holes in the ground.  That
one incident had left its raw surface, and Gurney was to experience
the dreadful and horrid reactions of crude primitive emotion.  He
was sensitive; he had imagination.  He knew that mutilation and
bloody disaster might be waiting for him round some corner, but the
spirit of him set itself towards a silent selflessness.  He could
and would say--"Sometimes I am a fearful man, but I will not
sacrifice to fear."

So, he went everywhere, exploring that world of ditches and dug-
outs until nearly every corner of it was familiar to him.  He would
appear in the most unexpected places, front-line trenches,
listening-posts, gun-pits, cook-houses, company messes, aid-posts.
Usually he carried a packet or two of cigarettes with him, but he
carried much more than that, a smile, a light that suggested a
halo, a simple sincerity and a naturalness that could not be
denied.  To hundreds of men he became a familiar figure, welcomed,
saluted, smiled at.  Probably he did not know the name by which
they had christened him, "The Front Line Padre".

Sometimes he and Major Morgan joined in these pilgrimages, nor was
there any jealousy between them.  The Welshman seemed to lack the
negativeness of the Anglo-Saxon, and the sterility that compensates
itself with malice.  Gurney was learning to laugh, even at men whom
the Major could describe as "Awkward Brutes", and awkward they
could be, full of grousings and surliness, but as Morgan put it:
"They are our soil, and in them we have to plant the seed."  For,
this Welshman had the subtlety of the serpent.  He knew that most
men never grow up, and have to be cajoled, flattered, scolded and
slapped like children.  At home, was not another Welshman to
discover that munition workers had to be bribed, and their war-
effort sugared?

But Gurney went his own way.  His work was, in a sense,
experimental, an exploring of the body and soul of man.  He had
rebuffs and he had successes.  The thing was to smile and cultivate
compassion.  Tough cynics might ask:  "What does the little fellow
think men are?  Bloody saints?"  Gurney thought nothing of the
kind.  He was becoming catholic in his humanity.  Did men scrounge,
and skimshank and snarl over food, and spend five francs on love,
and curse sergeant-majors and some of their officers, and sulk?  Of
course they did.  But they stuck in the trenches, they endured,
they wrote letters home, and often they were unselfish letters,
concealing ugly truths.  "I'm in the pink."  "I'm feeling
champion."  Gurney found the balance well on the credit side.  The
debits were just human nature.

Pausing one day outside an aid-post he heard voices, shouts,
curses.  What disharmony was this?  There had been desultory
shelling, and Gurney had caught a splodge of earth on his cap.  Tin-
hats had not yet come in.  He put his head in to explore.  He saw a
large, burly creature with a red and rather brutal face, lying on a
stretcher, and fighting off an orderly, and an angry M.O.

"Blast yer bloody eyes.  Keep yer--'ands off me.  I don't want yer
muckin' me about.  Got it in the guts, 'ave I?  Bloody 'ell!  Get
art!"

The man was like a wild creature, shocked, and quite out of
control.  He cursed and struggled and snarled.  The angry M.O. was
trying to give him a dig of morphia, but the fellow knocked the
hypodermic out of his hand.

"All right, you fool, lie and rot.  Get some bearers, Jones.  We'll
tie him on a stretcher and send him down."

Gurney walked in, and the M.O. glared at him.

"Hullo, padre, better keep out of here, unless you want to hear
foul language."

"I don't mind," said Gurney, and sat down on a box beside the man
on the stretcher.

The fellow had wits enough to recognize him.  "What'o, the bloody
padre."

Gurney laid a hand on one of the man's hands, and had it flung off.

"You damn' well leave me alone.  I don't want to be messed about by
a bloody little parson."

Gurney smiled at him.  "Of course you don't.  Have a fag."

He produced a packet of cigarettes, and stuck one into the coarse
mouth, and the coarse mouth accepted it.  Gurney lit a match, and
held it to the white tube.

"Glad to be in here.  I was feeling a little windy."

He lit himself a cigarette.  The man stared at him.

"You--a bit windy!"

"Yes."

"Garn, tell me another."

The joke seemed a good one, and the fellow laughed.  "No bloody
funk about you, old sport."

"No, not quite that."

The fellow went on laughing.

He smoked, and in a little while Gurney was stroking his head,
while the M.O. and the orderly, pretending to be busy with other
matters, observed the miracle.  It was as though Gurney had cast
the devil out of the man, and so soothed and calmed him that he lay
still, with his eyes closed, and the end of the cigarette hanging
from his lower lip.  Gurney leaned over and gently removed it.  The
fellow murmured something, and Gurney bent to listen.

"'Old my 'and, sir."

Gurney grasped a dirty paw.  "I'm not goin' to die, sir, am I?"

"No, of course not.  Take it easy, keep still.  They'll soon have
you in hospital."

Actually, the man fell asleep, holding on to Gurney's hand, and
when the stretcher-bearers came for him, he went like a lamb.

The M.O., grinning, but faintly peeved, addressed Gurney.

"Bit of a wizard, aren't you, padre.  Bottle of morphia on legs."

Gurney was cleaning his cap.  "No.  I think the poor fellow was
frightened.  He wanted a mother."

"I wonder what Ma would have made of his nice language?"

"Just a baby squawling."

"I see.  Just like that!"


Gurney, returning to Abele Farm found, for a contrast, a letter
from Her.  The envelope seemed larger and stouter than usual, and
suddenly Gurney became excited.  Was it possible that she had sent
him her picture?  He sneaked off to his tent, closed the flap, sat
down on his bed, and opened the envelope.

There was a photo.  There were two photos, one of Her, and one of
George.  Gurney just glanced at the boy's and then sat gazing at
her.  She smiled at him.  What a kind and lovely smile she had!
And her hair, and her eyes!

Gurney read her letter.  She had had this photograph taken--for
him.  She spoke playfully of the others being out of date and
girlish.  "I'm a mature matron, you know."  Mature matron indeed!
And then she wrote that she had no picture of him, and was it
possible for him to be photographed in uniform?

Possible?  It would be a divine duty.  Then Gurney resumed his
contemplation of her face.  So absorbed was he that he did not
notice the movement of the tent-flap.  Captain Griggs looked in,
grinned, carefully reclosed the canvas, and with exaggerated
caution, stole away.  Nor did he make a joke of it in the mess.



XXVII


The war had as yet cast no considerable shadow upon Southfleet, and
the holiday crowds did not appear to have diminished.  Mr. Slade
experienced no slump in the sale of toys.  Mr. Sawkins was
accepting officers and officers' wives at the Caroline Hotel, and
charging them as much as he dared and calling it his war service.
That there were sad and troubled faces goes without saying, and
Mrs. Corrie Richmond's was one of them.  Her beloved Charles had
joined the R.A.M.C. and been sent to Gallipoli among officer
reinforcements.  Mr. Slade, when passing along Caroline Terrace,
raised his hat to the house, a peculiar gesture, and uttered an
inward prayer:

"May her boy be spared."

Mr. Sawkins, that expert snooper, observed this hat-lifting ritual,
and was puzzled by it.  Why should a man raise his hat to nobody at
the same spot each morning?  Did some elderly female sit at a
window and wait for the passing of old Slade?

A clash occurred, one of the many.  Mr. Sawkins, playing Nosey
Parker, strolled out to confront Mr. Slade at the moment when he
passed the Richmond house.  Mr. Slade raised his hat as usual, but
all the windows were blank, nor could Mr. Sawkins assume that the
courtesy was intended for him.

"'Morning, Slade."

"'Morning, Sawkins."

Mr. Sawkins paused, with a superior smirk.  "Any news of little
Gurney?"

Mr. Slade fixed a stare upon Mr. Sawkins's beard.  "Yes, he's in
the thick of things, and liking it."

"You don't mean to say he's up in the trenches?"

"That IS the very place where Gurney would be."

"Think so?  I can't see what use a little parson like that would
be."

"Obviously."

"Why, obviously?"

"I mean, from your standpoint, Sawkins," and Mr. Slade passed on.

Meanwhile, Gurney's Division had been taken out of the line, and
withdrawn to a back area to rest and act as army reserve.  Gurney
was sorry to leave Abele Farm and his tent in the orchard, but at
Merville he found himself in a pleasant billet, and next door to a
professional photographer.  He was photographed, both alone and in
a group of Field Ambulance officers, and sitting on the right of
the colonel.  Obviously, Gurney belonged.  He conducted services at
Merville, but "Conduct" was not quite the right word, for the men
listened to his simple and sincere sermons, and sang the hymns with
heartiness.  Gurney was not only "The Front Line Padre"; he was a
man who had a genius for being a man with men.  On two evenings a
week he held what might be described as a "Private Confessional".
Men brought their troubles to him, domestic or otherwise, and he
did his best to play Solomon.  Moreover he was becoming known to
all and sundry.  Not only did obscure Tommies salute him in the
streets, but they would add a "Good morning, sir," which was
outside the regulations.  But so was Gurney.  He did things which
sticklers for conformity might have boggled over, but to Gurney was
allowed the licence of a man who was trusted and treated with
affection.

Captain Griggs was a great horseman, the other officers less so,
and Captain Griggs held Horse Parades, and took his flock for a
canter in the glades of the Forest of Nieppe.  Gurney was persuaded
to join them, and took a toss on some boggy turf and landed in a
puddle.  Captain Griggs and the others did their best to clean him
up, but he had to bump home looking distinctly soiled.

"Never mind, padre, it's the only toss you have ever taken."

Gurney could laugh and say:  "I'll try again another day.  But, I
must confess, Geoffrey, that I'm rather sore."

"Vanity, or backside?"

"Backside, I'm afraid."

Captain Griggs painted him with iodine.

It was two days after this painful incident that the wonderful
thing happened.  Major Morgan turned up at the mess looking as
though he had a pet puppy tucked away under his tunic.

"I have a piece of news for you, Gurney."

"Have you, sir?"

"How would you like a little piece of ribbon?"

Gurney looked coy.  "Are you pulling my leg, sir?"

"I am not.  You have been awarded the M.C."

Gurney went pink with surprise and pleasure.

"The M.C.?  I really don't know why, sir."

"Oh, stow it, padre.  Don't be so filthily modest."

But the mess rose to the occasion.  Captain Griggs made a back, and
Captains Smart and Ryder hoisted Gurney on to Geoffrey Griggs's
shoulders, and Gurney and his mount careered around the room to
cheers that were not ironic, and though such behaviour may appear
silly and sentimental to the coldly clever, it is an exhibit to be
found among men.  They made so much noise that passers-by paused to
peer in.  How these English did make a joke of everything!

Said Major Morgan:  "Shall I read the book of the words?"

Gurney had slid down, and was on his feet.  "No, please don't."

"Oh, modest child.  Look at him blushing."

"I am," said Gurney.

Major Morgan laid a typescript on the table, and the Mess crowded
over the slip of paper.

For showing great courage and devotion in rescuing men from a
dangerous dug-out that had received a direct hit from a shell--etc.--

"All in the book of the words, padre.  Buckingham Palace for you."

"And dinner with the General, Gurney.  I have been asked to convey
the invitation to you.  It is for to-night."

Gurney stood looking out of the window.  He was thinking how this
wonderful piece of news might interest particular people at home,
and suddenly these other men grew silent.  Padre Gurney was alone
for the moment with himself, and perhaps with God.


Gurney dined at the General's Mess.  He had Major Morgan with him
as a friend and supporter, but Gurney began by being very shy,
particularly so as he was placed on the great man's right.  What
did you say to Generals?  What did such eminent souls talk about?
Though, of course, you waited for the great man to favour you with
a remark and then struggled to make some appropriate reply.  John
Gurney began by being modest and mute, nor did the General like him
any the less for that.  Your pert and breezy conversationalist may
be looked on askance by men, who, when at home, use their hands
more than their tongues.

But by some happy coincidence, and after the soup, someone
mentioned cricket.  Gurney perked up his ears.  Were these gorgeous
creatures interested in the game?  Gurney found the General's eyes
fixed on him, the blue eyes of a man who loved field-sports and the
open country.

"I seem to have seen you before, somewhere, padre."

"I don't know where it could have been, sir."

The General appeared to be searching his memory.

"You don't happen to play cricket?"

"As a matter of fact I do, sir."

And suddenly the great man smiled.  "By Jove, I believe I've got
it.  Did you ever play against The Harlequins?"

"I did, sir, once, for the Surrey Colts."

"Scorching day at Lords, in August."

"Yes, sir."

"By Jove, I remember.  You were the damned little fellow who howled
googlies, and put me out for three."

"I'm very sorry, sir."

Gurney looked it, and the whole mess laughed.

But there was no more ice in the atmosphere.  The General was off
on the subject of cricket, and Gurney, recovering his confidence,
joined him in the great game.  Damn it, here was a padre who was a
sportsman and who understood the graces of the game.  In a little
while Gurney was very much at his ease, but there was one thing
that troubled him, his friend seemed out of the conversation.  That
was not good or right.

Did Major Morgan play football?  He had done, very much so.  He had
played Rugger for Wales, and when Gurney set that ball rolling, it
was kicked hither and thither by other men, who, perhaps, preferred
football to cricket.  The General listened benignly.  He was not
such a fool as to miss the point.  Gurney had made an opening, and
passed the ball to Major Morgan, so that his friend could score.

After a last whisky before turning in the General said to his
G.S.O.1.:  "Great little fellow, Gurney.  We'll keep him.  Good
second to Morgan.  I wonder if we could run a cricket-club in the
Division?"

The G.S.O.1. was sceptical.  French turf was more adapted to
football than cricket.

"Well, I'd like to feel a bat in my hands again, Fairfax, even if
it were only on a back-garden pitch."

"Why not put the padre on to it?"

"By Jove, that's an idea!  He ought to have special leave, and
while he's at home he might get hold of some gear.  And he could
bowl me some of his damned googlies.  I'm going to play for the
village again when this business is over."


Gurney confronted a problem, a very personal problem.  Should he
write to Her and tell her the news?  But would not that look like
showing-off, ostentatious swagger?  Yes, it would be rather more
delightful if she were to hear of it in some other way.  So, he
remained mute upon the subject of his decoration.  It was Mr. Slade
who discovered it, at breakfast while glancing through the morning
paper.  Somehow Gurney had become news, very much news.  Mr. Slade
let out a sound that was almost a whoop.

"Well, I'm jiggered!"

Rose looked at her father.  What was there in the paper that could
jigger him?  "Why the excitement?"

Mr. Slade became suddenly shy.  "Wouldn't you like to know?"

"Let me look."

"Oh, no, you don't, my dear.  I'll give you three guesses."

"The miners have struck?"

"Cold, dead cold."

"Something about the war?"

"You're getting warmer."

"Something that concerns us?"

"Very much so."

"Pass over the paper."

"I haven't finished with it yet."

"You selfish old man."

She half-rose and reached across the table, but Mr. Slade dodged
her.

"Oh, no, you don't, my dear.  I'm still very interested."

"Please."

Mr. Slade had done enough teasing, and he sat back and smiled at
his daughter.

"It's something about--John."

"John!  In the paper?"

"Yes.  He has won the Military Cross for gallantry and devotion."

"You're not joking?"

"Never more serious."

"How wonderful!  Give me the paper."

Mr. Slade surrendered it.

He watched her reading that piece of news, and the way her face
became soft and luminous.  There was silence.  Then, she laid the
paper down, and stirred her tea.

"Why didn't he tell us?"

"Isn't that John Gurney all over?"

"Yes.  Of course.  It is."

But Mr. Slade had other uses for that paper.  He was going to make
a public parade with it, oh, very much so.  He was going to swagger
and crow and strut and chortle.  He was going to stuff that
sensation into Southfleet's mouth, and especially so into a
particular mug.  Yes, Mr. Slade was proposing to enjoy himself.

He felt jaunty and he looked it, his hat cocked, his face
mischievous, the paper in his hand, and as luck would have it he
was to meet quite a number of the necessary people.  Miss Godbold
was the first, rolling like a bladder of lard out of Cashiobury
Square.  Mr. Slade raised his hat and flapped the paper at the
lady.

"Great piece of news this morning."

"Dear, dear, have we won a victory?"

"In a sense, yes.  Mr. Gurney has won the Military Cross."

Miss Godbold's mouth opened like a fish, and her chin wobbled.

"But--how--incredible!"

"Yes, isn't it.  For exceptional gallantry and devotion to duty.
I'm sure you are delighted."

And the naughty old man passed on.

In Caroline Terrace he happened upon Dr. Richmond getting into his
car, and Mr. Slade brandished the paper at him.

"Southfleet's first war decoration, sir."

Dr. Richmond paused with his hand on the door.  He did not read the
paper at breakfast.

"Is that so.  And who?"

"Mr. Gurney."

"Gurney!"

"Yes, the Military Cross."

"Well," said Dr. Richmond, "I'm damned glad."

Now, this little incident proved to be a bait to catch Mr. Slade's
principal victim.  Mr. Sawkins, upon his balcony, had witnessed the
meeting and Mr. Slade's brandishing of the daily paper.  Mr.
Sawkins wondered if he had missed anything in the news, and as Mr.
Slade passed, he hailed him.

"Anything important, Slade?"

"Very."

"Nothing in my paper.  I'll change it.  What--?"

"Southfleet has been honoured."

"How?"

"One of our boys has been decorated for gallantry.  Great piece of
work."

"Who?"

"Why, Mr. Gurney, of course.  I had my money on him."

"Gurney?"

"Yes, Gurney," and Mr. Slade shouted.

"I don't believe it."

"You--wouldn't," said Mr. Slade, and passed on.


Mr. Slade paraded the town after paying a visit to his shop.

"Girls, Mr. Gurney has won the Military Cross.  We'll close early
to-day.  Half-a-day off."

He toddled down the High Street to Mr. Golightly's, but Mr.
Golightly did not need informing; he had read the news and he and
Mr. Slade shook hands over it.

"I feel like giving a party, sir."

"Well, why not?"

"To-night, at the Regent.  Will Mrs. Golightly come?"

"Most certainly she will come."

"I'll get the vicar."

Mr. Golightly caressed his suave and polished chin, and dropped his
voice into Mr. Slade's ear.

"But what about Emily?"

Mr. Slade looked shy.  "I don't think Emily will want to celebrate.
This--is a kind of judgment of Solomon."

Mr. Slade dashed off to the Regent Hotel to arrange for his party.
He could not give the number of guests at the moment, but let the
manager budget for a dozen.  And champagne would be needed.  Yes,
the exact number should be settled by noon.  What, of champagne
bottles?  No, guests.  A bottle per person might be disastrous.

"Make it four, Mr. Randall."

"Four it shall be, sir, and my best."

Mr. Slade's next visit was to the Post Office, where he purchased
two one pound notes and, returning to the shop, mailed them with a
short letter to George.

"Mr. Gurney has won the Military Cross.  Buy a new bat, and don't
get indigestion."

Yet another call remained to be paid.  Mr. Slade walked to the
vicarage, wondering how Mr. Jones had received or would receive the
news.  It might be a testing of Egbert.  As a matter of fact, Mr.
Jones was one of those who had read the report, and he came very
well out of the ordeal.

"This is--an honour to the town, Mr. Slade."

Mr. Slade shook Mr. Jones's hand with heartiness.  "I'm giving a
little party, sir, to-night, at the Regent.  Will you join us?"

"Delighted, Mr. Slade."

"Splendid.  And, Mrs. Jones?"

Mr. Jones looked down his nose.  "My wife is not feeling very
well."

"I'm sorry, sir.  Convey her my condolences."

For, there had been a scene at breakfast.  Mr. Jones had managed to
appropriate Gurney's glory as a tribute to his own prescience, but
Emily had not been pleased.  For Emily had a feeling that in the
game of "Scratch me and I'll Scratch Back", Gurney had cheated.


Southfleet's response to the news of Mr. Gurney's distinction was
varied and peculiar.  There were those who were not pleased, and
who, like Mrs. Jones, felt that Gurney had played an unsporting
trick on them and cheated.  It was as though the little fellow had
kept a card up his sleeve.  For, when you have settled a man's
reputation for him, it is impertinent of him to set about proving
you wrong.  Then, there were those who applauded, with a strange
flavour of patronage.  Their applause contained peculiar
condescension.  Pure pleasure over somebody else's success is a
very rare reaction.

"Didn't think the little fellow had it in him."

For any singular success may be a slap to Mr. Everyman's secret
self-esteem, and he must qualify it by assuming surprise, and
patting with patronizing gusto the back of the hero.  And strange
as it may seem, Gurney's most condescending critics were working-
men, especially those tinged with the new pink dye.  Socialism, in
its organic reality, is a revolt against success, the prejudice of
the moiling many against the more distinguished few.  More humbug
has been spread like grease over the plain bread of the plain man's
soul than its strenuous spreaders would ever dare to allow.

Mr. Robert Smiles, who was to become a very conscientious objector,
had bitter things to say.  This little parson was a humbug.  He had
taken a toff's bit of ribbon, and was justifying a capitalist's
war.  Mr. Smiles could utter hardly three sentences without
dragging in "Cap-it-alism", and snarling at it like a little dog
whose bone would never be big enough to please him.  Mr. Smiles was
an embryo-tyrant in tosh.  He would never admit that an inferior
heritage could prevent you from becoming superior to your
superiors.

There were two people who were whole-heartedly pleased, Dr. and
Mrs. Richmond.

"I think it is splendid," said she, "this--"

She paused for the word, and her husband, with a quizzical smile,
supplied it:

"Rehabilitation."

"Oh, Corrie, not that!  What a word to use!"

"It is not my word, my dear."

"Then whose?"

"Why, just Southfleet's, any collection of humanity.  A man can't
be allowed to clean himself up all on his own.  The community must
have a hand in it."

"But--"

"We are all barbered and shaved by the public, and unless you
submit to the process you are that unsocial person, a prophet or a
poet, or a something or other that seems superior."

"But aren't there unusual people?"

"Of course.  But they must not rub it in, Lucy.  The populace must
be allowed the privilege of appearing to discover them."

"Then you think Southfleet--?"

"Oh, in time.  They may get used to the idea that Gurney is a
little unusual."

There were yet others who appeared to derive satisfaction from the
surprise with which Gurney had provided Southfleet.  For three
successive days old Rawlins took a puckish pleasure in flaunting
the news in the faces of such anti-Gurney residents as passed the
turnstile.  Offensive old man!  Mr. Rawlins did not stoop to pat
the little parson on the back.  Old Rawlins had spent much of his
life at sea, and was a mystical realist, and a good judge of men.
Old Rawlins did not present Mr. Gurney with a halo, but believing
in a rough and ready God as he did, he believed that Mr. Gurney was
in God's confidence and good favour.

Mrs. Polly Cotgrove was another of his supporters.  Surely, a
landlady should know her lodger, and when tepid praise was handed
out, Mrs. Polly felt like emptying a cup of scalding tea into the
languid and complacent lap.

"Never thought he had it in him?  Well, I'm blessed!  And who are
you to be so hoity-toity about a real Christian gentleman?  Some of
you people make me sick."

And using Mr. Rawlins's language Mrs. Polly might have added:  "To
hell with your opinions, anyway.  What bloody right have you to be
smug and superior about Mr. Gurney.  Cor, go and wash your silly
mouth out."



XXVIII


It was characteristic of John Gurney that when he heard it rumoured
that the Division was to be engaged in a major military operation
he asked to have his leave postponed until the bloody business was
over.  And a bloody business it was to be--this Battle of Loos--in
that black and desolate country where men hung dying and dead on
barbed-wire, and the prize was no more than a few acres of derelict
soil.  Gurney went into that battle with a cheerful countenance,
six packets of cigarettes and a dozen bars of chocolate, and two
water-bottles slung about him, and he came out of it unscathed in
the flesh, but sick and torn in spirit, unshaven, dirty, and red
about the eyes.

For, incidentally, he had been dreadfully frightened.  This had
been no mere exciting incident, but hour upon hour of noise, peril,
torture, blood, agony and death.  He had heard men screaming, and
the horrible screaming of shells, and the infernal hiss of machine-
gun bullets.  He had seen.  He had found himself in a shell-hole,
shaking, cold, with a belly that had dropped into profundities of
flaccid fear.  He had not wanted to get out of that shell-hole.  He
had been sick in it.  Then, he had got on his knees within the
smell of his own vomit, and prayed:  "Oh, God, give me strength."
He had emerged from that hole in the ground, pasty-faced and
haggard, but with a scared courage in his eyes.

Compassion.  That had saved him, and somehow made him forget the
squirmings of his own mortal flesh.  These poor dead, these
wounded!  Gurney plodded over the suffering soil, kneeling by
wounded men, applying first-field dressings, giving drinks,
lighting cigarettes, comforting those who were past hope.  He
helped to lift men on to stretchers and to carry them.  He chanced
upon the bearers of his own Field Ambulance in the desolation north
of Hulluch, with a very unsmart Captain Smart salving the human
debris.  He joined them.

Smart, who found relief in anger when he was scared, shouted at
Gurney.

"What the hell are you doing here, padre?"

"Taking my share of hell," said Gurney, and they grinned at each
other, and were glad of each other in a world where a smile could
be a challenge and a consolation.

Other men might have asked Gurney the same question, for he got so
far forward that he found himself with the company of a famous
regiment that was waiting to attack.  The men were lying down, and
a very grim young officer hailed Gurney.

"What the devil are you doing here, padre?"

Again, Gurney's reply was apt.  "Having lunch with the devil."

"Well, get down, get down.  It's a hell of a short spoon you have,
standing up there to be potted."

Gurney lay down between two white-faced privates who grinned at him
and over him.

"Fancy meeting you here, sir!"

"Why not?" said Gurney, "I ought to share what you have to bear,
oughtn't I?"

Returning from that fracas, and helping along a wounded man whose
arm had been shattered, Gurney found himself confronted by no less
a person than the Brigadier.  They were known to each other.  The
Brigadier was looking fierce, for things were not going according
to plan, and he had come up to sort out the situation.

"Hullo, Gurney.  On the job?"

"Yes, sir."

"So I see.  And glad to see it."

The fierce man and his brigade major went on.

"Funny little fellow--that."

"Funny?  A damned good sort of funniness, Knowles.  Now, where the
devil is Haggard?  They must have got badly hung up."


But it was a sad and sober body of men which gathered once again in
a back area to rest and re-fit and be reinforced.  Gaps had to be
filled, and they were many.  The Field Ambulance had had its
losses.  An advanced dressing-station had been hit and Captain
Ryder killed with several of the men.  Poor Ryder, every day he had
written a letter home, and all his thoughts had gone to that
Dorsetshire town where he had left a wife and three children.
There was no joking in the mess, and Gurney, who had buried Ryder
and the others, had done nothing else but bury men.  It was a sad
and sorrowful business.  Moreover, there was not a private in the
Division who did not realize, even if he kept it secret, that the
Battle of Loos had been a bloody mess, a most depressing smack in
the face.  The British Army had been given its blood-bath.  It had
many things to learn with sweat and tears, anguish and curses, and
those who led it had the most to learn.

When Major Morgan brought the news to John Gurney that he was to be
recommended for a Bar to his Cross, Gurney felt no thrill.

"How--how superfluous, sir.  I really would rather not have it."

"Why refuse what the gods give?"

"What have I done?  And I nearly failed, you know."

"How?"

"I was most dreadfully and disgracefully frightened, and I hid in a
shell-hole and was sick."

Major Morgan smiled, but it was a rather twisted smile.  He had
lost many friends, and an illusion.

"But you got out of it."

"By the grace of God, I did."

"We all hide in shell-holes--sometimes, Gurney, both in body and
soul."

He produced a little piece of yellow paper.

"Your leave ticket, old man.  You won't object to that?"

Gurney's eyes lit up.  "No, sir.  No complaints, no objections."


Gurney walked on to the leave-boat on a sunny October day.  It was
a happy boat, for here were men who were going home, though their
sojourn would be so short and the return journey full of pangs.
Gurney had no home to go to, but he had a ribbon on his tunic and
some pride and thankfulness in his heart.  He had endured; he had
passed through his ordeal, and though he had surrendered to fear,
he had overcome that fear.  Was he proud of his piece of ribbon?
He was, for in those early days the Military Cross had not become a
ration, to be handed out to all and sundry, and pinned on the
breasts of commanding officers' pets.

The crossing was uneventful, and Gurney found himself at Victoria
Station, moving with the brown crowd towards a crowd of expectant
faces.  There would be no face there for him.  He did not ask for
it.  He was liking the secrecy of his return, the surprising of a
particular face.  He was both afraid and dreaming.  Would she look
at him as her picture had looked at him, day by day, and through
all those dreadful days?  He had her picture in his pocket.

Gurney was unlucky in his taxi-driver, a sodden, hard-eyed boor.
Fenchurch Street Station!  Who the hell ever wanted to go to
Fenchurch Street Station?  The man drove like the boor that he was.
Gurney gave sixpence as a tip, and the fellow held it in a
contemptuous palm.

"I'll buy a gold 'alo with this."

Gurney had learnt to be apt with men.  "I shouldn't try to, my
friend.  Why not a few new manners?"

"Gur, feelin' a bit cocky, aren't yer, with that bloody bit of
ribbon?"

"I didn't buy it," said Gurney.

But somehow this snarling fellow's nastiness had stimulated him.
It was different out there, and as he climbed the station steps, he
smiled to himself and thought of Mr. Slade and certain of Mr.
Slade's benign asperities.  "Why should the common man be always
expected to be other than common."  "Let's get rid of some of the
humbug, John.  Your common man does not covet a gold halo.  More
often he covets his neighbour's bank-balance."

Gurney entered his first-class carriage.  There were three other
men in it, commercial gentlemen, all of them unknown to Gurney.
They eyed him a little curiously, and with a suggestion of
patronage.  One of them attempted conversation.

"Been out in France?"

"Yes," said Gurney.

"I suppose you didn't see anything of that last show?  Parsons
wouldn't, of course!"

"Oh, just a little."

"A beastly bungle, I take it."

Gurney, having seen dead men, did not feel gentle towards this live
one.

"Beastly, sir, yes.  Those who never bungle and are not in the
bungling had better be silent."

And there was silence.


The strange thing about it all was that at Southfleet Station and
in Southfleet High Street no one appeared to notice Gurney and his
ribbon.  No sudden and welcoming smiles, no surprised and
outstretched hands!  No, "Why, if it isn't you, sir!"  Gurney was
just another creature in khaki, one of the brown multitude, and
after a year of war enthusiasm was ceasing to be dramatic.
Stranger still, a certain dumb hostility was developing against the
man in khaki.  Maybe he advertised the war too much with those who
wished to forget it; he challenged the older men at home who were
feeling young and potent, now that youth was absent.  He was
billeted upon people who did not always welcome the soldier-
stranger.  Some of them were earning unpleasant reputations for
pilfering and what not, and, as Mr. Sawkins put it:  "The scum is
in the army."  Anyhow, it was not till Gurney turned into Mr.
Slade's shop that any face brightened with happy recognition.

"Why, God in heaven, it's John!"

"John it is, sir."

"Why the blazes didn't you tell us you were coming?"

"Oh, I don't know, sir.  Maybe I wanted to play Rip van Winkle."

Mr. Slade had his hands on Gurney's shoulders, and he turned him
round to the light.

"Ah, there we are!  Doesn't it look new and nice.  I'm going to
strut around with you, my friend, and get reflected glory."

Gurney smiled into Mr. Slade's eyes.  As yet, Southfleet had given
him no glory.

"Staying with us, of course, John."

"I can't inflict myself--"

"Oh, fudge and nonsense, and you know it.  No, I'm not going to
ring up Sea View.  You go and create your own sensation."

And with affectionate playfulness Mr. Slade pushed Gurney out of
the shop.


Mr. Gurney continued down the High Street, with the sea a'glitter
before him, and the devout terror of the lover in his heart.  He
was so absorbed in the tremendous issue that he saw nobody, and
ignored the few who remembered.  He turned to pass along Caroline
Terrace, and saw the oaks in the gardens gathering a tinge of gold,
and the polished, glabrous gleam of the hollies.  The little
gardens were still flowering, for, as yet, there had been no frost.
Gurney saw the sunlight making a track across the sea, and
spreading in a sheet across the cliffs and the stretch of turf.  He
did not see Mr. Sawkins on his balcony, but Mr. Sawkins saw him and
scowled.  So, John Gurney came to the cliffs, and feeling strangely
strung up and confronting some immemorial mystery, he sat down on a
seat by the flagstaff and was conscious of inward transformation.
What had happened to him?  How and why had he changed?  For change
he had.  What of the multitude of men?  For years he had felt it to
be his lot to dwell in the midst of this multitude and labour for
it.  And now?  The multitude was just an anonymous mass, and the
more multitudinous it was the more drab and hopeless was the issue.
It would absorb all the follies and vices of the crowd.  How could
it be leavened?  Could it be leavened?  Gurney smiled at the sea.
Was he becoming a determinist?  Did he believe that only the
singular souls mattered, the exquisite few, Her?  But, surely this
was rank heresy?

Gurney shook himself up.  He squared his shoulders, adjusted his
haversack, gripped his little cane and walked across the grass
towards the houses.  There stood his temple of the unknown, a place
of primordial mystery.  How would she meet him?  That, to Gurney,
was all that mattered for the moment.

He came to the gate and paused.  The green veranda was empty, the
chairs put away, for these October evenings could be chilly.  A
little shiver ran down Gurney's spine.  He opened the gate, closed
it carefully, like a man who was shirking some meeting and playing
for time.  He walked up the path trying to look and feel casual.
Perhaps she was not in?  He could not know that she had seen him
from her bedroom window, and that she was watching him with secret
tenderness.  He could not see her go quickly to her mirror, and pat
her hair and appraise herself, as women do.

Gurney rang the bell.  A voice from the landing halted the maid who
had come out to answer it.

"I'll go, Nellie.  It is a friend."

Gurney had faced about and had his back to the door as though it
might be easier to confront a crisis with your back turned.  He did
not hear footsteps, but he heard the door open, and he faced about.

"John!"

Was her deceit justified?  No doubt it was.  Gurney stood, head up,
like a man looking at a precious picture that had been screened for
him by time.  How was the question to be answered?  Was she--?
Yes, it was the face he had carried about with him, and the reality
was more lovely than the picture.

"My dear, why didn't you tell me you were coming?"

Gurney did not colour up as she did.  He was white, poignantly
pale.

"Well, I--"

Her face seemed to come nearer, a melting, happy face.  And then he
had his arms round her.  He kissed her, and the kiss came back to
him.

Oh, strange confusion!  Her eyes slanted downwards; her lashes
drooped.  She put forth a finger and touched the ribbon on his
tunic.

"Now, I have seen it!  I'm so proud, my dear."



XXIX


Mr. Slade took a day off.

"Now, John, for reflected glory."

But Gurney was not feeling wholly glorious.  That is the worst of
being a sensitive creature; some problematical gadfly is for ever
dancing into the sun-ray and threatening to sting you.  Gurney had
gone to bed in a state of wonder and of exaltation, and had wakened
in the middle of the night with a ghostly voice importuning him.
It told him that his future would be that of a curate whose stipend
might be about three pounds a week, and that Mrs. Hallard was a
wealthy young woman.  It was not what people might say that
troubled Gurney.  He was beginning to know that people said
unpleasant things about you, whatever you did, so--all public
gossip was superfluous.  Gurney's ghost-voice and gadfly were
created by his own foolish and hypersensitive conscience.  If he
asked Her to marry him, Southfleet might say that he was after her
money.  Southfleet might go to Jericho; it was her faith in his
sincerity that mattered.

"I ought to call on Mr. Jones."

"Egbert can wait," said Mr. Slade.  "Let's walk on the pier."

Now, a walk on the pier was what John Gurney desired.  Here was his
father-confessor, a sage whose sagacity would be greatly concerned
in the issue.  Moreover, in the old tradition a father's consent
was considered helpful.

"Just what I would like, sir.  To get away from crowds."

"Rather a crowded life over there, John."

"Yes, one is hardly ever alone."

But if Gurney thought he was going to elude publicity, he was
mistaken.  It was as though Mr. Slade had charmed Southfleet in to
the highways, and that John Gurney's unheralded return of yesterday
had been too previous.  They met Miss Godbold, and the Misses
Plimsoll taking out a very fat spaniel for exercise, and John
Gurney saluted the ladies.  They did not appear to be particularly
pleased to see him, for the prejudices of spinsters can be as
leathery as their persons.  Then they ran into Mr. Golightly, and
that was a different matter.  Mr. Golightly lifted a perfect hat
and his smile was glossy and welcoming.  He shook John Gurney
heartily by the hand.

"Well, this is a most pleasant surprise.  Congratulations, Mr.
Gurney, congratulations."

He gazed at the ribbon on John Gurney's tunic.  "An honour that we
all appreciate, sir.  Really, I think the town should have given
you a public welcome."

Gurney looked uncomfortable, and Mr. Slade twinkled.

"Our hero arrived like a thief in the night."

"Modesty, sir.  I think we ought to give a dinner, Slade.  Yes,
most certainly a dinner."

Gurney walked along Caroline Terrace between his two civic
supporters, and past Mr. Sawkins's hotel, and Mr. Sawkins happened
to emerge to do the day's catering.

"'Morning, Sawkins," sang Mr. Slade.

Mr. Sawkins grunted.  He had no graces, and Mr. Slade chuckled.

This public progress continued.  People crossed the road to welcome
and congratulate John Gurney, but at last they reached the pier
entrance.  Old Rawlins was on duty, and old Rawlins smote his
thigh, and pushed his head and shoulders through the window of the
ticket-office rather like a cuckoo from a cuckoo-clock.

"Lord love a duck, sir, it does me good to see you!  Ribbon and
all."

"I'm very glad to be here, Rawlins."

"Is it for good, sir?"

"No, I'm afraid not," and suddenly John Gurney looked thoughtful.
He would have to go back.  But of course.  And yet the going back
seemed different.

"Keeping well, Rawlins?"

"Prime, sir."

"If you see Mrs. Cotgrove tell her I shall be along to see her."

"I will, sir.  Everybody will be pleased to see you."

They escaped, and saw the long timber trackway before them, empty
at this early hour, and with the closing of the season.  A pleasant
breeze was blowing and John Gurney took off his cap.  He needed a
hair-cut, and remembered it.  He ought to have thought of it before
meeting Her.

Mr. Slade also removed his hat, and the sunlight caressed his white
head.

"Not a bad place this, John."

"No.  You can walk without listening."

"To an old fellow's patter."

"Oh, no, sir.  Shells.  There is a strange frontier out there, the
line were you begin to listen.  On one side you feel secure, on the
other--"

"Yes, I can imagine it."

"To put it vulgarly you feel tight in the ears and the tummy."

Mr. Slade looked at him with wise affection.  John Gurney spoke
with more sureness.  He had been a man among men.

"Well, you needn't listen here, John."

Gurney pursed his lips together and was silent for some seconds.
"Will you do the listening?"

"As long as you like."

"I'm worried.  I want to talk to you about it.  I hope you will
understand."

"Go ahead, John."

Gurney looked at the sea.  "I--I--love your daughter."

"Well, why not?  She's a rather lovable--"

"Much too good for me, sir.  And yet, strange though it may sound--
I think--"

"She returns it, John."

"I hardly dare to--"

Mr. Slade was smiling.  "Well, what's the--obstruction?"

"I'm just a poor curate.  I may be nothing more than that."

"There's much in being that.  So, my lad, you are frightened of
Rose's money?"

"Yes, just that.  It would be terrible to feel--"

Mr. Slade took Gurney's arm.  "What sort of man do you think you
are, John, or what sort of man do WE think you are?  I'll go--
sponsor."

"Then you wouldn't think me capable--?"

"Oh, John, what a dear ass you are!  Here's a question for you.
Has Rose kissed you?"

John Gurney blushed and looked embarrassed.  "Yes, she has, out of
her great--kindness."

"Kindness!  Go along with you, John.  My daughter is no fool.
There is no commerce in such kisses."

"Thank you.  But would you--object?"

"To what?"

"My asking--for marriage?  Of course she might refuse me.  I am
quite prepared for that."

Mr. Slade pressed John Gurney's arm.  "Well, ask her.  You'll have
my blessing."

Gurney returned the pressure of Mr. Slade's arm.  "Thank you.  You
have always been such a good friend to me.  Then, I'm thinking of
the boy too--but perhaps that is presumption.  I am very fond of
George."

"I shouldn't say that he actively dislikes you, John.  After all,
you would be a better father than the man who begot him."


It was at lunch that Gurney gathered sufficient confidence to
confess that he would welcome a second walk on the pier.  Would She
care to come with him?  With an air of self-possessed and happy
serenity she said yes.  And could it be after tea?

"I must really go and see Mr. Jones this afternoon."

"We can have an early tea, John."

"Thank you.  I don't want to upset--"

"Shall we say four o'clock."

John Gurney, having smoked a pipe with Mr. Slade, took his cap and
cane and set forth to see his vicar.  He found Mr. Jones in the
conservatory, and the meeting between them was heartier than Emily
would have liked.  Mr. Jones's handshake was less flabby than of
yore.  Things were going well with him; he had been offered the
living of Hope St. Edwards, the richest living in the diocese, and
the prize would come to him on the death of the present incumbent,
who was eight-three and not long for this world.  Moreover, Mr.
Jones was to become a Canon.

"Well, my dear Gurney, congratulations."

"Thank you, sir."

Mr. Jones could not shed all of his patronage, but he shed so much
of it that his tone was paternal.

"We have all been quite excited about your honour.  You have it
there, I see.  Quite apposite--the Cross.  The Church Militant,
Gurney, the Church Militant."

This heavy playfulness concealed no irony.  Mr. Jones had ceased
from feeling jealous of John Gurney.  Canon Jones of Hope St.
Edwards need not be jealous of anybody, and chrysanthemums would
flourish there as successfully as at Southfleet.

"You must stay to tea, Gurney, and tell us all about it."

"I'm very sorry, sir, but I am booked for tea to-day.  May I make
it to-morrow?"

"To-morrow, then, Gurney.  Where are you staying?"

"With Mr. Slade."

"Ah, James Slade.  He is quite a Southfleet worthy.  We talk
gardens together.  Just look at my dear mums, Gurney.  Flowers make
one forget the war."

John Gurney, having admired Mr. Jones's chrysanthemums, hurried
down into the Old Town to pay his respects to Mrs. Cotgrove.  It so
happened that a number of the local watermen were getting their
boats up for the winter.  They were all elderly men, for the young
men were in the Navy or on minesweepers, and Gurney, stopping to
shake hands with old Ted Myall, found the other men clustering
round.  Nor were John Gurney's ribbon and his new reputation the
only lures; he was more popular than he knew with these men of the
sea.

"Glad to see you back, sir."

"Jerry didn't see--that, sir, did he!"

The joke drew laughter, in which Gurney joined.  It had become a
habit with him to carry cigarettes, and he produced a packet and
passed them round.

"How's everybody?  How's your wife, Ted?"

"Not too bad, sir."

"Remember Alf, sir?"

"Of course I do."

"Been torpedoed twice."

"Has he?  I hope--"

"He's on his third ship."

"That's the stuff," said Gurney.  "Sorry I can't stay.  I'm seeing
Mrs. Cotgrove."

The men remained grouped together, smoking in silence, and watching
him cross the road.

"Good little bloke, that."

"No nonsense about 'im."

Said Ted Myall with bearded gravity; "Speaking for myself I'd say--
Gurney's the sort of parson who would suit this 'ere town."

"Same with me, brother.  I've never seen old Egbert in a boat."

"Nor Emily."

"Cor--Emily!  Flat fish!"

Plain men are apt to be crude in their summing up of social values.


The day continued kind, kinder than some of the remarks passed by
certain of Southfleet's residents.  But who cared?  What mattered
Mr. Sawkins's snarls, or Mrs. Jones's cynicism.

"So, that's what he's after!"

"Her money!"

The sun was a great gold piece in a cloudless sky.  Old Sol must be
a benign and tolerant fellow, shining alike upon the lovely and the
ugly, upon the mean and peevish, and the warm of heart.  John
Gurney might be conscious of the ribbon on his tunic, but he was
more conscious of the decoration her nearness assigned to him.  He--
was going forth with her, to utter those memorable words.  It was
like going up the line with a little tight knot in your tummy.  No,
but hardly that.  Frightened he might be, but her face should have
provoked no fear.

Old Rawlins greeted them.  Well, God bless 'em both!  Was there
anything in this public parade?  Old Rawlins hoped so.  Old Rawlins
had moments when he could be exultantly sentimental.

The timber trackway lay sunlit before them.

Said she:  "Tell me how it happened."

John Gurney gave her one quick look.  "Oh, well, it just happened."

"And how?"

"An aid-post was hit by a shell, and I happened to be near."

She was smiling.  "And you--happened--to rescue the men."

"Well, yes.  I managed to get in.  Just impulse, you know."

It was her turn to glance at him.  "Nothing more than impulse,
John?"

"Well, perhaps--"

"Something rather strong behind the impulse.  Impulse might have
made you run away."

"Of course, it might."

"You must never run away, John."

Now, just what did she mean by that?  Was there some exquisite
implication in those very simple words?  John Gurney was silent.
And then they came to the pier-head, and saw the steps descending
to the lower stage where the green-black water played to and fro
under your feet.

"Let's go down, John.  I like to watch the water."

And suddenly she took his arm.  Reflected sunlight played on the
white and black timber, and the sea made a gentle splashing as it
swayed through the piles.  The place was deserted.  They stood
together in one of the bays and looked out across the sea.  John
Gurney still held her arm, and she showed no desire to free
herself; in fact she seemed to press a little closer to him.

Now or never!  What had she meant by saying that he must never run
away?  As if he could ever run away from her!  But there was this
dreadful war, and the going back.

"Rose."

"Yes, John?"

"There is something I want to say."

"Well, say it, darling."

Darling!  John Gurney felt that the sea was going up and down, and
the pier with it.

"You can't know--?"

"What can't I know?"

What a lot of prompting he needed!

"How much I love you."

She turned her head slowly and looked at him.

"My dear, why are you so frightened?  Men who do such brave things--"

"I wasn't half so frightened when--"

"What a horrid thing to say!"

"Oh, Rose, I don't mean--I mean I'm so frightened--because--it
means--so terribly much to me."

"Almost you are running away, John."

She was smiling, and her eyes--John Gurney looked into them.  His
head went up.  He was standing on parade--a man whom other men
looked to.

"Rose, will you marry me?"

"Yes, John, I will."


Old Rawlins saw them come back, for old Rawlins was doing some
privileged snooping through a hole he had bored in the side wall of
the ticket office.  No one was near them, and the glow of the
sunset lit up their two figures.  They were holding hands.

Old Rawlins smacked his thigh.

"Coo, he's been and gone and done it!  Lord love a duck, that'll be
somethink for the old hens to cackle about.  Well, God bless 'em
both!"



XXX


Cackle there was, but unexpectedly it was more kind than old
Rawlins would have thought possible.

Not that the parties concerned advertised the engagement.  The
announcement was made to the privileged few.  John Gurney and Mrs.
Hallard were seen together in public, even walking arm in arm, and
very much absorbed in each other.  The Rev. Egbert Jones gave them
his blessing; Mr. Golightly gave them a dinner, not at the Regent
Hotel, but in his own very comfortable dining-room.  There was
champagne, and Mr. Golightly made a short, suave speech, and
proposed the health and happiness of John Gurney and Mr. Slade's
daughter.

Mrs. Richmond kissed her, and while doing so, thought of Charles in
Gallipoli, a Charles in whom romantic memories still lingered.
Poor Charles!  But there were other charming women in the world,
and Charles should marry a girl younger than himself.

The news was broken to George.  They went up to London together,
and took the boy out to lunch.  John Gurney was very shy of the
occasion but when George asked for a particular favour, Gurney's
fears were lessened:

"Will you come back to the school with me?"

"Why, yes, if you want me to, George."

"We break up at four."

John Gurney looked a little puzzled.  George was eating his second
helping of raspberry jam-tart.

Said his mother:  "You have the afternoon off."

"Yes, mater, I know."

"Well, dear?"

George was looking at Gurney's ribbon.  "The chaps all come out at
four.  I'd like to walk round the playground with Mr. Gurney."

John and Rose looked at each other and smiled.

"All right, George; we'll do it."

So, John Gurney was a hero to his second wife's boy!


Mrs. Hallard had some shopping to do; also, she was not unaware of
the prejudices attached to public school playgrounds.  Fathers
might perambulate them, mothers--no, save on very exceptional
occasions.  So, John Gurney and George set off together, and George
wanted to be told just how his future father had won his
decoration.  Gurney, who was bothered by the immediate problem,
gave a very modest account of his adventure, and as he was doing so
his inspiration came to him.  Why not treat the boy as man and
comrade, with complete candour and happy confidence.

"George, I've got a secret, but I am going to tell it to you."

"Are you, sir?"

"Can you keep it?"

"Ra--ther."

"Well, they are giving me what is called a Bar to my Military
Cross."

"That means--you did something else?"

"Yes, I suppose I did."

"Where was it?"

"At the battle of Loos."

"Were you there, sir, too?"

"Very much so, George.  It was a very terrible battle."

"Why don't you want people to know?"

"Well, I blush rather easily."

"So do I, sir."

They had reached the school gate and the hour was a quarter to
four, and John Gurney, after looking at his wrist-watch, laid his
hand on the boy's shoulder.

"Let's walk round the playground, shall we?"

"Yes, let's."

There was a brief silence.  Then John Gurney spoke.  "Do you love
your mother very much, George?"

"Yes, I do."

"Of course you do.  She's a very wonderful person.  And I love her
too.  Do you mind?"

The eyes were very serious in the freckled face.

"No, sir.  Why?"

"Because she is going to belong to both of us.  I'm going to be
your father."

John Gurney willed himself to look down steadily into the boy's
face.  Would he see any shadow there, a secret and stealthy
jealousy, some unpleasant Freudian reaction?  He did not; George's
blue eyes smiled at him.

"Well, won't that be fun, Mr. Gurney?"

John Gurney pinched George's cheek.  "More than fun.  I've got a
new responsibility.  You, George.  And you had better stop calling
me sir."

"What shall I call you then?"

"Why, just--father.  What else?"

"All right, father."

George had his eyes on the school steps and the two elephantine
pillars of granite round and between which the school would pour
forth.  It was now two minutes to four, and George and John Gurney
were opposite the "Gym".  A little avenue of plane trees lay before
them, their mottled trunks sustaining the pale, autumnal foliage.
George steered his new father under the trees towards the tiers of
steps, and the sudden va et viant of emergent youth.  George's
freckled face had a cocky sheen.  He wanted to show young Barter
and one or two others that he had a friend who had been to the war
and held a decoration for valour.

George posed John Gurney close to the field railings and facing the
steps and the sudden torrent that poured down them.  Gurney might
be feeling a little conscious of all this publicity, and that he
was George's exhibit, but he was feeling happy with George.
Anyhow, his new son was not ashamed of his new father.  "I should
say not, sir!"  The school stared.  Young Hallard with an officer
in khaki, an officer with a ribbon on his tunic.  George was
watching for his particular enemy.  He saw, he grinned, he
challenged.

"Hullo, young Barter!"

"Hullo, yourself."

"This is my pater.  He's been in the battle of Loos."

Young Barter was a sallow, arrogant child with a fat and turgid
face.

"Glad to meet you, sir."

John Gurney held out a hand.

"I'm glad too."

"What's that, the Military Cross, sir?"

"Yes."

"And he's just won a Bar to it," said George.

Gurney cuffed him gently.  "What was the promise, my lad?"

"Sorry, pater.  I forgot."

But George's particular triumph was yet to come.  Down the steps
strolled Bushell, the captain of the Rugger team, tasselled velvet
cap on head, a rugger ball in the crook of his arm.  Bushell was a
tall, dark, comely lad, clean-cut as to looks and manners.  He was
taking out some of the team for practice between the goal posts.
George gazed at the great man, and the great man glanced at John
Gurney.  He saw the ribbon, and a ribbon had significance for Bill
Bushell.

"Afternoon, sir."

John Gurney smiled at this comely lad.  "A little practice?"

"Yes."

"I'm afraid my game is cricket."

George was goggling on his toes.  "This--is--my pater, sir.  Mr.
Bushell, our Rugger captain."

"Very pleased to meet you, Mr. Hallard."

They shook hands, and John Gurney did not enter into explanations,
but George was not to be suppressed.

"Excuse me, sir, his name is Gurney, Captain Gurney, M.C. with
Bar."

The tall boy looked puzzled, then amused.

"Oh, I see.  Sorry, sir."

John Gurney took George by the collar.  "This young man can't keep
a secret, Bushell.  I think I had better hand him over to you."

George wriggled.  "I forgot again.  You see, Mr. Gurney's going to
be my second pater."

John Gurney and Bill Bushell looked into each other's eyes and
laughed.


Three days to go, two days to go.

How very swiftly this wonderful leave had passed!

Things seemed different to John Gurney.  The shameful truth was
that he did not welcome going back.  Not that he would funk it, but
life had a new perspective.  Out there he had been a lone little
fellow sanctified to his job; now he had Her and George.  He was
responsible for other things than wounded or worried men.  Other
thoughts and fears would clutch him in dangerous places.  He must
live--not die.  He had not thought so much about death before, or
mutilation, but now they were horrors to be faced and, if God
willed it, flouted.

She had said to him; "I will marry you, John, before you go back,
if you wish it.  I suppose it can be--"

But John Gurney had found himself dominated by a strange
superstition.  Yet, was it superstition?  He could remember a hard-
bitten colonel saying:  "I'm always sorry when one of my lads gets
married while on leave.  So often he comes back and gets himself
killed."  Yes, that was true.  Fate seemed to pick out a man who
had reasons for being careful.

On that last night they sat on the sofa before the fire, with the
lights turned low, and the wind making a moaning in the chimney.
Mr. Slade had letters to write, but no letters were written; he was
reconsidering some alterations in his will.  Mr. Slade was a warm
man, and he had a prospective son to remember.  John Gurney had one
arm round her shoulders, the other held one of her hands.  As a
lover he was still subject to moments of shyness, and though he did
not know it she loved this shyness.  A woman does not ask to be
taken for granted, and Rose's first husband had been that sort of
man.

John Gurney was thinking of those first golden days.  Now, the
weather had broken, and that fatal boat would not swim through
halcyon seas.  Probably he would be seasick.  And he did wish that
the wind would not make that melancholy noise in the chimney.

His silence challenged her.  She looked up at his dim and serious
face.  What was he thinking, or feeling?

"You're not worrying, John?"

"No.  Only--feeling homesick--in prospect.  There is a difference,
you know."

"You will take care of yourself."

"I'll try to.  I have every reason to try to."

She turned her eyes to the fire.  "Am I making things more
difficult for you, dear?"

He hesitated, and his hesitation was revealing.

"Well, in a way--"

"I'm so sorry.  Perha'ps--if--"

But suddenly John Gurney was man.  He took her face between his
hands and looked into her eyes.

"Yes, I am afraid, but it is a--splendid fear.  What might I lose?
The most lovely thing in all the world.  But that shall not make me
a coward.  I shall want you to be proud of me.  I shall feel you
near me.  Whatever happens, you have given me the greatest thing in
all the world."

She put up her lips and kissed him.

"I'll try to be brave too, my dearest man.  Proud I am, and proud I
will be.  Nothing can take that from us."

"Nothing," said he.



XXXI


She did not see him off.  This lingering upon station platforms
could be too lamentable.

"I will come and meet you, John, but not say good-bye."

He liked to think of her as he remembered her on that dim, autumnal
morning, standing at the gate of Sea View, with the collar of her
fur coat turned up, and her hair shaming the drab morning.  She
could smile so long as his face was turned to her.  So could John
Gurney, though there was a plaintive whimpering in him like the woe
of a young child.  He had never felt like this before.  How young
one could be!

He did not enjoy that return journey.  Somehow he shrank from the
crowds and the noise, those dumb faces with poignant eyes, the
rowdy and forcefully cheerful lads who happened to be in his
carriage.  Leave had been a hell of a binge, all alcohol and sex,
and if they looked with ironical and faint hostility at Gurney, his
smile, and his ribbon were somewhat reassuring.  Poor lads, they
had wanted to live, crush the last juice out of the grape, before
being bundled back into that bloody business.  John Gurney had
become more tender to life's frailties.

"I'm afraid we're shocking you, padre."

"No, gentlemen.  I haven't lived in back areas."

"I should say not--with that!"

"Going back isn't always too easy.  I know that--personally."

He smiled upon them, and after this short exchange their stories
grew less lurid.

It was a rough crossing, and Gurney was sick on the boat.  Cold and
yellow, he saw Calais grey and dreary against a drizzling sky.  How
different had been that other crossing!  A bored R.T.O. was not
helpful.  The Nth Division?  Oh, out of the line somewhere and in
rest.

"You had better try Hazebrouck, padre."

John Gurney tried Hazebrouck, but the Division was not in that
area.  He passed the night in a chilly little hotel, feeling very
homesick, and not at all a hero.

It took him another day to find his friends.  They were in the
Amiens area behind the Somme, new ground, rolling chalkland with
little villages tucked away beside some stream in the midst of
towering poplars.  It was growing dark when Gurney left the lorry
that had given him a lift, and walked into his particular village.
He was feeling cold and hungry and depressed.

A figure in khaki emerged from an estaminet, and Gurney hailed it.

"Can you tell me where the Ambulance is?"

"Why, it's you, sir!"

"What, Smith!"

"Yessir.  Glad to see you back, sir."

Gurney did not say that he was glad to be back, but he was glad of
Smith.

"Everybody well?"

"Champion, sir.  Just round the corner here.  Jolly good farm."

They passed through a gateway into the usual courtyard with its
muck-pit.  There was a moist dim smell.  John Gurney saw a lighted
window, like a kindly eye.

"That's the Officers' Mess window, sir."

"Good, Smith."

"Had any tea, sir?"

"No."

"I'll see to that."

John Gurney groped his way down a dark passage, and as he did so he
could hear familiar voices coming from that farmhouse room,
Griggs's bass, Smart's tenor, the colonel's dry creak.  A sudden
warmth went through him.  Thank God for brother men, the human
stuff that you knew, even in its grossness and its horseplay.  This
French farmhouse could be home from home.

Gurney put his hand to the handle and opened the door, and he had a
momentary glimpse of the interior before faces were turned to him.
Tea was still on the table, though the cloth had been pushed back.
The colonel, Griggs, Smart and a new officer were playing Bridge.
Pipes hung out of mouths, and the air was full of tobacco smoke.
Hornblower had his feet up on the stove and was reading a novel.
Then those faces lifted or turned, and John Gurney stood for his
portrait in the frame of the doorway.

There were shouts, sudden exuberance.

"Why, it's the old padre!"

"Hullo, you old scoundrel!"

"Hooroosh!  Come in and be kissed."

Cards were planked face-down on the table.  Griggs got up, took
three strides and, picking the padre up, carried him round the room
like an infant.  His feet nearly brushed Captain Hornblower's face.
The mess's sardonic wag sniffed appraisingly.

"You've been in the muck-pit, padre."

"No, he hasn't."

"He's got some of it on his boots."

Griggs held Gurney's feet to the light, and to the colonel.

"Inspect the infant, sir."

"All in order."

"Ordure," said Smart.

John Gurney smiled up at Griggs.  "Put me down, uncle.  I'll be a
good boy.  I'll change my boots."

Griggs put him down, and John Gurney solemnly saluted the colonel.

"Excuse these children, sir."

"Had a good leave, padre?"

"Very."

Griggs was regarding him with affectionate shyness.  "Got married?"

"Not quite, but--"

"Shut up, Griggy, you're making the poor man blush."

Thank God for this warm, human stuff!  John Gurney found that a
bedroom had been kept for him, a little, austere, whitewashed cell,
with a red coverlet on the bed, and a picture of the Sacred Heart
above it.  How wise were the Catholics!  The little, clever people
might call it Mumbo-Jumbo, but these shepherds of souls chose the
human heart for their symbol.  The Roman padre in the Division had
become a particular friend of Gurney's, and like two travellers on
the same road, who differed in their costume, they could march as
comrades in the same essential faith.  John Gurney kneeled down at
his bed and gave thanks for many things; Her, man in his
simplicities, this corner in a troubled world where he was somebody
to other men, a comrade, and perhaps a father-confessor.

He was a tired man, though not feeling tired, and when they sat
down to dinner, the colonel, in his dry, kind way, pushed his
whisky bottle towards John Gurney.

"Have a drink, padre."

"Thank you, sir.  I think I will."

Griggs made a face at him.  "That means one with me, too."

So, Gurney drank two whiskies, and did not feel that he had sinned.
Not at all so; his tummy warmed to the stuff and was glad.  Pipes
were lit, and the cards produced.  John Gurney took a hand; he had
been taught the game, and his education was gaining breadth.  He
partnered the colonel, and won six francs.  How disgraceful!  Padre
Bluett had refused to drink whisky or to touch cards, and to these
other men he had been a little, windy prig.

Gurney lay awake for an hour or more, listening to the wind in the
poplars.  It made him think of the wind in the chimneys of Sea
View, but somehow it was less sad.  He had been afraid then, but he
was less fearful now, a man among men, men who trusted him.  Yes,
that was the most precious thing of all, your faith and the faith
of your fellows.  Without it no nimble cunning, no erudition would
avail you.  John Gurney had placed Her picture on the top of a
chest of drawers, and in the darkness he could feel it there.  He
fell asleep, weary yet comforted.

Was he more afraid than in the old days?  He was, and yet there was
a kind of poignant joy in mastering fear, and even in going to meet
it.  It was like setting out to face an icy but stimulating wind,
and to button your courage over your heart and smile, if a little
bleakly, in the face of the morning.

His comrades and friends saw no change in Padre Gurney.  He was
still the Front Line Priest, known here, there, everywhere, and
welcomed in dim and dangerous dug-outs.  He could smile; he was
master of his soul; he could speak gentle and comforting words to
men who were troubled.  His Faith shone in action.  He was the
exemplar, the human symbol of the God he served, and many men came
to believe in John Gurney and his God.

Tales came to be told about him, some completely true, others a
little highly-coloured.  There was one member of the Ambulance Mess
whom Gurney had never quite won as a friend, Hornblower, the tall
and elegant, grey and cool of eye, man of the new age, sceptical
and sardonic.  To Hornblower religion was a Punch and Judy show,
and John Gurney the showman, sincere no doubt, but an emotional
little fellow with too much back to his head.

It happened that Captain Hornblower was up in charge of a
particularly nasty advanced dressing-station, the cellars of a
ruined brewery.  A most unpleasant road led to it, straight and
shelterless, and shelled on most days with sedulous precision.
Now, this dressing-station received a direct hit.  Much rubble came
rumbling down upon the cellar vaulting, but the only casualty was
the mess teapot.  Blast blew in the canvas of the cookhouse window,
and the teapot was smashed upon the floor.

No grave tragedy, this!  And yet it was so, especially to the
superfine Hornblower.  A Ford ambulance, going back to Headquarters
with a couple of wounded gunners, carried a chit and an appeal.

"The infernal Boches have broken my teapot.  Can you replace it?
Otherwise everything is serene."

John Gurney, hearing of the calamity, took a seat in an ambulance
and visited a neighbouring town.  He managed to procure a teapot, a
homely, brown thing.  But that was not the end of the story.  Tin
hats had come in and, one sunny morning, John Gurney set out for a
country walk, steel-helmet on head, and carrying the precious
teapot.  Everything was quiet for the first part of the pilgrimage,
but as Gurney neared the ruined village in which the brewery lived,
the Germans began to shell the road.  Those nasty crumps were
coming nearer and nearer, and Gurney retreated into a ditch and
squatted there, nursing the teapot.  He did not like those shells,
oh--not at all, and in the matter of high explosive familiarity did
not breed contempt.  Perpetual danger wore men down; the veteran
might be one who was near to breaking-point.

Dirt was flung into the ditch, and John Gurney, feeling frightened,
cursed those Germans.

"Damn you, mind the teapot!"

Actually he removed his steel helmet and held it over the piece of
crockery.

The storm passed, and John Gurney got out of its ditch, and walked
on towards those jagged fragments of brickwork that once had been a
village.  He was still sheltering the teapot with his steel helmet,
and so, he came bare-headed to the steep steps that led down into
the brewery cellars.  A man was standing there, smoking a cigarette
and scribbling a message.  It was Captain Hornblower himself.

"Hullo, padre, what the hell are you doing here?  You don't mean to
say that you have walked up that bloody road?"

John Gurney smiled, though his face was white and shiny with sweat.

"I've brought you a teapot."

He uncovered the vessel.  Captain Hornblower stared at it, and then
lifted grey eyes to the man above him.

"You carried that--up under your tin hat?"

"The wretches were shelling the road, and I was afraid it might be
hit by a splinter."

Hornblower spat the cigarette out of his mouth.

"Well, I'm damned!" and he added:  "You are a peach of a padre."

Then, there was the episode of the boots.  A particular battalion
was detailed to raid the German trenches, and the adventure proved
to be a bloody and rather disastrous affair.  It was a sweet,
spring night, and wounded men came down by the score to a dressing-
station in a deserted farmhouse.  Doctors and orderlies were more
than busy.  Casualties piled up on them.  Brown bodies lay stacked
on stretchers round the courtyard and in the lane outside the farm.
Men groaned; the aspen trees whispered.  What pain and anguish was
here!  The Division's Great Man, arriving in a staff-car to explore
the situation for himself, stopped at the dressing-station and got
out.  He looked in silence at all those stretchers.  He saw a
little figure moving from one to the other, bent and busy.  His
curiosity was challenged.  He went nearer, flashed a torch.

The figure was John Gurney's.

"Hullo, padre--busy?"

"Taking off boots, sir."

"Ah--boots."

"I think it makes them more comfortable."

The Great Man turned his torch on Gurney's face.  The General was
no sentimentalist, but his inward thought was:  "Christ might have
had a face like that."


Maybe it did occur to Padre Gurney that the reputation for a
seemingly reckless devotion to duty might be the death of him.
Success kills many more men than does failure.  The failures can
grub along in an obscure groove, but those whose skill makes them
the slave of a craft may be sacrificed by those who crowd upon them
for service.  John Gurney saw so many of the sad and horrible
things of war; he was for ever burying the dead, or listening to
the woes of the overstrained living.  It was he who had to appear
calm and of a cheerful countenance, and preach the Cross and man's
redemption, when he was feeling weary, and afraid, afraid of some
lapse, some crack in his continual courage.

Life was beginning to wound him, life as it came to him in her dear
letters.  Would this bloody business never cease?  Would he ever go
home to her, not for those few and poignant days, but for good?
There were times when he was afraid of his own increasing
fearfulness, his shrinking--not only from the things he saw, but
from a torturing sense of personal peril.  He was not the man he
had been.  He was tired.  Life was tantalizing him.  Oh, for peace,
and some tranquil place where your ears did not strain and your
stomach contract, and your heart pound like the heart of some
frightened animal!

He saw men come and he saw them go, under the earth or away to some
hospital.  If it were to happen to him, which would it be?
Sometimes he would lie awake at night and shiver.

He confessed to his friend.  "It is a horrible thing to say, but I
seem to be more afraid."

Morgan looked at him affectionately.  "Have a rest.  I'll get you a
special leave."

But John Gurney would not accept that offer.  "No.  I'd feel like
running away.  And going home would make it more difficult."

"We shall be out in rest next week."

"Oh, I shall get over it.  One of one's windy patches."

Yet, the very next day, Gurney was assailed by what was for him a
major tragedy.  Morgan was killed while visiting a battalion in the
line.  The headquarters' mess was hit by a 5.9, and all its
occupants were done to death.

Gurney was more shocked by this tragedy than by any other happening
that he had experienced.  It touched him personally and profoundly,
in the loss of this big-hearted man who had fathered him in his
first lonely days, and who had never shown jealousy.  That is,
perhaps, the rarest virtue in the world of men.  Moreover, Morgan's
sudden death provoked the personal dread that had become so acute
in him.  Gurney had seen his friend's body, and had suffered from
sudden nausea and panic.  Morgan to become--that, a poor, pulped,
unrecognizable thing!  What if it should happen to him.  He could
only utter a bitter and secret cry--

"Oh, God, give me strength to master my craven self!"

He wanted to be alone, away from men, to withdraw into some secret
place like an animal that has been hunted, and get his breath and
suffer his heart to calm down.  Should he ask for leave, not home
leave, but for a week in some French town where he might forget the
war?  Forget!  How could he forget, or refrain from facing it?
That was impossible.

It was.

He was not to be allowed such abstention.  He was sent for by the
Great Man, a personal and friendly interview.

"Gurney, this is a sad business."

"Terrible, sir.  Morgan was my--"

"Yes.  A great loss to us.  But it is my wish, Gurney, and I think
the wish of many others, that you should take Morgan's place.  I
have some right to choose my senior chaplains."

John Gurney held his breath.  This was both an honour and a
sentence.  He was not to be suffered to escape.

"I--I--don't know what to say, sir."

"Well, say nothing, Gurney."

"But, sir, I don't know whether I am capable of taking Morgan's
place."

"We think you are."

"It means that I shall have to leave the Ambulance, sir?"

"Yes, you will come to us.  We may be a solemn crowd after your
doctors."

"I did not mean that, sir."

"Well, it will be more comfortable for you in many ways.  You have
had some tough times, Gurney.  You look a little tired.  Take it
easier."

Gurney tried to smile.  "You are very kind, sir.  Shall I have to
join the Doctor Colonels' Mess?"

The Great Man gave him a shrewd look.

"No.  You will join mine."

"That's most--"

"Nonsense, Gurney.  You will be the father of the family."

And that was what the Great Man christened him, Father John, and
the name clung.  Father John, or even Prester John, of the Nth
Division, a figure of faith and affection, and not of fun.  John
Gurney had to pack his kit and say good-bye to the Field Ambulance.
They gave him a farewell dinner in the mess.  They were sorry to
lose him.

"Don't you go sending us another Bluett, padre."

"I hope there will be no more Bluetts."

"Damn it, padre," said Griggs, "I shall have to salute you.
Morning, Major, morning, sir!"

"I shan't mind if you don't, old man."

"Don't old man me, uncle."

"Well, you may be made a colonel, Griggy, and then I shall have
to--"

"If you ever salute me, padre, I'll smack your head."

So, John Gurney was transferred to the more stately and comfortable
atmosphere of Divisional Headquarters, and became a member of the
General's Mess.  He put up a crown, and was saluted by his juniors,
some of whom were his seniors.  The news travelled to Southfleet,
to Her, and to Mr. Slade, and Mr. Slade made sure that Southfleet
understood it.  The Rev. John Gurney was now Major Gurney, M.C.
with Bar, and the senior chaplain of the Nth Division.

No one at home thought of him as a tired little man with a secret
fear in his heart.  He never breathed that fear to Her.



XXXII


Then, came the Somme, that most bloody of ordeals.  John Gurney's
Division was not in the first attack, but was put in in an attempt
to capture a system of trenches against which all previous attacks
had failed.  Never had John Gurney heard such drum-fire or seen so
many wounded men.  Even at night the bumping of the guns continued,
and the German shells wailed westwards in reply.  John Gurney felt
sick in the stomach.  It was hot weather, and there were flies,
flies and dust and strange smells.  On the morning when the Nth
Division was to attack, he got out of his bunk soon after dawn, and
as he shaved himself his hand trembled, and he cut his chin.

Blood!  He had a most strange premonition.  A voice in him said:
"You will be killed to-day."  He listened to that voice, quaked,
and defied it.

He went into the hut that was the mess, and wrote a letter to Her.
He said that it would be a dangerous day, and that he had duties to
do, and that whatever might happen she was to remember how he loved
her.  He posted that letter in the headquarters' box.

He was alone.  What an infernal row those guns were making.  An
orderly came in to lay the table.  It would be a dreadful and
desultory meal, for the divisional staff were furiously occupied.

Gurney began his solitary breakfast.  A dark, tired staff-officer
hurried in, and sat down as though he had a train to catch.

"Afraid you'll have a busy time, padre."

"Yes, I'm afraid so."

"The Seventy-Fifth had about four thousand casualties."

"Is the General--?"

"Gone up to advanced headquarters to get a better view."

Gurney drank his tea.  "What time do you think I ought to start."

"You?"

"I'm going up to be with the men."

The dark man gave him a considering look.  "Is that the idea?  You
look a bit cheap, padre."

"Stomach a little upset."

"Why not stay, quiet?  You'll have plenty to do--burying the poor
dead."

John Gurney winced.  "I feel more concerned with the living."


It was a serene, July day, or might have been so but for the mess
modern man was making of things.  A few miles away it would be so,
with the wheat waist-high in the silent heat.  The French orchards
would be setting their fruit, and the little secret streams sucking
up shadow and sunlight under the flickering poplars.  Why could not
man be content with simple things?  Why must he play the steel
monster crushing other men in his evil power-game?  How absurd it
all was!  As if mere crude power could produce happiness.  Was the
school bully a happy person?  Possibly.  But he was an evil
creature.

John Gurney plodded past those thundering Heavies, where the
gunners were working stripped to the waist.  The earth and the air
shook, and John Gurney's stomach vibrated with them.  This
horrible, scarred land, torn, weedy, vividly cursed under the
summer sun!  He was thinking of that little English town on the
edge of the sunlit sea, and of a white house with a green veranda
and green shutters.  Would he ever see it again?  The simple man in
him shuddered.

So, he went on into a world of noise, and dust, and flies, past
lorries and guns, and brown figures waiting to be driven to the
slaughter-house.  A horror of it all grew in him, tainting his
compassion.  He was afraid.

He came to trenches, sour clefts in the earth, torn and tumbled
here and there, and decorated with dreadful debris.  His friends of
the Ambulance would be somewhere here.  He plodded on, sweating yet
shivering.  His steel helmet felt heavy.  He began to meet wounded,
bloody brown bundles on stretchers, walking wounded smudged with
blood, some with dumb, dead faces, others grinning.  The damnable
noise grew nearer.  He could see those spouts of earth ahead of
him, the brown-black fountains of the German barrage.

He met two of his old ambulance-bearers, tramping and swaying down
with a stretcher.  John Gurney did not look at the man on the
stretcher.

"Well, Gates, hard at it?"

"Yes, sir."

"Captain Griggs up here?"

"Dug-out in the old Boche line.  But I wouldn't go there, sir.  Got
to get through the barrage."

"You've come through it."

"Our job, sir."

Gurney had flattened himself against the trench-wall to let the
stretcher pass, though these sweating bearers appeared to be in no
hurry.  The longer they took to carry their man down to the
dressing-station the longer they would be away from the worst of
the shelling.  That was but human nature.  Gurney watched them go
swaying down the trench.  What if he was to be carried down like
that?  But such self-pity would not do.  He went on--but every few
yards he had to make way for wounded men, men who could walk, and
who did so with a dumb and eager haste.  They had got their wounds,
and were out of the bloody business.  It might mean Blighty.  They
did not look at John Gurney, but shouldered past him.

He went on.  He came to an old fire-trench, and through a gap where
the parapet had been blown away he saw the open country, and that
line of shell-geysers, soil, and chalk spouting up.  He stared.
What horror was this!  Was it not madness to face it?  But he
passed through the gap, and on his right saw a sunken road.  Dead
men were still lying there, and some live ones, crouching for
cover.  John Gurney turned towards this earthen trough.  He sat
down under a bank, took off his helmet and mopped.

His crisis was upon him.

He felt that he could not go on.  And why should he go on?  He was
not a combatant officer whose job it was to go forward and fight,
nor an M.O. whose duty was with the wounded.  He--was not
necessary.  His facing of those bursting shells would not
contribute towards a British victory.  He would just go up and
potter about, and be regarded as an eccentric nuisance.  Duty!
What was duty?  Did not man humbug himself about duty?  It was a
kind of soothing, spiritual ointment which he applied when his soul
itched.

John Gurney sat, head down in that desolate road, a hell's road,
and the devil of self tempted him.  Had he not endured enough?  Had
he not proved himself?  Had he no right to cherish his survival,
and to think of his duty to Her?  Why risk death in a silly
adventure that might be no more than vanity?  He wanted to go on
feeling a fine fellow, and to retain his pose as the Front Line
Padre.

Gurney put on his steel helmet, and got on his feet.  He would hunt
up the Field Ambulance main dressing-station.  He might be of some
use there.  He took three steps in the wrong direction, and then he
paused.  He saw a prone figure pressed against the bank, shoulders
heaving, hands clawing the earth.

"Hullo, lad.  Wounded?"

The figure turned over and sat up.  Its boyish, blubbing face was
smeared with soil and tears.

"I've got wind up.  I've got a message.  I ought to be up there."

"You're a Runner?"

"Yes, sir."

"It may be important.  Come along, my lad, I'll go with you.  Two's
company."

The lad stared at John Gurney with wet blue eyes, got clumsily to
his feet, and turned in the right direction, and John Gurney turned
with him.


But it was not to be.  They had not gone twenty yards when a shell
that outpitched its fellows plunged into the sunken road just ahead
of them.  John Gurney had grown wise as to the varying sounds of
shells and their significance.  He shouted to the lad:  "Get down,
get down."  Gurney went flat as the crash came, but the Runner, as
though paralysed, stood with blue eyes staring, mouth open.  A
fountain of earth went up.  Gurney felt something strike his right
leg below the knee.  Was it a clod of earth or a shell splinter?
There was a numbness, but no pain for the moment.  When the last
clod had fallen he turned and sat up.  He looked for the lad.  He
saw a headless thing, with a raw neck spouting blood, and against
the earth-bank a head.  Gurney felt shocked, sick.  He shut his
eyes for a moment.  And then he became conscious of pain.  He
opened his eyes and looked at his leg.  It was lying at a queer
angle.  He was wearing puttees, and the right puttee was torn and
blood-soaked.  A red pool was collecting on the earth.

He had been hit.  His leg was broken.

The shells had ceased to fall.

John Gurney lay flat on his back.  He was in pain, but with the
pain was mingled a feeling of peace.  His ordeal was over.  He had
fought his fear, and now he could lie back and surrender.  A
strange serenity descended upon him.  How still and peaceful
everything seemed now that those guns were silent.  The sunlight
poured down upon him, and upon the blood that he had shed.

Brown figures began to pass up the sunken road, men carrying petrol
tins, stretchers, boxes of bombs and ammunition.  They passed by.
Some of them glanced at John Gurney, but casually so; they did not
stop to succour him.  Gurney was conscious of sardonic surprise.
He had spent himself upon many of these men, and now that he was a
casualty they could not turn aside to help him.  How strange!  But
perhaps a universal fear made men supremely selfish as well as
supremely selfless.

Help was near.

"Hullo, padre, old man!  Hit?"

It was Captain Smart going up with a Bearer Section.  He was down
on his knee beside Gurney.

"Leg, what?"

"Yes, a shell splinter."

"How long have you been here?"

"I really don't know."

"Didn't any of those fellows stop?"

"No.  Jobs to do, I suppose."

"Selfish swine!"

Smart got busy.  He was a veteran at this game, and his particular
toy was a pair of super-scissors.  He snipped through the puttee
and the laces of the breeches.  The Section had dressings and
splints with them.

"I'm afraid I may hurt you a bit, old man."

Gurney smiled.  "I don't mind.  I can rest now."

"By Jove, you've earned it.  A real good blighty."

"Are the bones broken?"

"Afraid so."

Smart was deft and very gentle with him.  "That's it.  Down you go.
Sergeant Prince."

"Sir?"

"Bearers.  Straight down to the M.D.S.  Tell 'em to take it easy."

Smart and the sergeant and two bearers lifted Gurney on to a
stretcher.  The bearers adjusted their slings.  Smart bent over him
and smiled.

"Good luck, old man.  Tell them to give you a dig down there."

"Good-bye, Smart.  You've been very--"

"Rot!  Go steady, you chaps.  Cheerio."

John Gurney closed his eyes.  Someone had tucked his haversack
under his head.  The stretcher swayed gently.  He felt at peace,
utterly at peace, in spite of the pain.  He was going down the
line, he was going home.  He had not failed in that last crisis.
He could lie still and think of Her.

At the main dressing-station John Gurney was received like royalty
or an honoured guest.

"The padre has come in."

Busy men gathered to look at him, and greet him.

"Bad luck, sir."

"Perhaps it's good luck."

John Gurney lay and smiled at them.  He was among friends.

He was carried into a camouflaged and sandbagged marquee tucked
away under a bank.  He found Colonel Bruce bending over him, with
that kind and ginger grin.

"Well, padre, you've got it at last.  Who dressed you?"

"Smart, sir."

"Good.  Much pain?"

"Yes, rather sore."

"We'll ease that."

Bruce himself gave Gurney his dose of morphia and examined the
splints.  A sergeant stood beside him taking John Gurney's
particulars and writing out a tally.

"You'll be all right for the C.C.S., padre.  I'll send you down by
the next ambulance."

"Thank you for all your kindness, sir."

Colonel Bruce patted his shoulder.

"You'll be missed, padre.  If you come back--we shall want you.
Good luck."

John Gurney was carried out and placed in a waiting ambulance.
Other cases were loaded in.  Colonel Bruce stood there in the
sunlight.  The ambulance moved off, and Bruce saluted John Gurney.



XXXIII


John Gurney was in England, and minus his right leg.  At a General
Hospital in France they had found it necessary to amputate below
the knee.  One of the first questions Gurney had asked his surgeon
was:  "Shall I be able to play cricket again?"  The playing of
cricket might be regarded as a symbolic act, and the surgeon had
reassured him.

"Of course you will, padre.  They'll fit you out with a lovely
substitute."

Gurney lay in bed and looked out of the window at England in
September, lovely, spacious and serene.  His hospital was a large
country house, and John Gurney had a little room to himself.  He
could see a part of the garden, a great border brilliant with
Michaelmas daisies and dahlias, and beyond it that English
parkland, and in the distance the silver-grey Downs.  Green hills,
splendid trees, little shady valleys, white clouds sailing in a
blue sky.

John Gurney felt very much at peace.  What was a lost leg when the
ordeal was over, and he had returned with honour from the field of
battle?  He had nothing to regret, not even that last combat with
cowardice.  And She was coming to see him!  Oh, wonderful day!  Why
worry about anything?  Southfleet might welcome him back.  Once
more he would be Mr. Jones's curate, and play cricket with his
lads, and walk upon the pier, and watch London paddling in the sea.
The simplicity of John Gurney's soul had not lost its savour.  He
had brought back with him no bitter discontents, no restless
swagger, no vanity that might remain unsatisfied in the world of
peace.  He did not desire to be a bishop, and order the ways of
other men.  He would be content to be himself.  He was happy with
himself, which is the ultimate beatitude.  And he would be with
Her.

"Nurse, is my hair tidy?"

"Quite," said she, and smiled upon him, knowing what the prospect
was.

He was sitting up, propped against plenty of pillows.  He had been
shaved; he had been put into clean pyjamas.  He had flowers on the
table beside his bed.  Surely, God had been very good to him!
Everyone was surprisingly good to him.  Maybe he did not know that
he had been christened "The Perfect Patient".

He listened.  Was that a car?  She was coming by car, and was
spending the night at the nearest country town.  It was a car.  But
was it--his--car?  What a child one was, and yet supremely man!  He
listened.  There were voices in the corridor.  The door opened.
"Mrs. Hallard, Major Gurney."  The door closed.  That nurse of his
had a lovely sense of tactful self-effacement.

What do two people who love each other and who have been parted say
to each other on such an occasion?  Not very much, perhaps, and
that little is their own private affair.

"Can I sit on the bed, John?  Is it safe?"

"Quite--"

"Which side is the poor leg?"

"The right side."

"Oh, my dear, if it had been--"

"I was lucky.  They tell me I shall be able to play cricket."

"Of course you will.  They are so clever now about--no, I won't say
that--"

Gurney smiled at her.

"Wooden leg!  In the old days it was a peg leg.  Better than a
wooden head."

They held hands and sat and looked at each other.  Then, John
Gurney asked her a question.

"Will you marry a man with one leg?"

"Don't be a dear silly."

"That is rather an indefinite answer.  And I have another
question."

"Is it serious?"

"Of course it is.  Do you think dear old Jones will take me back?"

"Take you back?"

"Well, Rose, I sometimes wonder whether Southfleet wants me back.
I wasn't always a success."

She looked at him with half-closed eyes, and an air of secret and
tender amusement.

"Weren't you?  You really are an immoderately modest person, John.
Yes, I think Southfleet will want you back."


She knew more than Gurney knew about the matter, but she kept her
secret, as she had promised to keep it, and the promise had been to
her father.

"Now, young woman, I want my share of the fun."

Mr. Golightly had become the vicar's warden, and Mr. Slade had
received elevation and had accepted the honour of serving as the
people's representative.  Mr. Golightly was the owner of a very
comfortable limousine, and he had retained the services of an
elderly chauffeur.  Mr. Golightly called for Mr. Slade very early
one September morning, and these two accredited delegates set off
together.

"I have it here, James, I have it here."

Almost Mr. Slade winked at him.  "Well, I didn't imagine you would
forget it."

Major Gurney had been promoted to a wheeled chair and a room on the
ground floor, and he was able to trundle himself out on the terrace
and make contact with men who had suffered as he had.  Legs were
missing, arms were missing, or a virtue that was more fundamental
than either, a belief in the essential meaning of things and the
will to go on living.  John Gurney had every reason for desiring to
live, though he preached the life hereafter.  Not that he preached
to the melancholy and the maimed among his fellows.  He went and
sat with them, and with an assuaging and serene silence that
sometimes persuaded them to open their hearts to him.

"Don't think me a rude blighter, padre, but can you see any meaning
in it all?"

"I?  Well yes, I can.  I shouldn't have the cheek to be what I am
if I didn't."

"You are a lucky man, padre."

"No, just a kid who hasn't lost the art of wondering at things, and
the mystery of it all.  Even that landscape is a kind of sacrament.
Can you explain it?"

"Explain what?"

"Why things grow differently?  Why a cedar, why a fern, why a rose
bush?  We haven't enough humility, old man.  We think ourselves too
damned clever, because we can put some little machine together.  I
don't think God bothers much about the cocky people.  He likes you
to come to him as a kid."

"Not enough humility?"

"Yes, that's it.  Give up.  Put out your hand and let faith take
it.  Something comes to one, something other than one's self."

The maimed man gazed at him with affection.  Yes, there was a light
in this little padre's eyes which most men seemed to lack.

John Gurney was trundling himself away from one of these heart to
heart talks when the deputation appeared upon the terrace.  He saw
Mr. Golightly and Mr. Slade being shepherded through the Georgian
doorway by the Matron.  Mr. Golightly was looking suave and
polished in a very sleeky-cut grey lounge suit.  Mr. Slade was less
ornamental, and his eyes gleamed with mischief.  John Gurney paused
with his hands on the wheels of his chair.  His face was all lit
up.

"Well, John."

"Good morning, my dear Gurney."

"This is a pleasant surprise, sir."

"Mutual, I am sure," said Mr. Golightly, with a manner dressed for
some special occasion.

Mr. Golightly had a roll of paper in his hand; it might have been
the charter of a new Southfleet that had become a Borough.

"This visit, my dear fellow, has--if I may say so--a double
purpose.  Isn't that so, James?"

Mr. Slade played up.  "Yes, a very serious purpose."

"Shall we withdraw a little?  To the end of the terrace."

Mr. Slade moved round to the back of John Gurney's chair and helped
him to propel it towards the Georgian garden-house which happened
to be empty.  There were chairs here, and Mr. Slade sat down, for
he had reached an age when sitting is a virtue, but Mr. Golightly
remained standing, with that roll of paper in his hand.

"We have come, my dear Gurney, to make--er--an official proposal.
Mr. Jones--or I should say Canon Jones--is leaving us.  He had been
presented with another living."

Mr. Golightly paused and displayed the document.

"Here, my dear Gurney, I have the signatures of a great number of
our parishioners.  I--or we--have been in touch with the Powers
that Be, and their co-operation has been--er--hearty."

Mr. Slade was looking up at Mr. Golightly with amused and
mischievous appreciation.

"Well, to be brief, Gurney, we are here as representatives to offer
you--the living.  It is, I may say, a universal wish that YOU
should take Canon Jones's place and become our vicar.  Perhaps you
would like to glance at these signatures?"

Mr. Golightly presented the document to John Gurney, and Gurney,
holding it in both hands, smiled at these two friends.

"This--is a very great surprise to me.  I--I--am most--touched--
and--honoured."

Mr. Slade seemed to be enjoying a secret chuckle.

"Are you going to refuse us, John?"

John Gurney smiled at him.

"No, sir.  I am not."


THE END



Project Gutenberg Australia

