
Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: The Hatton Garden Crime
Author: Arthur Gask
* A Project Gutenberg Australia eBook *
eBook No.: 1202421.txt
Language: English
Date first posted: June 2012
Date most recently updated: June 2012

Produced by: Maurie Mulcahy

Project Gutenberg Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg Australia License which may be viewed online at
http://gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg Australia go to http://gutenberg.net.au

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: The Hatton Garden Crime
Author: Arthur Gask

*

Published in The Mail, Adelaide, S.A., Saturday 17 March, 1945.

*



For many years Reuben Leyden had been one of the best-known diamond
dealers in Hatton Garden and it was said that, almost fabulous sums of
money had at times, in the course of a few minutes, changed hands in his
modest suite of rooms. Of a shrewd and intellectual countenance, he was
a rather frail-looking small man of slight physique. He had a peculiar
melodious voice, with just the trace of Dutch accent in his speech. His
office staff consisted of three girl clerks and a burly pugilistic
attendant. This latter was always well within call.

One morning two new clients called at Leyden's place of business. Both
men were about middle age.

One was tall and aristocratic looking, smartly, and even foppishly
dressed, and sporting a large monocle. The other, of much heavier build,
was well-dressed, too, his right arm, however, with the hand swathed in
a thick bandage, was carried in a sling.

"I want to see Mr. Leyden," drawled the tall man to the pugilistic
attendant who had come forward. "I'm Sir Francis Bessington," and he
handed over his visiting card. The attendant looked questioningly at the
second man. "Major von Swartz," snapped the latter in gutteral tones.
"We are friends."

The card was taken into the inner office, and, a few seconds later, the
two visitors were ushered into Reuben Leyden, who was seated behind a
big table desk. The attendant followed them, and, after pushing to the
door, but not closing it, seated himself down at a small desk in a
corner of the room, and began busying himself with some papers. He had
an automatic pistol in his pocket. Leyden never took any chances with
strangers.

Acknowledging the dealer's good morning with a curt nod, Sir Francis
produced a fair-sized diamond from some cotton-wool in a small box and
handed it across the desk.

"I want to know what you'll match this stone for," he said.

Leyden motioned them both to chairs, and proceeded to examine the
diamond under a powerful magnifying glass. "It is a goot stone," he
remarked presently, "quite a goot stone."

"Of course it is," snapped the men with the bandaged hand, "and I know
something about diamonds, as I lived in Johannesburg for a couple of
years." He added rudely, "I've come here with my friend to make sure he
pays no extortionate price."

Leyden smiled. "No one pays me an extortionate price," he said gently.
"I'm quite a fair dealer," and pulling a glass case containing some fine
scales before him, he proceeded to weigh the diamond carefully. "Yes, I
can match it," he said, and rising from his chair, he passed out of
sight into a small inner room leading out of his office.

Returning very quickly with a small cardboard box in his hand, from some
tissue paper he spilled about a dozen glittering stones on to a small
square of black velvet, which he had taken from a drawer in the desk.
After some consideration, he picked out one and placed it side by side
with the one Sir Francis had brought with him. "It will cost you £110,"
he said. "As I told you, yours is a goot stone, but mine is even a
little better."

"Too much," snapped the German. "You must take off £20." He turned to
Sir Francis and spoke rapidly in his own tongue. "The price is quite
reasonable, but we must beat him down. I'll do all the arguing because
you are always such a fool in making a bargain."

"Ja, ja," nodded Sir Francis.

He could not have continued the conversation further in German as 'Ja'
and 'Nein' were the only words he knew.

Von Swartz turned back to the dealer. "Yes, we offer you £90."

The dealer shook his head. "But I cannot sell at that price. You are
getting goot value at £110, the best of values."

"Let's have your magnifying glass," said the German. "It's a bit awkward
for me with this poisoned hand." He examined the stone carefully, and
then asked, "Been all your life in diamonds, I suppose?"

"All my life," nodded the dealer. "And my family, for four generations,
have been all cutters or dealers." He spoke proudly. "It was my father
who cut the great Cullinan diamond for His Majesty King Edward VII. He
was more than two years on the work."

Von Swartz looked more amiable, and finally it was agreed to pay the sum
asked.

The two then took their leave, with the intimation that they might be
returning in a day or two for some more stones, as Sr Francis was
intending to make up a necklace. The attendant was asked to call a taxi,
and given half a crown as a tip.

Driving away, the German, speaking now in much less gutteral tones,
asked rather anxiously. "Well, do you think you can do it, Matt?"

"Sure, after a little practice at home," grinned the other, and he added
in a good imitation of the dealer's voice, "It is a goot stone, and I
cannot sell for less." He laughed. "But do you think he understood what
you said in German?"

"Of course he did," replied von Swartz. "I tell you I know for certain
he lived for some time in Stuttgart and that his wife's a German."

He nodded. "What I said then would convince him we were just ordinary
buyers."

The following day the two returned again, and with the attendant a
witness of the transaction, bought another diamond, this time paying
£130 for a slightly bigger one.

They seemed much more friendly now, and as if they no longer thought
they were going to be cheated. "And some time within the next month or
so," drawled the man who was passing himself off as Sir Francis
Bessington, "I may be bringing you the necklace for which I am wanting
these new stones." He sighed heavily. "The ladies are deuced expensive,
particularly the extra pretty ones."

Out in the street again, the man who had called himself von Swartz said
confidently, "Now, next time I shall be very surprised if the old devil
keeps that ugly brute of an attendant in the room. Jews are naturally
secretive, and he won't like the man seeing too much of what business he
is doing and guessing at the big profits he must be making."

He shook his head vexatiously. "Still, until he is cleared out we can't
do a thing."

Two days later they were back in the dealer's office, and they cursed
deeply when the attendant prepared to take up his accustomed seat.
However, Leyden made a slight adjustment to the position of the ink well
upon his desk, and, that being an arranged signal, to the great relief
of the two visitors, the man at once proceeded to leave the room. Still,
he only pulled the door to and did not quite close it.

Very soon quite a good assortment of diamonds were spread out upon the
dealer's little square of black velvet, and he was pointing out their
beauty and value. The German had moved up closer to the desk table to
get a better view.

Then, suddenly, von Swartz's injured hand slipped from its bandage and,
quick as the strike of a snake, had shot out over the desk and gripped
the dealer fiercely by the throat. The latter had not had the very
fraction of a second's warning, and he uttered no cry and made no sound
as the German threw himself over the desk and lifted him bodily out of
his chair. The strange thing, however, was that it seemed the dealer was
still talking, and even in slightly louder tones than before.

"But they are goot stones," came his melodious voice, "and the best that
money can buy."

With the Jew black in the face, and now quite unconscious, von Swartz
laid him noiselessly upon the floor and, slipping on a pair of gloves,
darted into the little inner room where the precious stones were always
kept.

"But you must really knock off £100, Mr. Leyden," came the slow,
drawling voice of Sir Francis, "and then we'll call it a deal." And the
voice of the dealer answered back that he could not possibly reduce his
price.

Then for some minutes an imaginary conversation was carried on, with the
rumble of the voices clearly audible in the adjoining room.

The dual speaker had nerves of steel, and his voice never trembled, but
for all that, his face had blanched a horrid sickly colour, and his
forehead was pricked out in little beads of sweat. Success or failure
was now balanced on the razor's edge, and everything depended upon what
happened in the next few minutes.

There--uncovered for all to see--was the dreadful face of the throttled
dealer, while a bare 10 yards away, and with an unclosed door between
sat the all unconscious office staff.

Another caller arriving to see the dealer, a message for him on the
phone, and dammit! It would mean death on the scaffold for them both!
That fool, Bert, had such a heavy hand, and it was any odds the Jew was
dead!

The German reappeared at last, patting his pockets significantly, and
his voice was now heard in the brief conversation which ensued.

It seemed a bargain was quickly struck and the money passed over. Leyden
was heard bidding his customers good-bye, and von Swartz came smilingly
into the outer office. Sir Francis, however, lingered for half a minute
or so at the open door of the dealer's room, laughingly chiding Leyden
for having extorted so much good money for a few paltry stones.

Then came the critical moment as Sir Francis pulled to Leyden's door,
and the two companions prepared to leave the building. As once before,
the attendant was asked to call a taxi, and it happened a disengaged one
was found close by. Another half-crown tip was passed over, and the
attendant stood on the pavement watching them drive away.

A quarter of an hour passed, and then one of the girls went in to her
employer to inquire if she could now go out for her lunch. What she saw
when she entered the room, however, quite took away all desire for food.

* * * *

One morning some three weeks later the Chief Commissioner of Police was
talking to one of the head detective-inspectors of Scotland Yard.

The latter seemed in a very despondent mood. "And as far as I can see,
sir," he said, "there seems little hope now of picking up any clue.
Beyond that the murderers must have been in close touch with Sir Francis
Bessington, as evidenced by their making use of one of his stolen
visiting cards the very morning after he had left Southampton for the
United States we have found out practically nothing. We have uncovered
no trace of any foreigner he knew whose description would answer to that
of the supposed Major von Swartz, and the identity of the other killer
is equally as unknown. Yes, we are completely at a dead end."

"It's unfortunate," sighed the Commissioner, "as the newspapers are so
very vicious and clamouring for our blood."

Now it happened that at that very moment when this disconsolate
conversion was taking place at Scotland Yard two men had just arrived at
Euston to catch the Scotch express. They had booked for Glasgow and
looked just ordinary men, tourists it might have been, off upon a
holiday. One was tall and slim, and the other of much stouter build.

Just from force of habit, perhaps, they glanced round quickly, as they
entered a first-class carriage.

No one appeared to be interested in them, and no one, apparently, gave
them a second thought.

Taking two corner seats opposite each other by the window, it seemed
they were going to have the compartment to themselves, but a minute or
two before the train started an elderly and rather distinguished-looking
old gentleman with white hair entered hurriedly and took possession of a
corner seat on the corridor side.

He was followed immediately by another man, obviously his servant and
probably his butler, in ordinary clothes. This latter placed a small
suitcase upon the rack, handed his master a small handbag and a rug, and
mouthed rather than asked if he could do anything more.

The old gentleman shook his head and, taking a magazine out of his bag,
at once proceeded to read. Whereupon his servant turned to the other two
occupants of the carriage and said most respectfully:

"My master is stone deaf, gentlemen, and could not hear if a gun were
fired off right under his ear. So, if anyone comes to see his ticket
will you very kindly explain to the collector that he must nudge him to
attract his attention."

The two men said smilingly that they would.

The train started upon its long journey without anyone else coming into
the carriage and the two companions, evidently in high spirits and
thinking it a good joke, began to chip the deaf old gentleman.

They called him 'Old Snoozer,' and asked him where he'd left his best
girl. Then they addressed him by names which were by no means polite,
suggesting that his parentage, at any rate upon his mother's side, was a
matter he would no doubt like to forget. They remarked, too, that he
looked 'a hardened old whats-er-name,' and shook with merriment at their
own wit.

Getting tired of their play at last, they left him alone and talked
between themselves.

The old gentleman read on for some time, and then, probably for a change
of occupation, put down his magazine and, taking a pad out of his bag,
proceeded to write.

The whole time he never once lifted his eyes or took the very slightest
notice of the two men. At Crewe the inspector came to examine the
tickets, and it seemed that the old gentleman was not only deaf, but
also very stupid, as for a long time he could not remember where he had
put his ticket.

At last, however the inspector found it for him among the muddled-up
papers in his bag. The old gentleman then handed over a tip with a
pleasant word of thanks.

Later on more passengers entered the compartment, but nothing out of the
ordinary happened until Carlisle was reached, and then, before even the
train had been brought to a standstill, a police inspector had swung
himself on board and, followed by three men in plainclothes, had hurried
along the corridor straight to the compartment containing the old
gentleman.

Taking no notice of him, however, he pushed his way in straight up to
the two men who had also come on the train at Euston. "I want a word
with you two gentlemen," he said sharply, "so will you please come to
the stationmaster's office with me at once."

The men gasped in consternation, and then the right hand of the shorter
of them darted back to his hip-pocket, but the inspector threw himself
upon him and jerked out the hand again which was now seen to be
clutching to an automatic. A fierce but brief struggle ensued before the
man was secured and carried out.

His companion, as white as death, gave no trouble, and was taken out,
too. It was all over very quickly, and, in a few minutes the journey
northwards was resumed in the usual way.

The evening of the following day the Chief Commissioner of Police left
Scotland Yard in an obviously most cheerful frame of mind.

"Yes, my dear," he said to his wife after dinner, "of course it was a
most wonderful piece of luck."

"Though all the credit of their arrests will come to us, every bit of it
belongs to old Lord Barnstable."

"But what on earth had it to do with him?" asked his wife.

"Everything," laughed the Commissioner, "for it was he who landed them high
and dry into our net. It was like this:

"It appears that when upon a train journey the old boy has a perfect
horror of being drawn into boring conversations with other travellers,
and so, when his man had fixed him up in a seat he has orders to tell
anyone else in the carriage that his master is stone deaf, and will they
very kindly explain that to any ticket collector who comes round."

"This happened yesterday, when his lordship took his seat in the Scotch
Express. His man told the tale to two men, the only other passengers in
the carriage. Then when the train had started upon its journey, these
men, as a vulgar sort of joke, began abusing his lordship and calling
him all sorts of unpleasant names, quite sure, of course, that he
wouldn't hear a word.

"Presently, the joke beginning to wear a bit thin, they took to
discussing their own affairs, and his lordship pricked up his ears when
they began talking about the Hatton Garden murder. In a few minutes he
was quite certain the crime had been their work, and that they were then
actually carrying the diamonds on them. They even mentioned the name of
the fence in Glasgow they were taking them to."

"But how could they have been so stupid!" exclaimed his wife.

The Commissioner laughed. "We learnt later they had shared a large
bottle of champagne at the refreshment buffet at Euston before getting
on the train, and it was that, no doubt, which was making them so
lively. At any rate, to go on with the story, his lordship stopped
reading and started writing letters. He wrote three as a blind.

"Then when the ticket inspectors came round at the Crewe, His Lordship
pretended to be very muddled and unable to find his ticket, and it ended
in the inspector helping him to go through the bag.

"There--right on the top of some papers--the man saw an envelope
addressed to the stationmaster at Crewe and marked in big letters,
'Urgent--very urgent. Deliver instantly.'

"Fortunately, in bending over the bag, the inspector had had his back
turned to the two men at the other end of the carriage, and in
consequence they did not see him pick up the envelope. Within five
minutes the stationmaster was phoning us at the Yard. Lord Barnstable's
word was good enough for us, and we got ready to arrest the men at
Carlisle."

He chuckled. "And now, as His Lordship refuses to allow the part he
played to become known, as I say, we shall get all the credit, and the
public may never learn how we were helped."

"But who were the men?" asked his wife.

"One was a fourth-rate provincial actor, and the other whom we believe
to have been the actual killer because of his strength, was the
cloakroom attendant at the Ormonde, Sir Francis Bessington's favourite
club."

The Commissioner frowned. "Ah, but for one little false step at that
club we should have been right on the bullseye, and perhaps have
uncovered the wretches ourselves.

"Our mistake there was that we looked for a German who would have known
Sir Francis was going to America, instead of trying to find a man who
SPOKE German. This cloakroom fellow had been a prisoner in Germany for
nearly four years during the last war, and spoke the language almost
like a native."

His face cleared. "Never mind, all's well that ends well, and I may even
get a knighthood out of this, with any luck."



THE END

Project Gutenberg Australia
